Edric the forester: or, The mysteries of the haunted chamber: an historical romance
EDRIC, THE FORESTER, 4-c %c.
CHAPTER I. In Ihc days of William the Con¬ queror, there lived a valiant youth, strongly attached to his interest His name was Edric (surnamed the Fo¬ rester). He had the good fortune of bein^ very successful in arms ; which induced the king to raise him from the station he held in his army to the rank of general, and give him tlie command of a very powerful army, with which a2
(assisted by the Wchh) ho marcned to invest Shrewsbury, jn order lo al- tack the troops of the Eari- Client, Fitzosborne, and the Baron Fitzosric ; who, vvith many oilier noblemen, con¬ tinued strongly to opp^o the iuva^i :i of William. The renown of Edric the Forever spread far and near; and ihe micccvs he had hitherto met with, evciUd (er¬ ror and alarm in the bosoms of ali those he meant to oppose. No sooner did tlie news reach the confederate Earls, that Edric was ad¬ vancing *. ith a very formidable army towards Shrewsbury, than the Baron Fitzosric hastened to his castle of St. Egbert, to see that it was in a state to
repel the attacks of the enemy. For, if Shrewsbury fell into their hands, as he much feared it would, he had not a doubt but the army would proceed im¬ mediately to St. Egbert's Castle and the valuable estates thereto belonging, as it was situated on the banks of the Severn, about six miles distant from Shrewsburv. He dreaded the victo- rious arms of the valiant Edric ; his -\ ev\ name filled his breast with an in¬ describable terror that he could no way account fbr: his bosom also glowed with an unconquerable hatred toward Edric ; for, in the many skir¬ mishes that he had met with, Edric always maintained ihe superiority over him : and he could not bear to behold >o young a champion arrive at tlic Mimmit of military excellence, bearing a 3
down the sagacity of those of double his age. And he began to think it most prudent to endeavour to make his peace with the Conqueror ; appre¬ hensive that if Edric the Forester should have the success to vanquish the Earls Brient and Fitzosborne, there would remain nothing to prevent his immediately marching to the Castle of St Egbert, and perhaps reduce that noble edifice to a pile of ruins. A few days prior to Edric the For¬ ester's determination of giving them battle at Shrewsbury, Fitzosric visited St. Egbert's Castle, on the business as before related. He liad arrived under '!k outer wall, whieh extended a considerable way, when his horse stumbled and threw him. His ser«
\ants were apprehensive that he had received some injury by the fall; there¬ fore, lifting him in Iheir arms, they conveyed him into a small cottage that stood by the way side, as the Castle was at too great a distance for them to think of carrying him there till they had examined the extent of his hurt. As soon as they had seen him safe to the cottage, one of his domestics hurried to the Castle to get a proper carriage to remove him, leaving his i3 ' Cj fellow servants to attend on their master. The cottage was inhabited by a woman and her daughter of ver\ ^en^ teel appearance, who, although habit- \*-d in Mm pie attire, had a certain somc- A I
thing in their behaviour that evinced they had seen better days. They shewed every possible attention to the gentleman, who soon recovered by their kind assistance, and gazed al¬ ternately on Ellen and Elgiva (for that were their names) in speechless .admiration. Ellen expressed a fervent hope that he was not hurt. Elgiva most tender¬ ly seconded her mother's inquiries. Fitzosric assured them hc was well, and expressed himself much obliged by their generous attention. After hav i profusely thanked them for Iheir kindness, and his carriage arriv¬ ing, he took his leave. Ellen w r as about thirty-six year,« of
age: she possessed a most engaging countenance; her form had dignity and grace equally blended ; her voice was tender and harmoniously persua¬ sive ; and she would have done honor to better apparel than that which she wore. As it was, she could not fail of attracting admiration in all who be¬ lield her. Elgiva, the daughter of Ellen, was seventeen. She was not so tall as Ellen ; but had much of her person and manner. She had beautiful au¬ burn hair, whieh flowed in artless ringlets, disdaining to be confined by the bandages she wore: her eves were a lovely blue; the serene sweet smile of gentleness always shone on her countenance, which made her mother, a5
the fair Ellen, so much regarded. But the meanness of their little habitation, and their plain attire, created a sen¬ sation of inquisitive curiosity in the bosom of the Baron Fitzosric lhat soon after yielded to a different pas¬ sion. When Fitzosric, by the assistance of his servants, arrived at St. Egbert's Castle, he began to make very parti¬ cular inquiries of his domesties if they knevv vvho were the inhabitants of the cottage, as they seemed to be new¬ comers ; for, to his recollection, hc had never seen them before. He was in¬ formed that they had lived there but a few days; and who they were, or whence they came, no one could give him «n*y information.
" I shall visit the cottage m the morning " said Lord Fitzosric : " I am anxious to learn vvho they are ; for their manners and the humble way in whicli th« i y Ihe but ill correspond." The Duron soon after retired to re^t; but he could not close his eyes fbr thinking of Ellen and Elgiva. And when a icuiporary slumber overcame him, his ureams presented to his wan¬ dering imagination the lovely cotta- gers, and he started from his slumber. His mind was so filled with the idea of them, that he could think of nothing else ; and he vvas resolved to pay them* a visit the next day. Day came, and the Baron Fitzosric was impatient till he went to the cot¬ tage, a 6.
The fair inhabitants wore an air of reserve at his entrance; but he told them he could not pass their door, after having received such singular attention and kindness from thern, without repeating his thanks. Ellen was not at all pleased with tliis \Wit ; but as it was unavoidable, she was obliged to submit, and necessitv com- pelled her to remain there a short time. Fitzosric, thinking his visit was not welcome, soon took his leave. In this interview the heart of Fitz¬ osric yielded to the potent pow er of what, among many, is usually called and mistaken for love ; for he was un¬ able to acknowledge w r hich of the two ladies had captivated him. Ellen was certainly a more suitable companion,
as he was turned of forty-three. But the innocence and vivacity of Elgiva eharmed him, and his wandering heart knew not w here to fix. However, as it w T as not Lord Fitzosric s intentions to marry, he returned home to form a scheme wherebv he trusted the two ladies would easily fall into his snares ; and then hastened to join his regiment at Shrewsbury, expecting every hour to be attacked by Edric the Forester.
CHAPTER If. The night before the battle of Shrewsbury was dark and stormy. The rain poured down in torrents, the tempestuous wind howled through the trees, the awful thunder rolled in tre¬ mendous peals, and the vivid light¬ ning proclaimed a night of terror. The army of Edric had pitched their tents near the town ; but Edric was anxious to behold once more his beloved Elgiva, and, determining to take advantage of the gloomy shade of night that encompassed every ob-
ject with more than usual darkne&s, he set forward io see her; and, perhaps, bid her and her amiable mother adieu for ever! unknowing what might be the chance of the morrow, which in all probability would decide the con¬ test between William the Conqueror and his opposers. He had found out the humble habitation they now re¬ sided in, and had escoiled them a few nights before to that place (as he vain¬ ly hoped) of safety; for their former dwelling was too near the seat of war, and, since their removal, had been re¬ duced to ashes by the enem\\ Accordingly he quitted his tent, and set out unmindful of the howling tempest or the beating rain. His only fear was, that, as- he had never seen
the place but once, he should be un¬ able to discover it, as the night wore a garb of unusual darkness, except when the lightning flashed upon the surrounding objects, Edric's heart beat with eager so¬ licitude for the fate of the fair Elgiva, who, with her mother, inhabited an humble cottage near the walls of the towering castle of the proud Baron Fitzosric, which he knew would be be¬ sieged if the Conqueror's army obtain¬ ed the victorv on the morrow ; for he who had been the principal in insti¬ gating the other lords to oppose Wil¬ liam, was the first for them to level their vengeance at. Only apprehensive for Elgiva, he
defied the warring elements, and dared to pass very near the guard of Fitz- osric's army, whose soldiers lay sunk in sleep. Illumined onlv bv the forked lightning which led him through the otherwise impenetrable darkness, he passed forward, till a flash more vivid than the rest, pointed out to bim the bumble dwelling of the lovely cot¬ tagers. And, what made his heart sink, to behold at a little distance the lofty turrets and embattled towers of St. Egbert's Castle, the noble domains of his most obdurate foe, the Baron Fitzosric. With what joy was he received by Ellen and Elgiva; but their joy was soon damped by the dreadful appre* hension, that this in all probability
might be the last time Heaven might bless them with a sight of each other. Their interview was short, for Edric was obliged to return as swift as possi¬ ble to the camp, to prepare for the contest of the ensuing day; and he had several miles to travel. Yet a secret grief swelled bis full heart with the idea that they might never meet again; that some ill-fated accident might intervene to cross his wishes. Elghi saw his depression ; it was so extreme, that hi all her life she had never beheld him appear lo suffer so acutely ; and, to rai*e his drooping spirits, she exerted her own, urging him to prepare for ihe approach of the ensuing day with that courage she had always seen him exert, and con¬ cluded with saying, "My Edric, will
you not strive to be happy, and hope to live for me V The question had the desired effect. To live for Elgiva was all his wish ; his bosom was animated with every hope of conquest, happiness, and love; all seemed to feel new inspiration by Elgiva's question, asking if he wmdd live for her. He tenderly embraced them, pro¬ mising that within three days, if he was alive, he would come to remove them to a more suitable habitation ; far he hoped from the tumult of war; and then departed, loaded with their blessings. He eagerly pursued his way back
to the camp; where, as soon as he arrived, he threw himself on a couch without undressing, being greatly fa¬ tigued and in want of a few hours re¬ freshment by sleep, previous to the mighty business which was to take place on the morrow. As the narration of the cottagers is at present the most material, I shall return to them : Ellen and her daughter could not prevail on themselves to retire to rest, after the departure of their beloved Edric ; but they continued during the night fervently offering up their prayers to heaven for his preservation. During the day when they knew the battle had commenced, and therebv to them was * «.
a day of dreadful anxiety, still hope animated each bosom, that Edric might yet continue the favoured object of heaven. The dav had nearlv closed, and the sun just setting in beauteous ma- iesty, as if unconscious of the horrors of the day: Ellen and Elgiva were watching with admiration and anxiety its career, as he sunk behind the hills, w hen they were suddenly alarmed by the appearance of Lord Fitzosric and a train of his attendants, pursued by a party of soldiers, with whom they were fighting and endeavouring to escape. The Baron leaped frora his horse and rushed into the cottage, followed
by three servants; and, in a tone of dismav, softened bv a wish to serve the inhabitants, thus to their astonishment exclaimed : " Shrewsbury is taken ! all is lost! the victorious army pursue us and sweep down all before them ! ily to the Castle of St. Egbert, there you shall be protected, every danger threatens you if you remain here!" " I fear no danger, my Lord!" re¬ plied Ellen; " our poverty will be our security, and sure they will not be so inhuman as to take our lives !" " Trust not to that!" replied the Baron, " but believe me your friend: apprehensive for your safety, I only
wish to place you beyond the reach of danger ; that place can only be found in the embattled Castle of St. Egbert." A servant now entered with every appearance of fright pourtrayed on his features, exclaiming, "Fly! fly 1 my Lord, we are strongly pursued ! a fresh party advances, they set fire to every house they come to, nor will they spare even this humble cottage. They are without a leader, only the soldiers Hushed with success who have taken Shrewsbury.—alas! too easily." " Oh I my beloved Edric !" cried Elgiva, in a voice of unutterable dis¬ tress, " where are you ?" and fell senseless on the ground*
Ellen was nearly frantic at the siolit: and in this situation »ome of the attendants lifted up Elgiva in their armSj and carried her in her swoon to¬ ward the castle; others seized Ellen and forced her away. Fitzosric and the remainder of his party continued fiVhting with the soldiers; and re¬ treating till they reached near the gates of St. Egbert's Castle, which stood open to receive him, and, after their entrance, closed with a heavy noise. They conveyed Elleu and Elgiva through several apartments, till they reached one very handsome on the second landing, where Elgiva, when she recovered, found herself with her mother, surrounded by the Baron Fitzosric and his party.
Ellen was extremely hurt to think of being torn from her humble cottage, but thought it best to return her thanks to Fitzosric for his kindness in wish¬ ing to protect them from danger; though in her own breast she did not fear anv ; nor had she at that time any suspicion that the Baron had only endeavoured to terrify them in order to gratify his own views. lie urged her to accept of that apartment while she and her daughter staid Jicre; and assured them that his servants would be happy to obey their commands; and after receiving thsir thanks, he withdrew'. As soon as they weve alone, Ellen said, " My dear girl, 1 could have vou i. b
spared the kindness of the Baron Fitz¬ osric, for I really had no fear; but while vve are against ourwilK indebl- cd to him for his protection, whieh i hope will not be long, we mu>t not seem unthankful; if wc reallv are in danger, we ought to be grateful to Heaven for its preservation—yet 1 hke it not." " Nor 1," replied Elgi\a, weep¬ ing: "prophetic were the apprehen¬ sions of our dear Ed rit;, lhat some accident might happen to us—where now will he seek us? he wiil never imagine that we are within the walls of St. Egbert's Castle, under the pro¬ tection of his enemy!—Fitzosric was alwavs the foe of Edric !" u We must be cautious and silent,"
Miid Illlen, "and not discover who we are ; you know the reasons that oblige nie to adhere to that inviolable secrecy, that has limited vour father and my- self to obscurity ; but the time I trust will arrive, when secrecv will be no h.nger necessary; besides, our more immediate safetv demands it now. FitzoMMc has been three times defeat¬ ed h\ Edric ; and I should dread if he knew we were the friends of Edric, le^t he .should discontinue his appa¬ rent ueneroMty, and still cherish an I'liniilv in his breast towards the va¬ liant youth he eould not conquer—and make us suffer the revenge he would take on him P* In such conversations, Ellen and Elgiva passed their lime; and, when b 2
they were visited bv Fitzosric, he treat¬ ed them with every mark of attention and respect. So gentle, so friendly was his conduct toward* them, that Ellen and her daughter chid them¬ selves for suffering sn*pk ton to dare encroach in their misuU inwards om\ who seemed (o act so tndy ;>em rons and amiable.
CHAPTER III. 1>,om the moment tlie Baron Fitz¬ osric discovered the ladies in the cot¬ tage, he had resolved to withdraw himself from the confederate armies ; and, as soon as Shrewsbury had fallen into the hands of the Conqueror, wrote his submission to the Norman voke; and 5 unexpectedly, abandoned his for¬ mer friends, the Earls Brient and Fitz¬ osborne in their greatest distress. The cruel desertion of so powerful an ally, entirely damped the courage of tht* confederate Earls, and they fell into the hands of Edric the Forester ; cxe-
crating the treacherous conduct of Fitzosric, who had been the instigator of all the evils into which they had fallen, Fitzosric had, in reality, hired some soldiers to seem to pursue himself and servants immediately after the defeat of Shrewsbury, merely to compass the design he meditated; which was to remove Ellen and Elgiva to the Castle of St. Egbert; in which he fortunately succeeded. His heart wavering be¬ fore, now declared the object of his preference, to be Elgiva. Her youth and innocence charmed him, though he could not suppress the ardent ad¬ miration that spoke in favour of Elleu. Another strong inducement led him to prefer Elgiva : he overheard her call
on the name of Edric when she fell into a sw r oon, and doubted not but that he vvas tenderly beloved ; a most powerful opportunity now r offered of his being privately revenged on the person he hated more than ever, for the principal reason, that he could not conquer him; and was jealous of a rival in love or war. With what transport did he now pursue the dic¬ tates of his soul! and exult in the dis¬ appointment he knew Edric would suffer when he could not discover where they were gone. Thus passed away a week. The Baron continuing to treat them with great respect; because fearful of giv¬ ing them any alarm. Ellen, impatient b 4
to quit the Castle of St, Egbert, fre¬ quently expressed her thanks, and re¬ peated her ardent desire to remove ; but still Fitzosric had some plausible excuse to offer in opposition. They wanted a change of apparel; but that difficulty was sooa overcome by his presenting them with some very elegant clothes, which he said belong¬ ed to a sister of his, who had lately been there on a visit, but was now in London; and requested they would make use of them while they remained there; and he hoped a few days would enable them to depart in safety. He entreated they would favour him with their company to dinner; and begged thev would endeavour to make them-
selves as happy as possible during their unavoidable separation frora their (\ iemU. The generous offer was accepted v\ ith thanks ; and they retired to dress to attend him agreeable to his request at dinner. The robe vvhich Ellen wore, was purple and gold ; her petticoat white, and richly ornamented. Elgiva's habit was white and silver. Dress, in gene¬ ral, makes a great alteration. Ellen's natural elegance appeared to great ad¬ vantage in the dress she wore ; and Elgiva lost not the smallest share of her beauty when adorned in a habit that so well became her, and which for richness surpassed every other she b 5
had ever worn. They neither of theni wished for such grandeur, and would have been exceedingly happy if the Baron could have accommodated them with a suit of plain attire each ; but they were necessitated lo wear what they could till they left the Castle of St. Egbert. When they entered the apartment where the Baron was sitting reading, he arose, and w ith great politeness led them to a seat. His eyes sparkled with delight — he gazed alternately on each, enraptured.— Ellen, who could not avoid observing the more than ordinary attention he paid to them, — began to fear, that all his kindness towards them was not the effects of disinterested generosity.—
She sighed—Elgiva's gentle bosom caught the contagion ; each partook of the same ideas, imagining that this day would give them cause of future unhappiness. The day passed on—Fitzosric sat late. The maid was called that at¬ tended I hem, and they bade him good night. When they had proceeded half way along the gallery leading to the apartment, the Earl sent his favourite servant, Ethelwald, to say he wished to speak lo Elgiva. She immediately returned, to know his pleasure; and Ethelwald retired. She entreated to know the reason of his wishing her to return.
" Elgiva," said Fitzosric, " I wish to speak a few words to you alone. You cannot be ignorant, my sweet girl, of the ascendancy which your beauty has gained over my heart! my eyes have often expressed the language of love, and declared what passes in the bosom of Fitzosric! till now, I have not had an opportunity of revealing to you the ardent passion that consumes me! deign, lovely Elgiva, to accept the truest love that ever existed in a human breast! consent to be the wife of Fitzosric, Lord of these extensive domains ; and let me glad the hearts of my people by giving them a lady of your worth and beauty!" Elgiva looked astonished at this amazing declaration — her mother's words, that she feared kis kindness teas
not the effects of disinterested genero¬ sity) struck forcibly on her mind ; and a secret dread unfelt, unknown be¬ fore, made her experience every un¬ easy sensation, and prevented her re¬ plying. u Speak, Elgiva!" said Fitzosric, " or may I interpret your silence in my favour ?" " My Lord V replied Elgiva, «I have not the vanity to imagine you are serious; and if I thought you was, I have not the ambition to aspire to such an honour ! I am truly grateful for all the favours my mother and I have re¬ ceived, but the intended honour I mu>t beg to decline.'*
" Perhaps, Elgiva," said he, press¬ ing her hand with fervour to his lips, " perhaps your heart is already be¬ stowed on some more favoured lover ! and for him, Fitzosric is rejected 1 There is distraction in the thought, El¬ giva, which I want words to express ! torture me not vvith the thought! \et if another possesses your affections, I shall be miserable indeed P* Elgiva was silent. She remem¬ bered her beloved Edric ; uncertain whether he lived or had fallen in bat¬ tle ; and sighed at the dreadful idea, that she might see him no more! While these melancholy thoughts floated in her mind, which caused the tears to tremble in her eyes, she was
alarmed bv hearing a melodious and heavenly voice say these words; * Remember how \ou oft ha\e sworn, When firat I uh^ynur bi'nlt ; ^ our love should never know a change, ST For Jane ?litr m «*«. \ uiir pride!" Fitzosric started ! his countenance . hanged from the animated glow of health and love, to a deadly paleness ; he dropped Elgiva s hand. He trem¬ bled ; and putting his hand involun¬ tary on his sword, looked wildlv round as if in search of the cause of his alarm ! " What is the matter, my Lord P' s>aid Elgiva, perceiving his extreme agitation and terror.
u The voice! thevoice!' exclaim¬ ed he, unheeding to whom he replied ; and kept gazing on a distant part of the room. Elgiva was greath terrified at his manner, believing him disordered in his intellects ; the declaration of love to herself had given her much dis¬ pleasure, blended with uneasiness ;— his present singular behaviour increas¬ ed it; and she thought it a fit oppor¬ tunity of leaving the room. She there¬ fore hurried as swift as possible away; and soon joined her mother.
CHAPTER IV. u Good Heaven!" exclaimed El- oiva, as she entered her mother's apartment; "the Baron Pitzosric is ^ surely deranged in his senses! Ah! my dear mother—your words were in¬ deed prophetic—the civilities we re¬ ceive from his Lordship are not dis¬ interested ; the sooner we quit this place the better !'* " Then are my suspicions confirm¬ ed ?" said Ellen, " though I dreaded to wound you with my fears—I have been miserable ever siuce we entered
St. Egbert's castle ; mv heavv heart denoted our being hurried from the peaceful cottage, was not merely the effect of accident, or the will to serve us; it was premeditated ; and we, des¬ titute of the power of defence, fell easily into Fitzosric's detested snares: but the wife and daughter of the good Edgar can bear misfortunes with for¬ titude, and continue virtuous," said she, embracing Elgiva; then address¬ ing the maid, said, "Agatha, you are one of Lord Fitzosric's servants ; if in his interest, I am sorry; if not, let me not confound the innocent with the guilty." " There is something in your coun¬ tenance, madam," replied Agatha, " that I would wish to serve to the
utmost of mv abilities ; but my Lord's commands must be obeyed: I have lived thirteen vears and a half in the Castle ; the Baron is an odd sort of a gentleman, but he is tolerably kind to his servants at times. But my Lady, oh! dear soul; she was a good lady indeed ; I may almost say, an Angel upon earth: never, never, can I meet her equal; never, while I live, shall I forget the amiable, the mysterious Lady Jane." " Mysterious Lady Jane!" ex¬ claimed Elgiva, recollecting the stanza she heard pronounced in the chamber vvith the Baron ; and forgetting her own and mother's apparently danger¬ ous situation, only wished to be in¬ formed of what had given her some
alarm. " Tell me, I conjure you," con¬ tinued she, " of the mysterious Lady Jane! for I am strangely interested. While with the Baron, a sweet voice stole plaintively on my ear, and each word made an impression on my heart which I shall never forget; mention¬ ing somebody of the name of Jane— Wliat could it mean ?" Agatha shook her head, as if she was acquainted with something which she did not wish to reveal, and said she would take some future opportu¬ nity of speaking of her late Lady ; and was about to leave the room. " Rack me not with suspense," said Elgiva, taking her hand and detaining her, " but have pity on me, and case
the solicitude of my •aching hear*, and tell me now.*' Ellen experienced extreme sur- piise on hearing her daughter so seem¬ ingly earnest about, what in their pre¬ sent circumstances, she deemed a tritle, and intreated Agatha to gratify her daughter's singular curiosity. The maid complied, first securing the door for fear of intrusion, and then prefaced her recital with observing, it was not altogether right to mention her masters affairs, which, in all pro¬ bability, might lessen him in their es¬ teem ; yet, she so much loved her dear Lady Jane, that she always felt happy while speaking of her, though she had been long, long dead.
" It is now between thirteen and fourteen years ago, since I first entered the service of the Baron Fitzosric, as waiting-woman to Lady Fitzosric; she was a very beautiful and accomplished lady ; never in my life did I meet wiih one so truly good-natured, so amiable, and friendly, as Ladv Jane, as she was usuallv called. " All her domestics loved her as w ell as I did, but the Baron always behaved very sullenly to her (at least all the time that 1 lived with her), and his strano*eand ankind conduct caused her many tears. Before her marriage w ith the Baron Fitzosric, she had been mar¬ ried to the Earl of Wallingford, the former owner of this castle, by whom she had one son.
" The Eari of Wallingford and our present Baron were friends from in¬ fancy, and loved each other more than brothers, if possible; he often staid some months at this cattle, when he came to this part of the country to rnjoy the company of his friend, for it seems they had been companions in the war<, a "d had been victorious fel¬ low soldiers together; and vvhen it was reported, that the Danes invaded this land, about twentv-one vears ago, Lord Wallingford and the Baron col¬ lected their forces, and, under the command of the valiant Earl of Devon, joined to oppose them. " Unfortunately the Earl of Wal¬ lingford fell (as supposed in a skirmish, for there was no real battle), by an
arrow, which pierced through his body; but, alas! his death was certainly in¬ tended, for at the time the fatal arrows vvas shot, the Earl was stabbed in the back with a dagger, whicli was found by some one who preserved it. " The Baron Fitzosric was the first, it i^ems,to bring Lady Jane the mourn¬ ful intelligence ; and being her hus¬ band's most esteemed friend, he used all his abilities to soften the grief and distress which he saw Lady Jane ex¬ perience for her irreparable loss. Thus far I have often heard Lady Jane in the distress her heart daily indured, say, and what a generous friend she always believed Baron Fitzosric to be. " However, time moved away, and
Lord Wallingford had been dead se¬ veral months. The kind attention of the Baron increased Lady Jane's es¬ teem for him, as she perceived the ex¬ treme attention he paid to her and her son ; the pains he look with all her te¬ nants and domestics, and his assi¬ duities to alleviate the sorrows that dwelt at her heart Time, in part, chased away some of her grief, though she alwa\s remembered Lord Wal- lingford with the tenderest affections; yet, at the expiration of a twelvemonth, Lady Jane w as so much pressed by her friends to marry again, that to oblige them she suffered them to pre¬ vail in behalf of Baron Fitzosric. Ac¬ cording to the regret I Jiave seen Lady Jane feel for Lord Wallingford; vol. i. c
I do not imagine she would ever have married again, had not her friends so strongly persuaded her. " For the first three months of their marriage I have heard Lady Jane say the Baron treated her with apparent great affection; but soon after, she per¬ ceived a very great alteration in his manner, to what she had formerly ex¬ perienced. He often treated her very harshly, and gave way to such sudden starts of uassion, so widely diflerent from the amiable and tender disposition of Lord Wallingford, that, too late, she perceived the error into which she had fallen. <r About two years after her marriage,
she had the misfortune to lose her son, which almost broke her heart, and by whieh means the Baron Fitzosric be¬ came sole Lord of all the vast domains of Lord Wallingford, which is im¬ mense. Lady Jane's grief for her be- loved child may be easily conceived ; after which period a visible alteration took place in the conduct and beha- v iour of the Baron. The desire of no- veltvin his affections excluded Lady Jane from holding any place in his heart; and, while he bestowed his love on others, the meek Lady Jane was treated with insult and ill humour; a very usual thing you will allow; for when once a married man gives way to love any body else but his wife, he never can love her. c 2
" Several years passed away in this manner, and at length he fixed his re¬ gard on a young village maid, named Birtha, and stole her from her father's. The men employed in so doing brought her to the castle ; and Ladv Jane, bv tbe light of the moon, as she was look- ing out at the window, saw the unfortu¬ nate Birtha eonveved into the castle. This affair happened when I had lived *bout a year with her Ladyship. 4i After the above occurrence, Lady Jane was never truly happy ; she had made many discoveries, that hung heavy on her mind, though she forbore to complain; but certainly the death of the worthy Lord Wallingford, the loss of her son, and her unhappy second
marriage, with the ill treatment she received frora the Baron, were causes sufticient to distress a feeling heart, had there been no other—one soon occurred which I was witness to."
c 3
CHAPTER V. " One very fine summer's evening Lady Jane proposed a walk for the benefit of the air, as she had been un¬ well best part of the day. I was the only person that attended her; and she directed her steps towards the wood, on the right-hand side of St. Egbert's Castle. It was near dusk, and I en¬ treated she would return, as the place was very solitary. " ' Agatha/ she replied, ' this soli¬ tary situation is in unison with my hapless thoughts-—but i, will inform
you of the reason why I walk here, at an hour not very proper, I must con¬ fess, in case any one should be wicked enough to hurt us. *' c c Last night I dreamed that Lord Wallingford came to me, pale, and with the arrow in his side; while, to my amazement, he said, ' Oh! my be¬ loved Jane I I did not fall by the chance of war, but by the haud of my treacherous friend. You are deprived of our beloved child also by his infa- mous designs ; and he too will attempt your hfe, if you are not particularly cautious. Yes, Jane, the murderer of your Wallingford was Fitzosric !— your son is not dead !—-let your bosom cherish the cheering rays of hope, for * you will sec him again ; and if you c 4
* wish further to be convinced, walk in the wood this night, about half an hour after sun-set, and believe the truth I now reveal.' " * The shadow then vanished into air, and I awoke. Terror shook every limb ; Fitzosric was in a profound sleep by my side ; I looked on his handsome countenance, sleeping in all the ease of conscious innocence, and said, mentally, * Is it possible he could be guilty of murdering his friend ! Unkindly as he has treated me— wretched as he has made me—I would not for the world he should have that guilt on his soul P " ' The idea of the visionary Lord Wallingford chased sleep from mv
f\\es, I impatiently awaited the hour of rising. Fitzosric, this day, has beeu more kind to me than usual; but such horror has possessed my heart through this dreadful dream, that I tremble at his touch, and shrink from it as from the touch of a murderer! My soul is terrified at the sight of him. My in¬ disposition, which is the effect of long- continued sorrow, and oppressive me¬ lancholv, seeminglv has awakened his affection. Alas 1 too late, he teazes me with inquiries of my complaint!— Ah. Agatha ! my complaint is deeply rooled in my afflicted heart, to which peace can never be restored. I have been impatient till the approach of sun-set; and this is the real cause, Agatha, that brings mc here. 1 c 5
" I was much surprised, as you may suppose, and entreated her not to venture farther into the wood, for fear of any accident: and, though I was greatly terrified, I endeavoured to per¬ suade Lady Jane it was only an idle dream. u Lady Jane looked round her every way, as if greatly disappointed, sighed heavily, and said, * Well, it may be an idle dream ! but it has tor¬ tured my heart all the day ; and I am certain the impression it has made on my mind can never be erased. However, I will be directed by you. Lead me to the Castle ; for I see no one here that will give me the expected information. 5
" She leaned on my arm ; she trem¬ bled violently, and wept in silence. " We had not proceeded far on our return, when a rustling among the trees i ather alarmed me; and turning round lo see from whence the sound i a me, observed a man advancing to- YKUtU us. My heart was agitated by Jear; but Lady Jane was far otherwise. She looked undaunted, and, with ar¬ dent anxiety in her expressive counte¬ nance, asked who he was * " l Be not alarmed, Lady Jane/ said the stranger, * I have a few words for your private ear, if you will honour me with the hearing.' " A man with a long white beard c 6
now came forward; he was wrapped up in a long cloak, which completely covered him, all but his beard—for his face was not discernable. " ' For Heaven's sake ! who are you?' exclaimed Lady Jane; c What is your business with me ?' " To which the stranger replied :— 6 I will inform you, in the first place, I am well known to you; but having something particular to communicate, have assumed this disguise, as at pre¬ sent I must remain concealed. I as¬ sure your Ladyship, I have endea¬ voured to gain an opportunity of speak¬ ing to you for several months past, and now I dread to wound you with what I I have to disclose. 5
" * Proceed,* said Lady Jane, see¬ ing he hesitated, £ and do not heed my servant.' " l An alarm was spread that the Danes were landed, and were march¬ ing towards Ashdon,' replied the stranger, i The nobles instantly col¬ lected their forces, and proceeded to that place, in order to repel the in¬ vaders ; but it was only some evil- minded people had created a report to disturb the peace of Edward, sur¬ named the Confessor, and the country by fancied evils. However, it was very near coming to serious conse¬ quences, as they began to attack one another, some by mistake, and some for want of something to do. Many arrows were discharged before the
tumult could be subsided. I was with¬ in two of Lord Wallingford. The ar¬ row which pierced the heart of that worthy man came from an hired assas¬ sin, who aimed it fatally at his Lord¬ ship. At the same time I saw the Baron Fitzosric put his hand on Lord Walliogrford's back, and he soon after fell from his horse. " i The party rushed forward, and did not heed Lord Wallingford ; but I who saw there was some treachery in the affair, stopped, and kneeling down by Lord Wallingford, whose breath had forsook his body, saw a dagger plunged to the very hilt in his back. I drew it forth, and was shocked to see the instrument, as I knew who was its owner.
" ( Ever since that fatal hour I have treasured up that dagger, oflen de¬ signing to give it yon, but being fear¬ ful of afHictinir you, when vou knew that the Baron Fitzosric was the mur¬ derer. Here is the dagger ! you will recollect it was usually worn by Lord Wallingford's friend.' " Lady Jane took the dagger, and, looking stedfastly on it, with horror exclaimed, " My God ! it was indeed the dagger of Fitzosric ! Am I then really wedded to his murderer ?*—and fell into my arms, bereft of every sense. " We exerted our efforts to recover her, and with difficulty succeeded.— She secured the dagger from all eyes,
and slowly walked between the stran¬ ger and myself, supporting her to the extremity of the wood. " Lady Jane was deeply affected ; yet, before she reached the end of the avenue of trees, sho asked how he came to seek her in that place } " To which the stranger replied. 1 This morning I dreamed a very sin¬ gular dream. I thought Lord Wal¬ lingford came to me, and said, Give the dagger you took from my body to Lady Jane — let her know she is married to the villain who robbed her Walling¬ ford of life! At sun-set you trill meet her in the tvood; fail not to attend her at that hour! — and then disap¬ peared.
u c I have often had a command of the like nature during the course of the last six months ; and have often seen Lord Wallingford in my dreams-—but never to desire it so positively as this morning. I now determined to obey the command, and succeeded in meet¬ ing you. My own wishes, even from the moment of Lord Wallingford's death, prompted to reveal the whole to you. My soul was shocked when I heard you was married to the Baron ; and then I resolved to be for ever secret, because I would not afflict your future peace : nor should I ever have revealed it, but by the solemn com¬ mand of Lord Wallingford—and now, agreeable to his will, I have per¬ formed it.*
" ' Thank you, thank you P said Lady Jane, aud the mysterious stran¬ ger darted amidst the thickest of the trees. " We hastened home. Lady Jane scarcely spoke a word all ihe way, so entirely were her thoughts enveloped in the stranger's confirmation of the tes¬ timony of the visionary Lord Walling¬ ford. For myself, I was thunderstruck at the idea of the Baron's guilt, and expressed myself accordingly to my amiable, disconsolate, and suffering Lady. She entreated me not to men¬ tion a word of what had happened, and 1 kept the promise I gave till this hour. *• Ladv Jane, soon after this terrible
event, grew extremely dejected ; she endeavoured to shun the Baron, who in all probability, from interest, treated her with more kindness ; but she felt so great an abhorrence to his caresses and attention, that she avoided hirn a^ much as lay in her power; for she really beheld him with sensations nearly allied to horror. " Ladv Jane soon lost a relish for all company and every kind of amuse¬ ment. The only thing that could give her any satisfaction was to allow her to sit and ponder over her unprecedented misfortunes. She seldom entered into conversation, and seemed to have a great weight of something very parti¬ cular labouring; in her mind—often ut- tered strange incoherent words— aU
ways saying either—" Poor Birtha !' or < Poor Jane!" Her conduct was now very mysterious. I often missed her for several hours together, and have searched every part of the Castle I dared venture into to find her— sometimes without effect. 1 feared her misfortunes would turn her brain; for whatever she thought, she confided it in her own bosom; and if I ever asked, as often I did, for I truly loved her, to be entrusted with the cause of her griefs, all her answer was— c I ara greatly troubled, Agatha!—you know enough—seek to know no more!' " Three months after our meeting the stranger in the wood, Lady Jane died suddenly, and was buried by the Baron's strange desire in one of the
apartments of the Castle, no one knew exactly where ; and the Baron was so cruel to me, that hc would not suffer rae to take farewel ofher much lamented clay; and although we all begged per- mi>>ion to attend our dear Lady to the grave, he positively denied us. i: Ever -since then the disturbed spirit ol Lady Jane walks in the North gallery and the chambers leading therefrom. Sometimes we hear her sweet voice sing so mournfully, com¬ plaining to Lord Fitzosric. Four or the months pass away, and she is silent; then again she appears and sings so plaintively ; and I have parti¬ cularly taken notice, that something remarkable happens after the appear¬ ance of Lady Jane, as if she came on
purpose to warn some one of evil. Per¬ haps her spirit is concerned for your being here, and wishes to save you frora the designs of the Baron. Lord bless you, Ladies I have heard the words so often repeated that I can say them by heart—her song is usually " Remember how you oft liave .swdrn, When first I was your bride, Your love should never know a change, For Jane she was your pride." « The same," said Elgiva; " Mer¬ ciful God! how astonishing is this ; poor Lady Jane. Yes, these are the very words I heard spoken, which so much alarmed me." «Yes," replied Agatha, " and there are other astonishing things in
St. Egbert's Castle; but I am afraid of terrifying you." " Our terrors cannot be augmented, Agatha," said Ellen ; '* for the Baron i dread and despise ; he is my only terror." « Why then, madam, I will tell vou " said Agatha:—" A Danish no- bleman of very high rank, had the mis¬ fortune of being taken prisoner in the time of the Great Alfred, many years ago; he was brought to this castle, and strongly confined by Lord Sefrid, uncle by the mother's side to the late Lord Wallingford's grandfather; and in those dreadful chambers, after he had been a long time in confinement, he was murdered; no one could tell
why, or by whom ; but many believed he killed himself; however, there his body was found dead. And his spirit has continued to haunt the chambers in the north wing of the Castle in par¬ ticular, so much so, that no one dared to enter in them, or use them ; such a terror has the speclre of the haunted chamber filled every body with, that I do not think there is any one in the Castle at present, except Ethelwald, who would venture into the north gal¬ lery, either fcy night or by day. " When Lord Arnulph, son to Lord Sefrid, came to the estates, he would fain have treated their fears as a kind of romantic superstition ; for he would never believe in any thing of the kind ; but his people were always complain-
ing, and at length prevailed on him, to have the spirit laid in those chambers ; and the north wing of the Castle has never since been used on any account. He was also prevailed on by the Clergy to have the doors strongly fastened up, and the keys put away or buried, no body knows where, lest any one should be tempted to open them through cu- rioMty ; and the mystery of the haunted chamber still remains unknown to this day. " But, alas! madam, it is not the Danish Lord, but Lady Jane that haunts the Castle, and increases the mystery of that horrid place; and sometimes I have heard her sing with a heavy sigh-— " Fly, to avoid the fete of Jane."*— VOL, I. D
as if to forewarn people of approach¬ ing danger. I often think, and I can¬ not drive the thought from my mind, that Lady Jane did not die fairly ; or why does her spirit wander so mourn¬ fully about, cautioning people to avoid ihe fate of Jane ! I never shall forget the day of her death, if I were to live for ever. I saw her, and helped her to dress in the morning as usual; about noon I missed her, and the Baron came home; he continued in the drawing- room till late at night, and nobody was admitted into the room but Ethel¬ wald. " At the usual hour of Lady Jane's going to bed, I inquired if she was ready for me to attend her; I was an¬ swered no. I thouglit I heard my
Lady's voice speak louder than usual, but did not dare go till I was ordered. About midnight I met the Baron going to his apartment; I asked if my Lady was ready for me to attend her? He answered me very surly, and said, c My Lady wanted no more of my as¬ sistance.' I begged him to say what he meant, as I always attended Lady Jane to her chamber at night. ' I am much troubled, Agatha,' said he, i you will never more have the satis¬ faction of seeing your Lady; she drop¬ ped suddenly off her chair about an hour ago, and expired:' he then hur¬ ried into his room and shut the door, leaving rae sinking with astonishment and grief. I have before said, that the Baron denied my seeing her, or attend¬ ing her to the grave. My thoughts on o 2
this singular occasion I cannot de¬ scribe. Ab, Ladies! the Baron has a great deal to answer for." " So I believe," replied Elgiva, clasping her uplifted hauds; " and Hea¬ ven in its. mercy lead us safely out of his power." Ellen was so overcome by what she had heard Agatha relate, that she could scarce articulate a reply. Theii situation seemed to her more dreadful than ever; and every tormenting thought took possession of her mind. Agatha, soon after, bade them adieu for the night, leaving Ellen and Elgiva racked with conjectures unable to describe.
? CHAPTER VI. A sleepless night was passed by Ellen and her daughter. They framed several plans to escape from the Castle of St. Egbert, which were rejected as soon as formed, unable to come to any conclusion, for Elgiva had observed that the outer door was strongly guarded, and feared the domestics as well as some men in the habit of soldiers, were placed there by Lord Fitzosric's order, to intercept their flight if they should attempt it. She doubted not but that the man, of whom she had heard such horrid transactions related, with re- n 3
gard to his friend the Earl of Walling¬ ford, and the mention Agatha made of Birtha, she imagined if he could be capable of such guilty deeds, with the addition of ill treatment to Lady Jane, he would not be scrupulous in his con¬ duct towards them, if his evil genius had inspired him with bad thoughts. Now was the time when they want¬ ed the powerful arm of Edric the Fo¬ rester, or her father, Edgar Rosenberg; but, alas! they neither of them knew that Ellen and Elgiva were inclosed within the Castle of St. Egbert; or those dear objects would soon have been released by them from the op¬ pressive power of Fitzosric. Leaving them absorbed in the
gloomy ideas the uncertainty of their destiny was calculated to inspire, 1 will now give some account of Edric and Edgar, Edgar Rosenberg, the husband of Ellen and rather of Elgiva, a man of great understanding, though but io au humble sphere of life, had been called from his peaceful situation, in the forest of Ellesmere, to London, to accept of a very beneficial situation under go¬ vernment. William, soon after he be¬ came Conqueror, having heard much spoken in praise of the honour and in¬ tegrity of Rosenberg, by Lord Somer- ville, on whose manor of Ellesmere Edgar and his family happily resided; who, recommending him as a man of d 4
uncommon talents, and well calculated to hold a situation of the most import¬ ant trust, the King immediately placed him in a very advantageous situation, vvell imagining that he would be dili¬ gent in the discharge of every duty. As affairs were not yet settled, and the turbulence of the times made people afraid of trusting one another, a secret of importance to the mutual happiness of Edgar and his wife, in¬ duced him to think it prudent to let his amiable Ellen and her daughter remain in their own habitation, till a proper place could be fixed on for their future abode. His merit had been often, obscured, by the secret which compelled them to live in a very re¬ tired manner, and prevented him from
exercising those excellent talents, which would have been an ornament to any family, and more particularly to the age in which he lived. He therefore was obliged to content himself with seeing them about once a month, till hoppier times would convey his loved Ellen and Elgiva to a situation where peace and happiness should unite to w elconie them. In those times when England was torn by inward commo¬ tions, he thought it best for them to live in retirement, unvexed with the cala¬ mities that desolated the country. The duties of his station would not allow him to visit them often ; but ho contented himself with hearing from theme
d 5
The advancement of Edgar paved the way for those honors, which soon after fell to the share of his adopted son Edric, of whom he was very fond; he often named him with ecstacy to his friends, and extolled his well-deserved merits. He requested him to come io London, which summons he immedi¬ ately obeyed, and Lord Somervilie ac¬ companied him, Though brought up with Edgar as a forester, yet Edric had always au ambition for a military life. William had often heard Lord Somervilie speak highly in praise of Edric; he sought to conciliate his friendship; and when they arrived in town Lord Somervilie introduced him to the King, who took & very great liking to him, and gave
him a captain's commission in the army. Edric, who, in obedience to the fancy of the King, was called Edric the Forester, soon after the honor con¬ ferred on him, waited on his father, as he usually called Rosenberg, for he had found in him the affections of a parent: each were overjoyed at the sight of tbe other; Edgar congratu¬ lated Edric on his success, and seemed to anticipate the rising glories of the youthful hero. Edric was ordered to join his regi¬ ment in a few days, during which time Rosenberg and Edric hurried to Elles¬ mere, for him to bid adieu lo his snp- d6
posed mother and sister, for whom Edgar perceived his adopted son had an extreme affection. Ile now thought it necessary to undeceive Edric, and let him know he was not his son, a circumstanee which neither Edric nor Elgiva were acquainted with till now. 1 shall pass over the effect of this declaration, till a future opportunity, any more than by observing that Edric obtained permission to pay his addres¬ ses to his beloved Elgiva, of whom he always w r as extremely fond, but dread¬ ed to indulge his affection, as he be¬ lieved she was his sister; but this de¬ claration made him truly happy, and he joined his regiment with a degree of fervour and happiness he never before
experienced, determining to exert all his abilities to render himself worthy the daughter of his friend. Three or four battles were fought, iu all which Edric gave such proofs of his courage, and acquitted himself so entirely to the satisfaction of his King, that he soon after honored him with the command of a very powerful army, with which he marched to op¬ pose his enemies, the Barons, who, though obliged to submit to the Con- queror, still at times would revolt and set the nation in new disturbances, destroying many of its inhabitants. Edric had often defeated the Barons, and hoped to restore peace to his be¬ loved country; but while the ardent
wish expanded in his bosom, another disturbance broke out, headed by the confederate Earls Fitzosborne, Biient, and the Baron Fitzosric, who, assem¬ bling all their tenants and vassals, formed a very powerful army. Edric, who had been so repeatedly victorious, was proposed to oppose them with a numerous army ; but the Earls had been so expeditious in col¬ lecting their forces, that Edric expe¬ rienced uncommon alarm, when he learned that the rebel army were within a few days march of Ellesmere, the residence of his dear mother (as he usually called her) Ellen Rosenberg, and his beloved Elgiva, for whom from infancy his breast had glowed with the fondest affection.
Rosenberg, his protector from child¬ hood, was far, far absent; he could give no assistance to his wife and daugh- ter, for whom Edric trembled, as he learned the approach of the confede¬ rate lords towards their dwelling. He pressed forward with all imaginable speed, in order to remove them from the threatened danger; and, when withiri a few miles of Shrewsbury, the army under his command halted at an advantageous situation, awaiting to give the enemy battle. Edric, anxious for the removal of Ellen and Elgiva, no sooner had chosen their ground, than confiding in the friendship of a trusty captain, informed him that he must be absent a few hours, in order to save the wife
and daughter of hit* friend and protec¬ tor Rosenberg from falling into the hands of the enemy. Time would not admit of delav. Edric changed part of his habit; and, disguised in a long cloak, attended by an assistant, they mounted their fleet horses, and rather (lew than rode to the habitation of Ellen Rosenberg. Ellen was overjoyed to behold her Edric arrive to preserve her, at a time when she had nearly given herself up for lost. There was no time for words. He ordered his attendant to carry a large trunk, wiiich he knew contained many valuable articles, and put it in a place of safety ; then mounting Ellen on the horse, and taking Elgiva on his
own, he bade them be under no appre¬ hension, for he would not leave them till he had secured them a safe retreat. Avoiding the road to Shrewsbury, near which place lay the confederate army, he turned away towards Bre- theren, though he was fearful he should not be able to cross the river. Haste would not permit them to make a choice of a situation, and no habita¬ tion offered, which drove them nearly to despair; till arriving under the walls of the Castle of St. Egbert, whicli in his hurry at that time he did not recollect, he observed a mean cot¬ tage. Unable to proceed further on account of his return to the army, he alighted, and lifting the latch, entered
the humble dwelling, where he found a poor old woman alone, " Good mother!" exclaimed Edric, " can you be so kind to receive my mo¬ ther and sister under your roof a few days—a fortnight at most. I bring them from the distressing seat of war, to preserve their lives; let rae have your answer as quick as possible," " Alas ! sir," said the old woman, " my cottage is very small; 1 have not room for two—but one can stav vvith me if you please, and one can go and be with my daughter — she lives hard by." "Oh!" said Edric, " my mother
and sister will die at the bare idea of a separation. Here, take this purse, it contains forty pieces of gold, divide it with your daughter, and resign your cottage to those so dear to me. I only ask it for one fortnight; every thing of yours shall be kept in safety, and your future reward shall be considerable^ if you will so far oblige me." The sight of the purse made the old woman immediately determine, and she complied with Edric's wish, which was, to resign them her humble dwelling, and to return and do them any little service they might stand in need of. Edric, overjoyed that he had found some place to shelter them from the
impending danger, ran to lead them into the house. The old woman wel¬ comed them with great civility ; but Ellen, who had surveyed the lofty black towers df St. Egbert's Castle with sen¬ sations of' melancholy awe, no sooner entered the cottage, than she inquired the name of the Castle, and to whom it belonged. " The Castle is called St. Egbert's Castle," replied the old woman; " and its owner is the Baron Fitzosric, who is now at the wars ; and he owns all the lands round about," Edric and Ellen looked at one another almost petrified and unable to articulate a syllable. Sensations of an uncommon nature filled his bosom at
the mention of the castle's belonging to Fitzosric, the foe he had wished to avoid, and now had brought the two people most dear to him on earth so near his habitation, Ellen shuddered, and strove to conceal emotions that agitated hev breast from the anxious and penetrat¬ ing eve of Elsfiva, who observed that her mother and Edric was alarmed at the mention of his name, but was silent in the presence of the old woman. Elleu Rosenberg, first recovering from her embarrassment, requested the old woman would endeavour to pro¬ cure them some refreshment; who said, she must go and see what her
daughter had; for her house was a very poor one—and then went her way. Edric then said, " I am mute with astonishment to think that the man of all others I would wish to avoid is the owner of this place, which malicious fortune has conducted us to. Our residence at Ellesmere has been in a very retired manner; but it amazes me to think that I never heard of his being the owner of this place, nor that his estates lay here about. However, the time will not permit a further removal. You, my dear friends, are necessitated to remain here till the next battle is decided ; w r hen, if it pleases God I survive, your safety shall be my first
care. Be secret!—let no one know who you are ; mention to no one that you are allied to Rosenberg; and above all, avoid saying you know any thing of me. I know the hatred Fitz¬ osric bears me, and how greatly he would rejoice if he could give me trou¬ ble. Perhaps, my amiable friends, he might make you suffer to revenge him¬ self upon me." " Oh! rightly judged," said Ellen, " no one shall know vvho vve are. I see the dangers to which we should be exposed if he suspects we are your friends ; for which reason I will nei¬ ther speak o my husband nor vou till I embrace you I oth in a place of safety. My dear Edric, a thousand thanks I
owe you for your kind attention ; delay no longer your return to the army. Heaven, in its mercy, will be your guard and ours!" He tenderly embraced them bothj and commending them to that Provi¬ dence who is the guardian of the in no- cent, bade them farewel; for Elgiva was mistress of his heart, and he sighed with regret at parting vvith the fair maid he adored. El&iva sighed as he turned from her, and with difficulty suppressed the starting tear. Edric mounted his horse, and was out of sight in an instemt, so anxious was he to regain the army* fearful of the enemy's ad-
vancing before he returned to head his forces. A week however elapsed, and the enemy did not approach, a circum¬ stance that much surprised them, (though it allowed Edric an opportu¬ nity of going to the cottage to see if Ellen and Elgiva were safe.)—The supposed cause soon reached them by a deserter from the confederate army, which was, that, contrary to every one's expectation, the Baron Fitzosric had hinted his intention to withdraw him¬ self frora the confederacy, assigning for a reason that he acknowledged William for his King. This conduct greatly distressed and embarrassed the Earls Fitzosborne and VOL. I. E
Brient, who had been entirely insti¬ gated by the Baron to act as they had done. Their army by his desertion would be considerably weakened. However, as they w 7 ere driven to ex¬ tremities, they determined to give Edric the Forester battle, and marched to Shrewsbury, where they found Fitz¬ osric ready for the onset. They in¬ quired if what they had heard concern- in^ his deserting their cause vvas a truth, but he positively denied ever having given such an idea a moment's thought. A desperate battle was now com¬ menced. But in the midst of this calamity Fitzosric treacherously aban¬ doned his friends to their fate ; which victory was in favour of Edric, for he
look the town of Shrewsbury and the two lords prisoners, with many power¬ ful nobles, and the rest of their army vvas completely routed.
E 2
CHAPTER VII. Edric's first object after the vic¬ tory was decided, and they had rested from the fatigue they had undergone, was to fly to relieve the anxiety he knew Ellen Rosenberg would experi¬ ence while his fate remained doubt¬ ful; and elated with the idea of the happiness Elgiva would feel when she saw him alive and had escaped every danger. Flattered with these fond and delu¬ sive thoughts, he hastened towards the cottage. But what words can convey
his astonishment and horror, when he arrived there and found no Ellen—no Elgiva. The old woman was there, but she could give no manner of infor¬ mation what was become of them, as she on her return, one day, found the place deserted, the door open, and no one could tell what was become of them. Frantic with the dreadful intelli¬ gence, and unknowing how toad, ©r which way to take, he began to fancy that in all probability Ellen bad found her retreat was not secure, and vainly imagined, that she and her daughter, ap¬ prehensive of approaching danger, had taken the opportunity of flying to Lon¬ don, to put herself under the protec¬ tion of her husband Rosenberg. s3
To London he hastened, only to meet a disappointment that over¬ whelmed him with despair, and to make the worthy Rosenberg partake of the bitter cup of affliction and misfor¬ tune. And what added to the troub¬ led bosom of Edgar was, that the situ¬ ation of affairs was so circumstanced, as to prevent him making the neces¬ sary search himself. Edric declared, he would exert, his utmost efforts to discover where they were; but he could not be spared frora the army for any length of time. However, he hoped that the victory of Shrewsbury would allow them some short time before any new disturha-nee presented itself; and he promised to lose no time in endeavouring to discover the dear fu¬ gitives, assuring his friend, that h&
would send daily dispatches to let hint know of his success. Rosenberg's heart sunk with dread, when informed that Ellen and Elgiva had quitted the retirement Edric had provided for them—an indiscrib¬ able fear robbed him of every hope of happiness and peace; but his dear Edric had promised to seek them wherever they had concealed them¬ selves. He knew Ellen's virtue and affection, and fondly flattered himself slie had retreated from motives of pru¬ dence, and anxiously awaited the ar¬ rival of some messenger to bring him the happy intelligence of their health and safety; and these hopes (though erroneous) helped in some measure to eha^e away despondence* El
Edric, anxious to discover what was become of his loved Elgiva, hastily pursued his journey, eagerly inquiring at every place he passed if they had seen persons answering the descrip¬ tions he gave. Successless were all his efforts; arid, almost broken hearted for their loss, he repaired to his army at Shrewsbury. Grief now obtained her rapid powers over the afflicted Edric, though a youthful conqueror, decked with all the spoils of victory, the smiles of his sovereign, and the affec* tions of the people. Amidst the fa¬ vours that fortune profusely showered on bim, his heart was a prey to grief,
and the oppression of anxiety and thought under which he laboured, was too visible for any one to pass over it unobserved. After staying near three weeks at Shrewsbury, during which time he re¬ ceived a visit from the disconsolate Rosenberg, and his solicitude increas¬ ing, he one evening determined to go again to the collage, and inquire of the old woman if she had heard any thing of the two people he sought. He reached that place in safety; but the answer was what he expected and dreaded—No ; and the distracted Edric was compelled to return without gaining the least satisfactory intelli¬ gence.
As he was just entering a thicket of trees bordering the road side, his thoughts absorbed in melancholy recol¬ lections, rendered still more so, lhat his ill success prevented him from cheering the drooping heart of his friend and father Rosenberg, he was suddenly roused from indulging his distressing pain of tliought, by over¬ hearing a person say, in a low voice, * 4 'Tis he." Rather alarmed, he turned sharply round, and found five or six men close behind him. His single arm would have been of little service had he known their intention. As il was, he could not help himself, for they threw a large wrapper over him, and spon made him their prisoner. , >
Ih vain he asked what was the reason of their violent proceedings; they would return no answ r er. Forced to submit to their arbitrary power of numbers, he was eonveved he knew not where ; one of them remarking in their way, that they had got the fight¬ ing Edric at hist Edric, muffled up and almost sti tied, knew not where they were carrying him to. They seemed to proceed a good way, but in his situa¬ tion he could not ascertain the time, to suppose the distance; but, accord¬ ing to his conjecture, in about half an hour he heard a door unlock, and presently found they were ascending with him.
% 6
Another door was then opened, into which they conveyed him. Then setting him down and taking offthe wrapper, he discovered himself lo be in a kind of prison, for he perceived the windows were strongly barred, and the furniture in the room con¬ firmed the idea. He looked round with surprise and disdain, then asked ik for what reason he was brought there?" " To keep you, sir, from doing further mischief," said one of his con¬ ductors rather impertinently, which rousing the indignant spirit of Edric, he replied, " Mischief!—that seems to be the province of those who com¬ manded me io be brought hither. Pray by what orders am I deprived
of pursuing my road and business in so strange a manner?" " That," replied a second, " we do not think fit to inform you; but you will meet with your deserts, I dare answer for that. I have thus far to inform you—you will be detained here a prisoner for some time, so you may as well endeavour to reconcile yourself to your fate—for being dis¬ satisfied will not mend matters, I can assure you." They then abruptly left him, and secured the door ; where I must leave my readers to judge of the severity of his afflictions, while I return to Ellen and Elgiva at the Castle of St, Egbert.
CHAPTER VIH. So entirely were their bosoms* filled with detestation towards tho TJaron Fitzosric, that thoy determin¬ ed to avoid him as much as vvas in their power. And when hc requested their company next day to dinner, they complained of indisposition, and desired permission to dine in the apartment allotted for them. Fitzosric complied, for his heart was ill at ease—the well known voice of Lady Jane had struck him with dread. Several months had elapsed
since she pronounced her complaining tones, by whieh means he had hoped her spirit rested in peace, and would no more torment him. Alas! how erroneous was the illusion! — She again pronounced how much she had been disappointed in his vowed affec¬ tions, which he had cruelly and trea¬ cherously chosen to break; and he did not wish to see either Ellen or Elgiva, tiil his troubled spirits had acquired their usual calm ; or at least till he could conquer hi* feelings by a dissembled composure. The next day he hunted. The fol¬ low mg, he had a large party to dine with him—they drank freely—and it was late before they parted. Wine chased away the idea of Lady Jane
from his mind ; he was now as happy ns ever. Elgiva had lieard of their merry¬ making ; and hoped, during the ge¬ neral hilarity, to obtain an opportunity of quitting the Castle. For which reason, she left her mother making preparations for their departure, if she should succeed, and ventured down stairs to see if there was a possibility of escaping. The terror she felt for the Baron, inspired her with the desire of leaving his detested roof; and hope flattered her with success, if she embraced the opportunity which now seemed to offer. Bat, unluckily, while she was in the hall, the company broke up, and de-
scended hastily, followed by the Baron, who escorted his friends to the gate of the Castle to take his leave, Elgiva's heart received a severe check in this frustration of her most ardent hopes—and she could not sup¬ press the tears that swelled her over¬ charged bosom, in consequence of the disappointment, a hope so anxiously desired and so unluckily dispelled.— She wished to avoid the Baron ; for she observed by the levity of his man* ner, and some words that dropped from his lips as he parted with his friends, that he had been drinking too freely. Fearftil she could not pass up the great stairs without being seen by Fitz-
osric, and anxious to regain her cham¬ ber, she slid behind a column which led to another part of the Castle, hop¬ ing: to rest unseen. From this hall there was a small staircase whicli she ascended, flattering herself it** would lead to her chamber, as the greatest dread she now endured was the meet¬ ing the Baron. As she reached the top of the stair¬ case, her terror and disappointment iucreased. It led her iuto a gallery- she looked round, and instead of be¬ holding the illuminated gallery lead¬ ing to the splendid apartments usually occupied by Fitzosric and hisfamih, vvas surprised to find only one solitarv Ltmp, suspended to a long iron chain iu the middle of a large Gothic gal-
lery—which gave a very faint light in the midst of so large and dark a place, whereby the surrounding objects were enveloped in a deep gloom. Between the arches, which sup¬ ported a noble cieling were fixed many liandsome pictures, though the faint light allowed her only to view the nearest. She walked up and down the gallery to search for a way out, but could not perceive any; then looking round her with astonishment, she exclaimed, " Good Heaven !— Where am 1 ?" " In the north gallery, near the door of the haunted chamber," replied a voice, which petrified her with ter¬ ror and amazement, and to Kt\e
herself from falling, she rested her arm against the column of a Gothic arch, under which stood a whole length portrait of a young lady, who appeared very beautiful, and was ex¬ ceedingly richly dressed. Elgiva's terror at the reply being made when she saw no creature near ker, almost overcame her, and pre¬ vented her observing the picture till she recovered from her fright. Then fixing her eyes on it, as the first ob¬ ject after her senses returned, she fancied it moved; but, to her great surprise, saw the exact representation of the picture walk slowly across the gallery. Astonishment tied her tongue, and
rivetted ber to the spot—but that astonishment increased, when turning her eyes towards the picture, she per¬ ceived it still remained the same. " What a mystery is this!" said she.—" Could my eyes deceive me ?— Surely I saw the picture raove—but here it remains. — I wonder what it is." " Lady Jane," replied a voice, uttering the name with a heavy sigh. Elgiva was now deprived of the power of speech; she looked fearfully round, but totally unable to move from the spot. The sigh was repeated; long and
dreadfully it echoed through the marble hall. Elgiva's terrors re¬ doubled. A third sigh alarmed her to a degree of horror. She made a violent attempt to speak and move, but could only utter a loud scream, and fell senseless on the pavement. She vvas roused from this state of insensibility by the Baron, vvho had heard her scream, and had followed the sound of her voice to the north gallery; where he found her deprived of sense or motion. He lifted her from the ground with care, and press¬ ing her to his bosom, brought her to herself; and as she opened her eyes h*r terror almost overcame her, on
finding herself supported by the de¬ tested Fitzosric. " Elgiva! Dear Elgiva P' said he, " what could induce you to come to the north gallery?" She was silent—her heart was too full to reply. She dared not reveal the truth, and had not power at that time to make an excuse, or give an evasive answer. 4i You are silent, ray sweet Elgiva," said he ; " tell me, I beseech you, how came you here?" " I missed my way," she replied, 41 1 thought this small staircase led
to my chamber, but I found myseli mistaken." u But why was you so alarmed ?" he said, " Why all that terror ex¬ pressed on your countenance 1 -~ I heard you shriek violently—tell me, my love, what was the cause of your fainting?" <£ Lady Jane" was Elgiva's an¬ swer. Fitzosric started, unable to conceal his surprise, but immediately compos¬ ing his features, said, " Lady Jane ! —but how could she alarm you ?" " Is this her picture, my Lord," said Elgiva, pointing to it
" It is," " 1 saw it move."—Fitzosric trem¬ bled.—" I could not suppress my ter¬ ror." continued Elgiva. " I uttered a wish to know the meaning—a voice, sighing, answered— < Lady Jane!'— I was so much terrified that I fainted awav."' Fitzosric appeared greatly agitat¬ ed, as she related this singular cir¬ cumstance ; but soon overcame his feelings, if he had any that wounded him, and he said, " 1 did not think, Elgiva, you could give way to such childish and romantic notions; it is nonsense all—the errors of a fearful fancy; because you found yourself in the north gallery, and have, I sup- VOL. i. f
pose, heard it related by some of my stupid servants, that that place is haunted. That is the mysterious chamber," pointing to an elegant Gothic doorway ; " that is the dread¬ ful part of the castle of which such amazing reports are in circulation : but let me entreat you, my sweet girl, banish these idle fears, and do not be terrified with imaginary evils. I w ill lead you from heuce, to a place more adapted to your gentle thoughts." So saying, he placed Elgiva's arm within his, and led her reluctantly along the gallery towards the oppo¬ site extremity to the haunted cham¬ ber ; where, pushing a door open, which was covered with green cloth, and before unperceived by her, she
immediately found herself in the illu¬ minated gallery at the top of the great stairs. Surprise, for a few moments, de¬ prived her of the power of making any observations. At length she with- drew her arm, and politely thanked Fitzosric for his kindness in leading her from a place, of which she ac¬ knowledged sJie had lieard strange reports, and said she would no longer trouble him, as she could step forward to her mothers chamber alone. " Your mother is not in her cham¬ ber, Elgiva," said he. " Where then, ray Lord?"
r 2
" Alarmed at your absence, she came to me in the drawing-room, anxious to know where you was, and what detained you. I will conduct you to her," said Fitzosric, taking her hand and pressing it with an eagerness that amazed her, then hurried for¬ ward. " Stop, my Lord Fitzosric," ex¬ claimed Elgiva, " you have passed the drawing-room door." " No matter, my love—never mind the drawing-room." " But my mother, Sir, expects me," said she sternly, and endeavouring to disengage herself from his hold; but the Baron would not allow her to leav e
him. He pressed her with a vvild transport to his bosom, which liberty he saw gave her great offence. Then throwing himself on his knees before her, in humble and tender accents iu- treatcd she would stay and hear him. Elgiva was now more terrified, from the apprehension of real danger from the dreaded and hated Fitzosric, than she before was, at the imagina¬ tion of supernatural appearances; and in her own mind execrated her folly, in being overcome by the fear of illu¬ sive ills, which brought the designing Baron to the north gallery. She saw his eyes exulting in the idea that she was now in his power. 1 h> could not disguise the pleasure he f 3
experienced at the accident which led him to her assistance, while her heart shuddered at the thought—for he no longer appeared the hum ble supplicant; he held her robe with all his strength, and would not suffer her to leave him. " Rise, my Lord," said Elgiva, darting an angry and indignant look at him, " and permit me to retire; this situation and conduct is a dis¬ grace to yourself and me. 1 insist on it that you let me go." <£ But your mother, Elgiva, she expects you in the drawing-room.— How childish and ridiculous are your doubts!"
" It is all an artifice, my Lord Fitzosric—my mother, I am positive, is not in the drawing-room—if she was she would have heard my voice, and would not have permitted you to detain me so long. Once more, I in¬ sist on your releasing me." " I see, Elgiva, you suspect my honor, because you are convinced of the violence of my love," Fitzosric rose from his supplicating attitude, and, without releasing Elgiva, turned and opened a door which led into a bed-chamber, where several ta¬ pers were standing burning on a table. The Baron drew her forcibly towards the door, Elgiva's heart sunk in her bosom with terror—but casting f4
her animated and inquiring blue eyes on Fitzosric, said tremulously— " Whither, my Lord, are you go¬ ing to lead m$V 9 16 To my chamber," replied Fitz¬ osric. " Think not to disappoint my ardent desires—this is an unlooked for opportunity, and I must embrace it.— This night, my lovely girl, I mean you shall share it with me, and to-mor¬ row's dawn shall witness our mar¬ riage." Elgiva started back with horror.— She was equally terrified at her situa¬ tion, and affronted witb the insult she had received ; as also inadequate to express the detestation she suffered
for hira in terms equal to her feelings. At length she indignantly exclaimed —*< Marriage!—Marriage with Fitz- oric!—Oh ! Heaven never ordained that the names of Fitzosric and Elgiva should meet in marriage—and think not, that after this affront, I shall ever look on you but with contempt and detestation." " Wrong not the innocent," was uttered by a voice exactly similar to the voice Elgiva heard in the nortli gallery. Elgiva turned with astonishment, to see whence the voice came, but could perceive no one. Fitzosric trembled, and his counte- f 5
nance changed; but he still clasped Elgiva in bis arms; and seeing how much she was alarmed, ventured to kiss her cheek with the greatest free¬ dom. " Desist!—Desist!"—was uttered by the same voice that spoke before, and immediately the form that alarm¬ ed Elgiva in the north gallery passed before them* The Baron, terror struck, quitted the trembling Elgiva, and supported himself against the door of his cham¬ ber. Elgiva, seeing him so much ap¬ palled, turned and said—" Thus is the guilty punished, and your vile in¬ tentions defeated—the very dead rises to oppose your tyranny and injustice."
And then nimbly ran along the gallery, » and ascended the stairs to her mother's chamber, leaving him mute with ter¬ ror, anger, and disappointment Fitzosric, when he bade his quests good night—heated with wine, and entirely regardless whether he acted right or wrong, heard Elgiva scream, and vvas greatly surprised to find the sound came from the north gallery ; and although it was a place he never cared to enter, yet, hoping to meet Elgiva, he hurried to her assistance, and strove to impress her mind with terrors, that she might the more easily fall into his power; thereby designing to take a mean advantage of her being frightened and defenceless—determin¬ ing in his own mind that she should *6
be the partner of his bed, though what he said with regard to the marriage was farthest from his intentions. But the voice alarmed him, and shook every dormant feeling of his guilty soul; and, to increase his ter¬ ror, the appearance of his unfortunate wife, Lady Jane—for it was her spec¬ tre that so terrified him, frustrated his wicked designs, and gave the charm¬ ing Elgiva liberty to escape. For when no natural power could disarm him of his vile purpose—when the soft per¬ suasions of innocence, in the mild form of Elgiva, could not prevail, the fleeting shade of Lady Jane brought him to a sense, through terror, of what was due to Elgiva and himself; though Jiis return to justice and reason was
but of a short-lived duration. His mind, naturally inclined to gratify every sen¬ sual wish of his heart, soon recovered his usual desires, and he execrated his folly in letting Elgiva escape, when he had such an advantageous oppor¬ tunity of triumphing over her virtue. He now feared that his conduct had given her an alarm—that she might suspect his designs, and avoid him. He now considered how it would be best to act in future ; and determined, the next opportunity that offered, to be more cautious, as at this time his intellects were a little clouded by in¬ ebriety.
CHAPTER IX. Breathless with affright, Elgiva reached her mother's chamber, who had anxiously waited her return, cherishing the flatterer, Hope, during her absence, that the length of time Elgiva staid, was in consequence of having met with the wished for suc¬ cess. But what language can explain the afflicting conflicts that racked the breast of the amiable Ellen, when she heard her daughter s dreadful recital and escape frora the base intentions of
the villainous Fitzosric. Nor did she know how to resent the affront, friend¬ less, unfortunate as they were, pri¬ soners in his castle, deprived of tbe liberty of escaping, and devoted to the power of a wretch, who knew not how to exercise it, unless to oppress the innocent, or gratify his wicked desires : the thought drove her almost to madness. Often did they implore the mercy of Heaven to release them from his tyranny, or to send their be¬ loved Edric, or Rosenberg, to effect their deliverance. Alas ! they little dreamed of the misfortunes that in¬ volved that hapless youth. When morning came, Ellen said, " My Elgiva, I am resolved to see this man. I will insist on quitting St
I£gbert's Castle—for if we suffer our¬ selves to remain here, without notic¬ ing the insult he has offered, it will only give him an opportunity of in¬ sulting us again—he shall see I will resent it. He has no right to detain us. We w r ant nothing of him—for whatever he meant in kindness I re¬ turn him a thousand thanks; but his base conduct sinks him beneath my contempt; and I should think myself contaminated by holding conversation with a man, who has no other sense of honor or hospitality than to crush the persons he has attempted to protect, merely because their situation gives hira the cruel power of being supposed a friend, and under that mask to con¬ ceal the basest designs. I was in hopes I should have thanked him with
real gratitude—but his behaviour has deprived me of expressing them with the sincerity I could have wished, be¬ cause I consider myself very ill treated. How dares he oppose our removal? It astonishes me to thi^k I have so contentedly put up with his vain ex¬ cuses, repeated affronts, and singular ill conduct. He is already up—I hear his voice. Come, we will go together." They descended the stairs, and met the Baron coming from his dress¬ ing-room, who affected not to observe them, as he conjectured Ellen was going to make some complaint; and her natural dignity and persuasively commanding manner alwavs struck
him with sentiments of virtue, awe, and admiration. " My Lord Fitzosric," said Ellen, <c I beg to speak a few words with you. I shall not trespass long on your time, bat I really ranst be heard." ** With pleasure, Madam," said Fitzosric, with a gracious and tender smile, which he could at all times assume whenever he thought neces¬ sary ; and, taking her hand, led her into the dining room. Then turning to Elsiva with a manner of address and a accent which would have made any one believe he was sincere, said, u First, Elgiva, I must entreat your pardon. I ara truly ashamed of my
behaviour last night. I know I de¬ serve not to be forgiven, but my mind had been elated by the cheering smiles of my friends. I must confess that I had overstepped the bounds of pru¬ dence in wine, or I never could have been guilty of so rude behaviour to a person I truly respect I beg you will believe my sincerity, and forgive the effects of my headstrong passions. I do assure you, when I awoke this morning, and recollected my singu¬ larly affronting conduct, I could not rest in peace till I had seen you, and made every acknowledgement for my fault in my power." " Very well, my Lord," said Ellen ; " as you acknowledge your fault I can say no more on that topic; it really is
a very disagreeable one to me, and has caused me great uneasiness/' " What says Elgiva?" said the Baron, tenderly taking her hand, " you are no longer angry, since you find I was not in my senses. I should wish all the wine at the bottom of the sea, if I thought I had offended you past forgiveness." " I forgive you, my Lord, con¬ ditionally," replied Elgiva, without looking at him, " that you never treat me so rudely again ; yet, it makes me admire, that whatever wrong action a gentleman is guilty of, if he acknow¬ ledges himself overcome with wine, he thinks it is a sufficient excuse to cover all his mad actions ; and therefore,
when in that state, he thinks himself authorised to behave as rudely as he pleases ; and what must a person feel, when he comes to his recollection of having been guilty of every wrong while elated with wine. Had you killed me, your being sorry for it this morning would not have restored me to life, or comfort to my mother. In¬ deed, mv Lord, it will not bear an argument. But take the advice of a Aery young person, and guard well your actions, that reason and honor never forsake you." Fitzosric was rather hurt at what *he said, and vowed mentally that she should not escape ; but he would have it one time in his power to resent her having been so free in her thoughts
and advice. However he thought it best to appear well pleased with her remark, and said, " I know it, my sweet Elgiva, and really am of your opinion." " Now, Lord Fitzosric," said Ellen, " you must listen to me, Five weeks I have been in the Castle of St. Egbert, far against my wish, I assure you; though at the same time I feel myself extremely obliged for all your civilities, and the trouble we have put you to. But it is high time for us to return to my own house, which must be in strange confusion duiing my long absence, for we were near a fortnight at the cottage before you re¬ moved us to the Castle. We fled to that place to avoid the scene of battle.
Again, my Lord, I must repeat my thanks for all your favors, and it is my request that I quit the Castle this day." " So suddenly!" exclaimed Fitz¬ osric ; " I shall feel very much at a loss for the happiness I have experi- cenccd in your agreeable company the few weeks you have been at the Castle. But if it is really your desire, you shall be obeyed ; though I must inform you, if you mean to go to Shrewsbury, which I guess by your saying you ilew from the field of battle, I can assure you, you will find it in a state of confusion, as a second battle is hourly expected; though I have nothing to do with it now, for I have sworn fealty to William the Conquo»
ror, and entirely withdrawn myself from the cause I once espoused. How¬ ever, if it is your determination to hazard as much danger as you flew to avoid, I shall say no more. In the afternoon a carriage shall be ready to attend you where you please ; though, I must repeat it, 1 am sorry to part with such agreeable company. We will breakfast together, if you please ; and though vou have been so long in the Castle, I believe you have never seen the beautiful garden that belongs to it. You must excuse my neglect, being for so many years unused to the company of ladies ; and ifl have been wanting in attention and respect, I entreat you will excuse it. We will walk there after breakfast, if agree¬ able."
Ellen readily complied, overjoyed that she had gained her wish so easily, by his promising they should depart; and she only reminded hira to give orders for the carriage to be in readi¬ ness, as she endured great anxiety till she reached her own habitation. Fitzosric assured her her will should be obeyed. They breakfasted —talked of indifferent matters—then walked in the garden. After which Fitzosric went out and Ellen and El- v triva retired to their chamber, elated JO with the pleasing hope of soon bidding adieu to the Castle. Four o'clock came; Ellen began to fear the Baron had behaved so kind, and promised her removal,only todis- VOL. 1. G
arm her of her just resentment; and began to scrutinise his behaviour, re¬ marking every word and look he be¬ stowed on them—and a person we cannot esteem, whom we know to have been guilty of many bad actions, it is natural to doubt their veracity, and convert every action (however trifling) to a fault, whether they de¬ serve it or not; but she had heard sufficient of Fitzosrie's character, to dread lest he still meditated .some de¬ sign against them, and now reallv thought he vvas only imposing on their credulity with an intention to deceive them. While Ellen and Elgiva were speaking concerning the Baron, a man servant knocked at their chamber door,
and said the Baron wished to speak with Ellen. Imagining it was to inform her the carriage was ready, she hesitated not to follow the servant. They descended the stairs. She supposed the Baron was in the usual room—but was a little surprised to find the man turned to the left. " This way, Madam," said the man ; " Ihe Baron waits in the crim¬ son room—follow me." Ellen silently followed—then en¬ tered through an arched doorway that led into a superb gallery, with elegant chambers on each side, and the door immediately closed. At the extremity u2
of this gallery was a spiral staircase, at the foot of which was a door with a beautiful painting upon it. They ascended the stairs, and en¬ tered a handsome neat room, out of which turned another, appropriated as a bedchamber, both richly furnished. " Bless me!" said the servant as he entered, " the Baron is not here—but take a seat, Madam—I will imme¬ diately go and inform him jou wail to see him." Without awaiting her reply, he retreated to the door, and ran swiftly down stairs, closing the door at the bottom with a loud noise. \ Elleirsat a considerable time> won-
dering why Fitzosric did not appear. To amuse herself she walked into the anti-room, and admired the neatness and elegance of the place. Books, music, and various refreshments were in abundance, which rather surprised her; but her thoughts were intent on leaving the Castle, and each lingering minute seemed an age. The sun was near setting—Ellen's impatience at the delay was extreme ; and dreading lest her absence should increase Elgiva's alarm, she descend¬ ed the stairs, determining to seek the Baron, as he had neglected coming to her. But when Ellen reached the bot¬ tom of the stairs, and found the door ."3 3
shut, which the exertion of all her strength could not force open—then every agonizing thought flushed on her tortured imagination, and drove her nearly to distraction. She was now convinced that the specious behaviour of Fitzosric in the morning, was only to lull their suspicions, till he con¬ certed the scheme how he meant to act. Recollecting his conduct to Elgiva the preceding night, she trembled for her safety, firmly believing he had taken this method to separate them, that he might the easier accomplish * his designs. Distracted at the bare supposition of evils, vvhich she dread¬ ed could not be avoided, she sat down on the lower step, and indulged the
most afflicting sensations a w r retch can experience, till a flood of tears gave her full heart relief. Then falling on her knees, with uplifted hands and streaming eyes, implored the Almighty's protection for her Elgiva, and begged its con¬ tinuation for herself, fervently praying till her mind bad acquired a trifling calm, as she cast herself on Providence for protection and comfort. Then, unknowing what to do, returned to the chamber. The sun had been set about half an hour, and the chamber was over* shadowed with the dusk of the even¬ ing—she thought she heard the door at the bottom of the stairs softly un- g 4
locks, and locked again. A few mo¬ ments presented Fitzosric before her, bearing a lamp. Ellen darted on him a look of con¬ tempt and horror ; but being anxious to return to Elgiva, checked the tor¬ rent of anger and resentment that was ready to break from her overcharged heart, as she found herself entirely in his power, in a place where she was confined without a possibility of escap¬ ing, unless it vvas his pleasure. The Baron had seemingly taken pains to habit his figure, which was really a very fine one, to the best ad¬ vantage—he appeared more elegant than she bad ever seen him during her residence in the Cattle. Hc sel his
* lamp on the table, and, throwing him¬ self negligently on a chair by the side of Ellen, thus spoke, " Ellen, your averted eye informs me you are angry with my proceedings. I allow I merit all your displeasure ; conscious of hav¬ ing very highly offended you, 1 seek noi to excuse myself. I come pre¬ pared to bear every angry and unkind vv ord you are pleased to utter. I con¬ fess mv fault—but that fault was in- spired by love." " Lovel" exclaimed Ellen, in a tone of indignation, her heart bursting with grief and resentment—she could not proceed—and turned her head away. " Yes, Ellen, love! From the o5
first hour I saw you my heart has been a stranger to peace. I have been long a widower—there is riot that woman existing for whom I feel that affection which I bear you. Determined at all events to obtain you, I quitted the cause I was engaged in, in order to remove you to the Castle; where I flattered myself I should inspire you with an affection for me, if I could render you any service. Love urged me to delay your quitting it—I in¬ vented excuses and delays, in order to put off your removal, that I might still enjoy the pleasure of your com¬ pany. Your solicitations this morn¬ ing I could not reasonably deny—and by promising to consent to your going away, it allowed me a short time to prevent it—and this is really the truth
which has induced me to act as I have done." " Designing villain!" exclaimed Ellen, " Heaven in its mercy will avenge my cause." " I deserve the appellation, most amiable creature!" replied Fitzosric, " I knew you would reproach me—go on, upbraid me still—call me by what approbrious names you will, still I must adore you, cruel as you are; and therefore, when I confess this, I trust you will believe my sincerity.''^ " And you, ray Lord, believe mine. Your treacherous conduct to me and my daughter, which you have avowed, makes me despise the man that could g6
act with such meanness as to deceive. To hear the name of love prophaned by lips like yours increases my detes¬ tation ; remember your infamous con¬ duct to Elgiva last night, and men¬ tion the name of love no more." ~" Time, Ellen, may inspire you with more favorable sentiments for me ; I can expect only upbraidings at present. My conduct to Elgiva I can fully clear. What I said was in a joke, only to try the vanity of young minds. I am very sorry for it, because I believe I frightened her—but your beauty and elegance claim my ad¬ miration, my respect, my love. Be¬ lieve rae, I am sincere—consent to be the wife of Fitzosric, and my future life shall be devoted to your will."
" My Lord, you must allow me to return to my Elgiva; my heart cannot bear the painful separation ; those few hours to me have been ages of torment." " Give me your promise to let the priest join our hands. When you meet me at the altar, Elgiva shall be restored to you—till then 1 shall de¬ tain her an hostage, till you fulfil my wishes." " Oh ! my Lord," exclaimed Ellen, " torture me not with this cruel deter¬ mination. If you pretend to love me, allow me my Elgiva, the only com¬ fort and happiness ill fortune has not removed from the wretched Ellen."
" But still you withhold the promise I request," said Fitzosric. " How can you, knowing the ardor of my affection, be so unkind ? I have told you my determinatio/j. Consent to meet me at the altar—I will then restore your Elgiva ; but you must endure a sepa¬ ration till then," i( Oh ! never!—never !—never!" exclaimed Ellen, distractedly. " Cruel man!—Leave rae, lest I loath your sight, and forget myself. But, mark me, Ellen and Elgiva are not friend¬ less, and one day you will severely suffer for this. Then, turning from him with an air of scorn, which, al¬ though it humbled the proud heart of the Baron, yet failed not to charm him the more. When, turning round, she
expressively said, " Yes, Fitzosric, thou that hast neither pity, fear, nor remorse, art adequate to the perpetra¬ tion of the v/orst of crimes." Stung to the quick at the conclu¬ sion of her speech, and for once at a loss what to say to appease her anger, he took the opportunity, and slightly wished her a good night; then retired, carefully securing the door at the foot of the staircase; the key of which he took particular care of, and never en¬ trusted it to any one.
CHAPTER X. Fitzosric had in reality confessed the truth. He had undoubtedly a great affection for Ellen, which vvas the principal reason of his using the treacherous means of conveying them to the Castfe. The youth of Elgiva then caught his wandering eye, and when they were both in his power, he knew not where to fix his wavering mind, determining to try his success, and obtain one of them for his mistress. Imagining the youthful heart of El¬ giva (to which period he alw r ays ascribed an insurmountable vanity,
which, I am sorry to say, is conveyed down to the present time) was to be caught by the display of a profusion of wealth and glittering presents, inde- pendant of any kind of affection, he had also the idea, that love, interest, oppression, deceit, or some kind of artifice, would be a means of her falling into his snares, by which idea he thought every female was to be gained, if the man would exert his abilities and dissimulation, and think it worth his trouble to waste his time in the pursuit of making a virtuous woman miserable. In confirmation of Ihe above wretched idea, the virtuous female has no reason to thank a Iale writer* for the contemptuous een-
sures he has past on her sex. But when she considers that he never knew what virtuous attachment was, she will not wonder at the envious manner of his writings, who therefore, in conformity to the malicious ideas of the patrons who supported and encouraged him to write agreeable to their voluptuousness and insensibility, in condemnation of the sex at large. Inspired by these pernicious notions, he has been the miserable means of leading thousands of men into errors, who, from caprice, a little superiority in point of fortune, a small dispute with the persons on w r hom they be¬ stowed their attentions, habitual in¬ tercourse with the most abandoned, or a whimsical, opiniated adherence to the ideas of the gentleman alluded to .
who for the sake of letting the world knqw that they had perused his works, and imbibed his opinions, as also those of a Noble Lord* ; vvhich, how¬ ever, might be the characteristic of some vain and unsettled women in the time hc lived; yet he certainly is not to be applauded forthe malicious sar¬ casms which he extends to all, merely to gratify the humour of the abandon¬ ed characters which he strove, for his own advantage, to please. Unless his pen was exercised to favor the designs of the daring libertine, who, bound by no laws, dared violate the most sacred—and on perusing the latter gen¬ tleman's works, will feel no scrapie in attacking the chastity of his friend's,
or brother's wife, nor the daughter of his most esteemed friend. And the most unfortunate and abandoned pros¬ titute may consider herself in a prin¬ cipal measure indebted to his pernici¬ ous tenets for all the miseries she is doomed to suffer. But to return to my story—I have before related Fitzosric's views with regard to Elgiva. He had first breath¬ ed his passion to her, as Ellen's dig¬ nity of manner awed him iuto submis¬ sion, virtue, and dread, v* henever he saw her, which prevented him from wounding her ears with professions of love, as he really imagined her a superior being to all he had ever met with.
But when he deluded her away from her daughter to a place where he could speak to her entirely alone, then hc thought it a fit opportunity, as she was sinking under anxiety and oppres¬ sion, to take advantage of her un¬ happy situation, and make proposals, which, had she been at liberty, he dared not offer. His heart accused him with injustice, and the little re¬ gard a woman ought to place on the professions of a man, who seeks but to destroy ; and if the unhappy being be¬ comes a victim to his deceitful vows, soon finds herself abandoned to misery and despair. Fitzosric's heart was set on con¬ quering, what he called, the stubborn virtue of Ellen: for, although he felt
a superior attachment for her to every other woman, yet could not his waver¬ ing heart relinquish the libertine pur¬ suits he was engaged in—flattering himself that some how or other she would yield to his entreaties. And though Ellen spoke but little, yet every word she pronounced was like a dag¬ ger to his heart. However, as he was not long of a temper to take these things to heart— virtuous love had not yet gained that ascendancy over him, to make him re¬ solve on relinquishing the fair Elgiva. He silenced the intruding voice of conscience, that represented to him a criminality in declaring an honorable passion for Ellen, while he was pursu¬ ing her daughter with an illicit one.
Therefore he went to seek Elgiva, to frame some excuse (at which he was always ready) for her mother's ab¬ sence. He found her waiting for him in the drawing-room. Terror and asto¬ nishment at her mother's longr absence had induced her to enter his detested presence, to inquire the reason ofher long stay. " Elgiva," said he, u you are the very person I wished to see. I am happy to inform you that your mother is gone from the Castle." " Gone!" exclaimed Elgiva— " Goue! Do not mock me—Do not
trifle with my solicitude. Gone!— Where?—How ?—Impossible!" " Yes," replied he, in an uncon¬ cerned tone of voice, " she is really gone from St Egbert's Castle, if I may be believed. The carriage was waiting—she expressed a desire of going alone, to see if her house and effects were safe, or to procure another ; and she left you to my care and pro¬ tection till she returned, which she promises shall not exceed three dajs." Elgiva's countenance varied alter- nately from a rosy hue to a deadly paleness. Her swollen heart was too full to reply ; it found relief in tears; for she retreated to the wainscot, and,
leaning against it, sobbed audibly, as if her heart would break. Fitzosric, unmoved, allowed her to indulge her grief, fearful of incurring lier just anger, if she should suspect he had bee . guilty of deceiving her. He therefore took her hand respectful¬ ly, and entreated her to be under no manner of apprehension on her mother's account, nor yield to such excessive grief. He begged her to believe the truth of his assertions; and assured her, lhat, in three days, she should cither see or hear from Ellen; which would relieve her mind of every anxious VOL. i. u
doubt, and convince her of his since¬ rity. Elgiva perceived there was no other alternative than to feign a belief of what he asserted, though, in her own mind, she did not believe a word of what lie said. Then, bidding him good night, she, with a heavy heart, retired to her chamber. Fitzosric, overjoyed to find his scheme succeeded so well, soon after want to rest. When Elgiva reached her cham¬ ber, she found Agatha waiting there,
which revived her sorrows. She wept afresh, and, falling on the bosom of Agatha, exclaimed, " Oh! the cruel Baron ! he has robbed me of my dear mother!" " For Heaven's sake, Madam! w hat do you mean ?" said Agatha. " He says she has gone from the Castle, and has left me to his care and protection. Oh ! is that to be believed? Do you think that, after his conduct last night, she would leave me to his care—without so much as telling me Oie was going, or bidding me adieu i Oh! no, no! it is another of his base h2
contrivances! Riches enables him to oppress the innocent; his exalted si¬ tuation in life privileges him to act the tyrant!" " I am so astonished, Madam»" said Agatha, " that lean hardly credit what I hear!" " My life for it!" said Elgiva, in a positive tone, " she has not left tho Castle ; I fear he has imprisoned her, to prevent our leaving him. — Oh ! Agatha! if you only knew the anxiety and distress that dwells in my heart, you would say I was a most wretched creature indeed."
" But what can be done ?" replied Agatha; "how can you be certain she is not gonel Oh! you know not how revengeful the Baron is, if he thinks any one doubts his word when hc has said any thing.—I have seen him in such a rage!" " I defy his rage!" said Elgiva, interrupting her. " As soon as all are asleep in the Castle, I will search every room and place I meet with, but I will discover where he has secreted hen" " Lord bless us! that would be terrible indeed ! I am sure I should be hS
frightened out of my wits!" said Aga¬ tha. " The cause will cure my fright; I shall feel none. Agatha, will you be afraid to go with rae?" " Indeed, I verily believe I could n<rt for all the world ; but I will wait here and pray for you." The Castle clock pronounced the solemn hour of midnight—Elgiva took a lamp, saying *' Well, Agatha, I will not urge you ; mine is a cause wherein I should conquer idle terrors: you, thank Heaveu ! lm\e none of the kind
to afflict you. I will go alone," And she immediately quitted the chamber, to the amazement of Agatha. Elgiva had observed her mother descend the stairs; so she did not imagine she was on the story even with her chamber. She passed the dining room, and nimbly flew by Fitz- osric's bed-room, aud many superb apartments, the doors of which stood open: but, not supposing Ellen was there, wa* at a loss how to proceed; especially as Ethelwald passed her and looked very earnest at her. The sight of him struck her heart with uncom¬ mon dread; for Agatha's account of u i
him made her shudder. She feared he was set by the Baron to be a spy upon her actions ; and her terrors in¬ creased, when he advanced and took the liberty of putting his arm round her waist, whispering at the same time softly— £f I want to speak with you— follow me." The expression of his countenance, which looked very cheer¬ ful, made her fear his villanous inten¬ tions. She had heard he had been the assh antof all his master's crimes. She ieared he was now endeavouring to ensnare her into the Baron's power ; or, perhaps, had dared himself to lift his thoughts to treat her with rudeness and insult; so that, in escaping tf *
Baron, she might fall into the hands of Eihelwald for as evil a purpose. Thus agitated, she disengaged her- <Af with difficulty from his grasp, and ilew up stairs to Agatha; where, re¬ citing what had happened, she was persuaded not to pursue her scheme of -earching the Castle. After waiting some time, and her anxiety increasing to know where her mother was, she again descended the otairs, and passed the various rooms she had before. Fortunately she did not meet with Ethelwald. Entering the gallery on the left hand, then open- II o
ing a door on the right, she found it led into a narrow passage with a door on each side. She opened one of them, and found it to be a kind of lumber room ; for the furniture was all in great confusion. Anxious to see if her mother was there ? she carefully examined every part; but, not discovering the object of her search, retreated, heaving a distress¬ ing sigh, and closed the door after her. The door of the opposite room was fastened; it required all her strength to withdraw the bolts, that apparently
liad not been opened for several years. Hope inspired her with tbe thought that her search would be ended here ; and, acquiring renovated vigour, soon accomplished opening the door* This apartment was large and handsome ; the furniture decaying by the unrelenting hand of Time, and covered with dust, as by its appear¬ ance there did not seem to have been a creature in that room for a great length of time. Elgiva sighed, and her fluttering heart believed the sigh was repeated, though it did not sound like her mother, 11O
and was greatly terrified lest Fitzosric should have heard and followed her. She looked round the room, in hopes of discovering some clue to guide her to the wished-for place that contained Ellen Rosenberg. An hour had elapsed in this un¬ successful search; for the clock had struck one some time, and she des¬ paired of finding her mother. Advancing towards a couch, where she meant to sit a few minutes to rest froim the fatigue, and to give relief to hjer troubled heart by st fresh fit of weeping, her eye rested on the floor
—she perceived it spotted with blood ! Astonished at the sight, she set the lamp on the floor, and, examining it more minutely, saw it was nearly covered. Terrified at a sight that appalled every sense, she was a few moments deprived of sensibility, and sunk extended on the floor. Her recovery brought with it new dread ; and the first idea that struck her aiilicted thoughts, was, that the blood spilled there was occasioned by the murder of Lady Jane; for she re¬ collected hearing Agatha say she feared Lady Jane did not come fairly by her death. *
A curiosity, checked by fear, prompted her to remove the clothes ©f the couch; and, with horror, she perceived they were all dyed with* blood. " Oh! soma dreadful deed has been transacted here," said she.— " Heaven preserve my dear mother from meeting a similar fate!—Inhu¬ man wretch! — how can his guilty heart find rest beneath the roof where¬ in such heinous crimes have been com¬ mitted." When she had removed the clothes, she found the middle of the couch
lifted up. Prompted with the desire of knowing all that related to the mys¬ terious appearance before her eyes, she ventured to open it; but suffered the most agonizing sensations when she perceived it contained the skeleton of a female, thrown carelessly in with the dress on. Elgiva, unable to behold, so unexpectedly, the sight that chilled her soul with horror, fainted away. When she came to herself, she found that in her fall she had extin¬ guished the lamp, and trembled at the horrid thought of being alone in a room where an unhappy creature had suf¬ fered, to all appearance, a most cruel
death. She had not a doubt remain¬ ing but that the uninterred body she saw, was the unfortunate Lady Jane Fitzosric; and fresh detestation in¬ spired her every thought towards the Baron, Then the doubtful fate of her mo¬ ther recurred to her mind. She be¬ lieved Fitzosric to be made up of ar¬ tifice and villany, and could not divest herself of the idea that he had con¬ fined her in some part or other of the Castle. However, she was determined not to relinquish the search she had begun, let it cost what it would ; for she endured such tornjenting thoughts
and such exquisite feelings in the bare apprehension of what might befal her mother, that the sight of the shocking spectacle she had just witnessed scarcely exceeded. The grey tinge of morning beamed in at the shutters. She walked to one of the w indows and opened it, to admit a gleam of light; without which she could not find her way to the door; and the rosy tinge of Aurora, as she waited the progress of the morning, displayed all the horrors of the apart¬ ment more dreadful. She looked to see where the win-
dow opened into, hoping it was to* wards the road; but was disappointed to find it turned towards a garden. The light was now sufficiently strong to enable her to leave tbe dread- fill chamber. Having secured the doors as she found them, she hurried with alt possible speed to her own room: and as she quitted the awful chamber, the Castle clock struck three. Agatha was still anxiously expect¬ ing her return. She perceived by JElgiva's pallid countenance that her mind had received extreme terror. She trembled violently, and had scarce-
ly strength to articulate a syllable. Agatha was greatly alarmed, Elgiva, observing her inquiring eye sought to know the cause ofher distress, said—* " Ah! Agatha, poor Lady Jane was murdered! You were right in the dreadful conjecture. The Baron is a wicked man. Oh! I have been in such a shocking room!—the floor was all over sprinkled with the hlood of that unfortunate Lady!—How I shuddered at the mournful sight, which busy memory will never suffer to be erased from my mind!—and, O Agatha! in a kind of press couch I found a female skeleton. Good Hea-
ven ! What were my feelings at that moment?'* Agatha stood petrified with amaze¬ ment, hardly daring to credit what she heard. Elgiva's distressed counte¬ nance was sufficient to convince her the dreadful tale was true ; then said, iC But have you found your mother ?" "O! nop replied Elgiva, " seek¬ ing for that unfortunate woman I en¬ tered that horrid chamber. The sight overwhelmed me—my light was ex¬ tinguished. Alas! I could not pro¬ ceed."
" I am sure it is a miracle that you did not die with the fright," said Agatha. u Well, after witnessing such a shocking sight, I would advise you to trust to the event; perhaps the Baron said the truth, and she is really gone." '" That idea shall never slacken my Murch, Agatha. I will not be want¬ ing in my duty—the thought that he i» deceiving me is so strongly im¬ pressed on my mind, that I cannot in the lea&t chase it away. I will en¬ deavour to rest myself a little; forthe anxieties and teirors I have under¬ gone the last twelve hours are almost
too much to bear; and as soon as dav a li H le more advances I will renew mv search.'* " I shall remain with you, Madam," said Agatha, " as you are alone— my heart feels for your troubles and disappointments." "As you please, Agatha." They then secured the door, and strove to silence the painful recol¬ lections of what had transpired, by courting the balmy aid of sleep.
CHAPTER Xf. F.lgiva was favoured by a few hours repose, which revived her spirits, and enabled her to bear the distressing sensations her afflicted bosom expe¬ rienced in her pursuit the ensuing day. Having breakfasted, and more fully related to Agatha the mysterious discovery, as she imagined, of the murder of Lady Jane Fitzosric, de¬ clared her intention of devoting the whole day in search after Ellen.
" You will be exposed to many dangers, I fear," said Agatha ; " only consider the number of servants at¬ tending on the Baron ; vou cannot go far before vou are seen." <( You tell me," said Elgiva, 4 that 310 one enters the north gallery. Per¬ haps the Baron, knowing the dread that every one entertains of that place, has confined her there, believing no one will dare venture therein—ami shall terror impede the search 1 am destined to make for my mother ?— No—that shall be the first place I will examine. My soul, Agatha, is now
a stranger to every fear of danger, or any other." " I must confess," replied Agatha, c< there is but one person in the Castle who goes into the north gallery, and that is tho Baron's trusty favorite Ethelwald, the keeper of his secrets— the assistant in all his crimes. And he is the only person who dares ven¬ ture there to light the lamp. I am sure the north gallery might have been in total darkness for me." " And why is the lamp lighted at all, if no person goes into the north galleiy, as yo»j telb hie 1 it might as VOL. I. I
well be in total darkness," said Elgiva. Agatha replied, " I have heard Lady Jane say, that when the spirit of the Danish Lord haunted the Castle, so that no one could live in it, there were a number of Bishops called together to lay it ia the north cham¬ ber; and they expressly ordered a lamp to be lighted in the north gallery every night. It is a ceremony, it seems, that must not be omitted as long as the Castle stands. And I am sure, if the Baron, and all the inhabi¬ tants of the Castle, had not a par¬ ticular dread, that some wonderful
misfortune would befal us if it was omitted, I verily believe the lamp would remain without lighting till doomsday." " What idle notions you are ali seemingly inspired with," said Elgiva; " it makes me wonder how any of you consent to live here. Ethelwald, you say, is the only person whose heart is a little more courageous than his fellows—and he now performs the duty." " Nobody els§ would go. Ber- nulph died suddenly, who used to have t)ie care of the lamp—and we yvera i 2
all happy when Ethelwald offered voluntarily—for every one of us dread¬ ed, lest tbe Baron should order any one particular person to do it I am sure if he had requested such a thing of me, I would have left the Castle that moment. I have often tliought, that the lamp, the nortli gallery, and the haunted chamber was all a mys¬ tery alike*—or did they think, when they ordered it to be lighted, that the ghost of the Danish Lord did not like to be in the dark ?" u WeU,".replied Elgiva, '• since I perceive' the*draadjyou have «of that place, I /will not : request that of you* !
which w r ould apparently wound your feelings, and help to intimidate mine —alone I trust my fortitude will not forsake me; the wish of discovering where my mother is concealed will inspire me with unusual courage.. But to see you trembling with fear and apprehension, if you accompanied me, would banish my resolutions. I charge you, Agatha, if the Baron should come to this apartment, and ask f ■»• me, do not mention where 1 am gone." Elgiva then hastily quitted the chamber. i 8
She first examined all the rooms on .ih$ same floor with her own, though she believed it would be to no purpose^only her own innate satis¬ faction, in the certainty that she had not omitted any place, however feeble the hope. She then descended to proceed to the north gallery. Fearful of being per¬ ceived if she went the way she first did, she recollected the door through which FitzoMic led her the night she was so greatly alarmed, and was happy to find it yielded to her hand. She entered the dreadful gallery
with far different sensations, than those she experienced the night when she found herself in that place, of which such ambiguous tales were spoken. She examined every door that she could open, but found them all de¬ serted and neglected. The noble fur¬ niture was falling into decay; the dust hung in large heavy folds on what had once been elegant tapesfrx, and defaced many beautiful pictures. In one room the casement had fallen from its station, by the rude hand of unrelenting Time, and left it a mansion for owls and daws to build in ; who, as 14
she" opened the door, which had not admitted such a visitor for many years, all set up a loud cry, as if alarmed, and immediately took to flight, shak¬ ing the mouldering fragments about her ears, that she could scarcely see for dust and rubbish. Not imagining her mother to be there, she retreated, and closed the door. She next examined the pictures in the gajlery, and heaved a deep sigh as she contemplated the lovely fea¬ tures of the unfortunate Lady Jane, while the most afflicting sensations
possessed her mind for that Lady^s melancholy fatej as she recollected the unburied body she had found in a distant chamber. : She then came to a winding stair¬ case, on the opposite side, and, de¬ scending, found ! it led into a chapel, tliouo*h, apparently, it had lidt been used as such for many years. And looking at the inscriptions on the monuments, was surprised to find one erected to the memory of Lady Jane Fitzosric. A very amiable character Fitzosric had honored her with on her tomb, representing her an affectionate i 5
wife, a tender mother, a sincere and faithful friend, and an engaging com¬ panion, with every other encomium that an affectionate and afflicted hus¬ band could bestow. " Alas!" exclaimed Elgiva, " what vile pageantry and mockery is here! —A noble tomb—a stately monu¬ ment—an acknowledgment of her vir¬ tues engraved thereon^—when the poor neglected clay is mouldering, un- coffined, unburied, and a spectacle too shocking to behold. Here her hopes were disappointed ;
for when she descended, she fondly flattered herself she should find her mother. A sigh burst from her bo¬ som, and tears chased each other in quick succession down her cheeks, as she hastened to return to the gallery —her bosom filled with greater detes¬ tation towards the Baron than ever she had known before. She had now examined every part of the north gallery, except the mys¬ terious chamber, and there she stop¬ ped. The door was strongly fastened; often she was tempted to open it, hoping to meet with Ellen. But she recollected the prohibition which 1 (>
Agatha said had been laid upon ali¬ as well as that the keys were put away beyond the possibility of dis¬ covering where they were hid—and a kind of superstitious terror overcame her at the thought of entering thai place, and deprived her of tlie emi¬ rate she experienced till now. " Surely my mother," said Mit\ «• cannot be there—I would venture anv thing to be convinced of the cer¬ tainty. The door is strongly secured —the keys no one knows where. Yet should I attempt to open the door of that forbidden apartment, vvhich, for a dreadful reason, has been closed for
so many years, what a train of mis¬ fortunes might ensue !—No—I cannot —dare not enter here. Sacred to the ghost of the Danish Lord, aud surely that of Ladv Jane inhabits it also, else w hv does her spirit wander here ? Poor unfortunate woman ! to fall into such cruel hands 1 Alas 1 I must relinquish all hopes of finding my mother, for this mysterious chamber bars my passage/' Elgiva then with an aching heart returned to her own chamber the way she came. Agatha was there, and dinner had
been waiting for her some time. She sat down to partake of the refresh¬ ments provided, though her heart was disconsolate in not discovering Ellen. Fatigued with her fruitless search, she determined to rest herself till to¬ wards evening, when she meant to renew it. She then related all she had seen to Agatha, and concluded with a wish that she could open the door of the haunted chamber, that she might have the satisfaction of saying she had not left a single place, however dreadful, unexamined.
tk Oh! talk not so," said Agatha, " unless you mean to frighten me out of my senses; for as soon as ever that dreadful door is opened, the ghost of the Danish Lord will be released, and no creature will be able to live in the Castle." " Cease such ridiculous ideas," said Elgiva, pettishly ; but while she chid the fears of Agatha, similar sen* sations crept gently over her mind; and although she spurned the super¬ stitious thought of the Danish Lord's haunting the place, she could not divest herself of terrifying apprehen¬ sions on acconnt of Lady Jane; for
she had seen that mysterious appear¬ ance, and what she saw she had an undoubted right to believe ; she had also heard the plaintive sound of her voice, and knew she vvas indebted to that singular appearance, who as a guardian angel preserved hev from FitzoM'ic's power. These recollections most power¬ fully possessed her mind, and cau.sed her to alleviate the terror she perceived Agatha endure, at the bare imagina¬ tion of the haunted chamber being opened. And assuming as much se¬ renity as could be supposed, she turn¬ ed her eyes on the trembling servant,
and sighing said, <c Be not alarmed, A galha, I will not open the door, though the cause of my curiosity is not an idle one, but most afflicting ; yet I respect the commands of the heads of our re¬ ligion, and lhat mysterious door shall not be opened by mc." Agatha expressed her happiness, that she would not open the door of the north chamber, made several in- quiriei* concerning tho different apart- men Is in that part of the Castle, to which Elgiva minutely replied. * While thev were discoursing the Baron sent a message, to request
Elgiva would favor him with her com¬ pany in the parlour. Elgiva at this moment dreaded the Baron more than ever, there was not a being on earth she wished more to avoid. She also recollected he had drawn her mother from her chamber by a similar specious pretence, and was under the most alarming appre¬ hensions, that he designed to alter her habitation, which would prevent her pursuing her wished-for search. She therefore returned a polite answer by the servant of Fitzosric, and begged she might be permitted to
decline attending him, as the grief she endured at the separation from her amiable mother, had made her ex¬ tremely unwell, and entirely unfit for company or conversation. As soon as the servant withdrew to deliver his message, Agatha said, 16 I am sure, Elgiva, yoa have grieved enough to turn your brain, and what you have seen must naturally increase your unhappiness. Suppose you take a walk in the garden ; the- moon is now rising, and it is a beautiful night; it may calm the agitation of your troubled mind. I know when any thing affects me, I feci my heart ex-
ceedingly relieved by walking out on a fine moonlight night." " I believe I will be advised by you," said Elgiva, " for my head feels as troubled as my heart: but 1 am not acquainted with the garden, therefore if you will accompany me I should be infinitely obliged to you." " With all my heart," replied Agatha; " if you will go, I will juat put the room iu order and follow you ; perhaps you do not know your way, without going down the great stairs, and there you will surely meet th# Baron, But if you pass the stairs, and
proceed as if you were going to the north gallery,on the right hand you will see a chamber, through which you must pas>s, and you will perceive a door on tfie opposite hide—that door, which is of polished oak, will lead you into a part of the Castle, which i dare sup¬ pose you have not yet seen. But if vou wi*»h to see it, I will ^o with vou to-morrow; at present I sincerely be¬ lieve a little air will do you o-ood, for you look shockingly pale. Therefore go down the stair> ihat you will see facing you, and they will take you into the solitary passage that leads to the garden."
Elgiva thanked her, and quitted the chamber, reminding her of her promise to follow.
JEKD Or THE FIRST VOLLMK,
Edric the forester: or, The mysteries of the haunted chamber: an historical romance
EDRIC, THE FORESTER, ~----^>«<4------- CHAPTER XHL Elgiva pursued the direction so minutely given by Agatha, but found she had much difficulty to gain the garden; for the stairs Agatha men¬ tioned were situated at the extremity of a very long winding passage, soli¬ tary indeed ; and when she found her¬ self in the garden, it was in such a remote part, that she could not easily tell where she wa», as she' had* no
recollection of the ptaee where ihe Baron one day led her and her mother, at least the present appearance bore no resemblance to the garden she had been iu before. However, as it was a most delightful evening, she pursued her solitary walk, hoping Agatha would not be long before she joined her. Every rustling of the leaves oc¬ casioned her to start in expectation of her wished approach ; as also for fear of the Baron, for whom she endured so much terror, that she could not re¬ ject the idea of secreting herself in some remote part of the Castle, till by some chance of Providence, the news .might arrive of; the safety of her mother. Absorbed in melancltoly reflections,
she wandered a considerable time, amazed to think what could occasion Agatha's long stay. The reason was, the Baron grew enraged when the servant delivered Elgiva's message. " She shuns me!" said he—" she shall have cause to repent her want of confidence. This girl penetrates deeper into my designs than I wish or imagined. 1 see she acts with caution, but her stubborn and perverse will shall yield to my superior arts, or 1 am not Fitzosric. So young and so full of such romantic notions of honor and sensibility. Who would have supposed a country girl like her possessed of such ideas? And her mother, with all the pride of con¬ scious nobility, attempts to awe me a a
with her frown. Is this a return for my favors? When I brought them here I thought their only pride would have been to oblige me. Hitherto I have been mistaken, but they are in my power." Hastily quitting the parlour, he darted up stairs to the apartment of Elgiva, bis heart swelling with anger and offended pride; and, finding only Agatha, began venting his rage on her, insisting also on knowing where Elgiva was. Agatha, terrified and at a Joss to know what to say concerning her ab¬ sence, lest he should suspect that Elgiva had been looking over any part of the Castle, w^ obliged lo owu the
truth, that Elgiva said she wished to walk in the garden, as she was much troubled with the head-ache, and that Agatha w T as to follow her. " As you value your life,'* said Fitzosric, " I charge you go not to the garden—I have something particular to say to Elgiva, and desire you will not intrude," He then quitted the chamber. Agatha was terrified at his menace, and dreaded his meeting with Elgiva. She observed him descend the great stairs —the anxiety she felt for Elgiva made her hope to meet with her, if she pursued the way she had directed Elgiva to take; she therefore hurried through the apartments towards the a4
garden, but could not perceive any one. Remembering the Baron's stern prohibition, and mindful ef her own preservation, she returned to Elgiva's chamber, ardently wishing her return. Fitzosric hurried up and down the walks with the greatest perturbation and rage, and wondered why he could not meet Elgiva: his heart heaving with agitation, impatience, and disap¬ pointment, roused his temper every step he proceeded. " She was ill/* said he, " and could not attend my in¬ vitation—deception all. She was well enough to walk in the garden, though she chose not to come to me. Design¬ ing creature! but it shall be the last time she has reason to triumph in de¬ ceiving me." Then he hastily renewed
his search, every moment venting new threats and imprecations on the hap- hss Elgiva. About half an hour elapsed in vain search, when he thought he perceived tlie form of Elgiva glide through an avenue of trees that led to a distant part. He increased his speed, at the same time endeavouring to quell the turbulent emotions that possessed his soul, and appear tranquil in her presence, as if he had suffered no alarm. " My sweet Elgiva!" said he, coming up, and taking her hand, u Why do you fly me? I came to chide you."
a 5
*/ Fly you, my Lord!" she replied, *•' and can I merit your anger for walk¬ ing in the garden, in hopes of re¬ lieving my heart or a weight of anguish." " Certainly not," said the Baron ; " but I tax you with unkindness. I sunt for you. I would have attended you here, had I known you had a wish for walking. You sent me a frivolous excuse. Why did you walk without me ?" <c Alas! my Lord! 1 am only fit company for myself. You are happy, but I am sinking to the earth with a weight of distresses. Why then should my unhappiness cast a gloom over your more joyous hours ?"
" Unkind Elgiva," said FitS50sric, " yet if you are fea,rful of infecting ms with unhappiness, as you call it, you have no pity on poor Agatha; she was to have been your companion, I find." c * She kindly offered to walk with me, my Lord, or I should not have required her. Alone, I can give vent to my sorrows, which increase by being suppressed, and I wish not to wound the tender feelings of Agatha, or any one else/* replied Elgiva. " You puzale me, my dear girl," said the Baron, forcing a smile, " when you talk of sorrows, and unhappiness —I should like to know the cause," a6
**Oh! my Lord Fitzosric!" ex¬ claimed Elgiva, in great distress, "too well—too well vou know the cause.** " Well, well," said Fitzosric, " the cause will be removed in a day or two. I suspect yoe have a very bad opinion of me, I mm** wed& tell you so. But I value oot wfe anv one savs or thinks -—and you, Elgh'a, will hereafter speak of me as you find me. Come, throw this romantic melancholy from your mind—be cheerful. I came to have a little talk with you ; but you look »u Military, that I am quite vexed to sec you." " My Lord, you do me honor," said she; " but when the heart is heavy,
the behaviour cannot be light—and as it is growing late, t think I sliall re¬ turn." ** No, no," replied Fitzosric, *' I prohibit thai—believe me, I shall not so soon part with you ; so reconcile yourself to an hours walk in the gar¬ den, and consider it will be of gre|it benefit to your health. Your head aches, and the air vvill remove it So 1 was told by Agatha, in excuse for your going without me." Then taking her arm under his, he led her up and down several walks, and at length seated himself in an harbour imme¬ diately under a high watch tower, and made Elgiva sit down also. Here again he began discoursing
of love, and vowed unalterable affec¬ tion to Elgiva; but as he was an ob¬ ject of her aversion, his soothing blan¬ dishments and tender caresses, which she could no way disengage herself from, gave her infiuite distress and concern ; and which she repulsed with a becoming disdain, as she was alarm¬ ed at the freedom of his speech and behaviour. And being at such a dis¬ tance from the Castle, began to trem¬ ble with dread. Fitzosric, observing her uneasiness, promised he would return with her to the Castle; but first insisted she should bestow on him a kiss, in token that she forgave him, and was not offended. Then he begged another, that she would think no more of what he had
said. As he drew her reluctant and averted cheek to his lips, a deep and distressing groan, as if uttered by some one in agony, issued from the watch-tower, and caused Fitzosric to start, and cast his eyes up to the tower. Elgiva's heart was torn with anguish. She seemed to recollect the sound, and, clasping her hands to¬ gether, as she rose from her seat, ex- claimed, " Merciful God! whence is that afflicting sound ?" " Do not be alarmed," said Fitzos¬ ric ; " I believe it was only the wind whistling through the leaves of the trees." "Ob! no, Fitzosric, delude me not with false arguing—the voice is fa-
miliar to mv memory—it was no wind —think not to impose on my credulity." Again a deep groan pierced her ears, and ihe souud continued long and dreary, as if uttered by some one in great distress ; while Elgiva lis¬ tened attentively, till the agony she endured drove her almost to madness ; and she could not disengage her thoughts from the object of her con¬ cern and dread. Fitzosric, fearing the alarm she apparently suffered might be an im¬ pediment to his views, took her hand, and drawing her near him, threw his arm carelessly round her waist, say¬ ing, " Come, come, Elgiva, you suf¬ fer such romantic notions lo get the
better of your good sense, that I shall certainly chide you. and use my au¬ thority in endeavouring to suppress such idle fancies." Elgiva struggled, and with diffi¬ culty disengaged herself from his hold, and indignantly replied, " Your au¬ thority I despise!"—and she turned awav from him. «/ " Return to the Castle," said Fitz¬ osric ; " let me conduct you," " Oh! unhappy wretch!" said she, raising her eyes to the tower, unheed¬ ing also what the Baron said, " that ever I should enter the detested Castle of St Egbert! where misery, oppres-
sion, and all its attendant train of horrors dwell" Fitzosric, seemingly astonished, replied, " What can give you such an aversion to the Castle of St Egbert?" " Yourself the greatest!" exclaim¬ ed Elgiva angrily. " Peace has been a stranger to my breast ever since the moment I first beheld you. Return to tbe Castle!—1 shall go alone—better to pass through a desart, where innu¬ merable wild beasts inhabit and prowl about iu search of prey, trusting to the mercy of Providence for my safety, than put myself under the protection ofa tyger, who promises to guard me safe, for no other reason but to watch an opportunity to devour."
Without waiting any reply, she hastily turned away, and left Fitz¬ osric petrified with rage and amaze¬ ment " A tiger!—a tiger!" he ex¬ claimed. " How could she dare to rouse my rage by such a comparison? But as she honors me with that title, and entertains such ideas of me, it will be my fault hf I do not act up to it. The purpose of ray soul was ^ot re¬ moved, it was only disarmed in her presence, to be renewed with greater fury. I shall be in the Castle before she can reach it. Severely shall she repent her rashness. The voice too. Vengeance is mine/' lifting his clench¬ ed fist towards the watch-tower; " and it rejoices my heart to, think that in this impenetrable tower Edric! the valiant Edric, the Forester, pines in
anguish! No more shall thy detested name carry terror to an host of ene¬ mies, nor insult my ears with thy con¬ quests. No more the victorious chief exult and triumph in the smiles of his sovereign and country. No—nor of Elgiva! My ambition first was wound¬ ed by thy conquests. Thee I hated; but Elgiva's scorn pronounced thy doom, and if she is not mine, she never shall be EdricV Having shot this spark of fury from his soul, he retired towards tbe Castle,- meditating by the way how he should dispose of Elgiva ; for he had determined *he should not return to her own chamber. He blamed him¬ self with having indulged her in too much liberty, by allowing her to walk
about the castle at pleasure ; and was considering what part of it should be her prison ; enjoying a savage exulta¬ tion in the thought, that she would be then more immediately in his power; and whatever good she received, she must acknowledge it to him, as he was determined to trust no one with the secret but himself. Pleased with the idea, he soon reached the Castle, and, putting off his cloak, and helmet nodding with white plumes, as he usually wore, to be less encumbered when the devoted Elgiva arrived, he put on a clos^ kind oi cap, and a servant's large coat, the more effectually to disguise him¬ self, and enjoyed the idea of Elgiva s
distress, when she discovered into whose hands she had fallen. Providence interposed to save the unhappy Elgiva. She fortunately dis¬ covered the path that led to the door by which she eame into the garden, and was rather surprised to see a light coming at a distance from a passage on the right hand, at the foot of the stairs. In a moment she perceived Ethelwald coming towards her. Her heart shuddered with dread—she fear¬ ed to speak to him j and imagining he had been to her mather, was deter¬ mined to ^eek that part of the build¬ ing, as ,A gat ha very justly remarked* it was a part of the Castle she knew nothing of.
Ethelwald passed her without tak- ing any notice, and she flattered her¬ self he had not seen her. One desire she had, was to discover her mother; another most powerful, was to conceal herself from the angry Baron, whom she knew she had highly offended, and dreaded meeting with while his rage continued. Pursuing the passage, which was dark, long, and narrow, for a con¬ siderable way, she came to a staircase similar to that which she had descend¬ ed. At the top wasawmdcfw, for the silver light of the» moon shone 4 bril- liautly, and illumined the stairs. Once more the flatterer, Hope, began to cheer the almost desponding heart of Elgiva. She nimbly ascended the
staircase, and ran swiftlv along a gallery, on each side of which were several chambers. As she stood before the door of one, she thought she heard a low female voice, as if in prayer. She listened, hoping it might be her mother, but felt tbe horror of a disappointment Still the person seemed praying, and in more audible accents. She dis¬ tinguished these words, u Father of mercies ! I beseech thee desert me not after so many years of trial. Lord, hear the prayer of thy poor supplicant. Preserve and protect my child, if yet he lives " The continuation was in so low a voice, that the sound died away in distance.
" Who can it be?" said Elgiva mentally; " is it another unfortunate being imprisoned by the cruel Fitzos¬ ric ? Oh ! she will forgive me for in¬ terrupting her orisons, when I acquaint her with the horrors of my situation. She may inform me of my dear mother. She may tell me how I may escape this horrid Castle, and the more detested Baron." Unable to quell her impatience, she opened the door, and rushed for- viard. The room had a lamp in it, and at a distant corner she perceived a female just rising from her knees. The sound of her entrance caused the stranger to look round, when to her infinite amazement and terror she be¬ held the form of Lady Jane Fitzosric. VOL, 11. B
And so overcome was Elgiva by the contending emotions that swelled in her bosom for pre-eminence, that she continued gazing on the phantom as it advanced towards her, till by insen¬ sible degrees she was so overpowered that she sunk senseless at the feet of Lady Jane, j ust as she stretched forth hor arm to save her. Lady Jane—for in realify it was Lady Jane herself!—first secured the door, to prevent intrusion, then has¬ tened to relieve the unfortunate object before her, which she soon accom¬ plished, raising the feeble and aston¬ ished Elgiva in her arms, and con¬ ducting her to a couch to repose till she was sufficiently restored; Elgiva cast a tender grateful glance on the
kind Lady, and said, " Angel or mor¬ tal, to whom I am indebted for this goodness, accept my thanks ; it is all the unhappy being who has drawn your attention has to bestow." »■ " Be comforted," replied the Lady, with a benignant smile, " and do not alarm yourself; tell me if I can any way serve you." " May I know to whom I am in¬ debted for this kindness?" said El¬ giva. " Perhaps, you have heard men¬ tion made of Lady Jane."
" I have." b2
** I am that unfortunate woman," said the Lady; " thirteen years have elapsed since it was reported 1 was dead, (at more leizure I will inform you); and from that time 1 have in¬ habited this chamber and the adjoin¬ ing rooms. This is the north, usually called the haunted chamber. Some of your story I have been informed of by one faithful servant. Tell me the rea¬ son that brought you here," Elgiva replied, " I had a mother, the only comfort left me in this dread¬ ful place. Three days ago the Baron took her from me. He says she has left the Castle. Oh! that 1 never can believe. She would not have left me behind her, surrounded by dreaded evils, without so much as saying she
was going. Fitzosric strives to ap¬ pease my fears. To avoid him I went into the garden: thither he followed me, wounding my ears with declara¬ tions of love. I have offended him, and to avoid his rage I flew—I know not whither. Chance conducted me to your Ladyship's abode—for when the fear of the Baron had subsided, my thoughts returned to my mother, whom I have sought for, but in vain. I have examined every room in tbe north gallery in hopes to find her, and hesitated whether I should not open the door of the haunted chamber. This, my Lady, is briefly what I have to relate now." u And you suspect your mother is still in the Castle?" said Lady Jane— b3
" if so, make your heart easy—a few hours will enable me to learn some¬ thing concerning her. At present it would be dangerous to venture in search; for if the Baron is offended with you, he may continue watching, in hopes of gratifying his wicked in¬ tentions," Elgiva shuddered at the mention of his name, and the tears trickled down her cheeks as she cast her eyes towards the ground, to conceal them from ber kind auditress, " Fear not/ 5 said Lady Jane, ten* derly taking her hand, " I promise you protection; with me learn to fear no ill. This chamber is sacred ; even the wretch, Fitzosric, dares not enter here :
dauntless as he is in all other enter¬ prises, his soul shrinks with dread and horror, whenever he presents himself before the supposed inaccessible door of the north chamber." Elgiva raised her timid eyes to* wards her kind protectress, and en¬ deavoured to speak her thanks, which Lady Jane perceiving, put her hand to her lips as a token for wishing her silence; then whispered, " who knows but the Baron, hurried by rage and disappointment, may have trespassed on the north gallery. If he has, the sound of your voice may be distin¬ guished. Follow me-—I will lead you to a remote closet, where we may speak more freely."
b4
Elgiva arose and silently followed her conductress, as much now over-- come with astonishment, as a few minutes before she was with terror. Lady Jane led her through two or three rooms before she reached the one which she thought most secure, aud desired Elgiva to remain there while she continued at the Castle, as there she would be free from the Barou. But perceiving Elgiva still appeared very low, she prevailed on her to take some refreshments, and make herself easy, as she was beyond the reach of barm. Elgiva complied, so kindly press* ing was Lady Jane; aud a short time enabled her to compose her spirits.
She then requested Lady Jane would indulge her with the account of how she came to reside there, as every body in the Castle believed she had been dead many years.
95
CHAPTER XfV.
" I will gratify your curiosity, which no doubt must be excited," said Lady Jane; " and your seeing me, must certainly have greatly amazed you." " I was the only daughter of Arthur, Earl of Devon, and was married at the age of seventeen to a most amiable young nobleman, Albert, Earl of Wallingford, for whom I had an ex¬ treme affection, and by whom I was
tenderly beloved. Dear ill-fated youth! I never think of or mention his name but the tears will flow in remembrance of the once happy hours I enjoyed, and of his miserable end, (t In his childhood a friendship commenced between him and Ber- trand Fitzosric, son to the late Baron Fitzosric. They were educated together, and their friendship increas¬ ed with their years. " When Lord Wallingford mar¬ ried, Bertrand Fitzosric would fre¬ quently visit us, and stay with us two or three months together; his conduct and manners appeared so amiable that he engaged every one's esteem. His person was truly elegant, his beha- b 6
viour noble, and apparently disin¬ terested ; he seemed to rejoice that his friend was so happy in his marriage: in ft word, he was every thing a person should hope to find in a friend he valued above all others. Yet, under this external semblance of every virtue* a heart was veiled of the black¬ est nature, and deceit and villany bad ehosen to fix their abode in a person, who for external beauty had no equal, except my Wallingford. " As Lord Wallingford seemed never so happy as when Fitzosric was one of our party (though he loved me most affectionately), therefore he was the oftener with us; and his behaviour was always so very respectful to me; so entirely remote from giving me any
offence; his whole soul appeared so truly devoted to Lord Wallingford; so solicitous for his happiness; and studied in every circumstance to prove himself bis friend, that he gained my esteem also. " We had been married twelve months, a time ever to be remembered with regret, as during that period I enjoyed every earthly felicity, blessed with the tender affection of the amia¬ ble Lord Wallingford: our happiness was augmented by the birth of a lovely boy. Need I mention how dear he was to me? Lord Wallingford's joy equalled mine; but this addition to our happiness was severely embit¬ tered by tbe report that the Danes bad lanued, wheu every Lord assembled
with his vassals to oppose them. My son was only three months old wheu this miserable event happened. " The Baron Fitzosric had lately died. Bertrand now bore his father's title ; and, collecting his forces, joined Lord Wallingford, and went forth to oppose the incursions of the common enemy. " When Lord Wallingford bade me farewell in the morning of that fatal day, a deadly shivering seized me. My prophetic heart dreaded ap¬ proaching ill. I sighed to think Lord Wallingford might perhaps return no more—that in the field of battle I might lose all that was dear to me. 1 could not conceal my tears at the bare
imagination. Lord Wallingford caught the soft infection, and struggled to suppress his feelings; then endea¬ voured to appease my apprehensions, and bade me welcome him with smiles, as he had not a doubt but he should return victorious. " He embraced me, and, sighing, parted. " I gazed after him till I could no longer distinguish him from the rest ; then turned from the window and wept Alas! I saw him no more; and treachery deprived me of every comfort when Lord Wallingford died. " In thc evening, while I was
sitting attending my son, a servant brought me a letter. It came from Fitzosric. He expressed his sorrow, and his inability to appear before me, as he was the herald of most distress¬ ing news; and pathetically lamented the loss of his friend, whose body had been pierced by an arrow, in a skir¬ mish which had unfortunately taken place, No more I read—my senses seemed overturned, I sunk to the floor, whence I was taken by my maid.** to my chamber, and for three days was insensible to every thing, being totally overcome with grief. 14 On the fourth day I appeared more composed, and recollected the miserable loss I had sustained. I wished to te-^ve my chamber, and won-
dered why my attendants wished to detain me there. My pressing in¬ quiries were at length complied with. I was informed Lord Wallingford was going to be buried, and they feared the sight would be too great a shock. " I requested I might see him, as¬ suring them I should not be happy if they prevented me. They consented. 1 saw my beloved Lord! kissed his dear pale cheek, cold in death; pressed his dear insensible hand to my break-* ing heart, while I uttered a farewel, till we met in the realms of bliss eternal. " As I spoke, the Baron Fitzosric entered in deep mourning. He ap** proached me with respectful awe, and
begged me to retire, gently chiding me for indulging the mournful sight, as he feared it would be too much for my spirits to support, and thereby re¬ new ray grief. I thanked him for his care, and the kind concern he took in my sorrows, and the loss of his friend. He told me his heart would not acquit him, if he did not pay every regard to bis friend on this side the grave, and said he was going chief .mourner, de¬ termined he would not forsake him to the last. " Again I thanked him. I was re¬ quested to retire, as they were going to remove him, I obeyed, as my grief was distressing; but, anxious to be¬ hold my Wallingford to the last, I walked the gallery, supported by two
of my maids, till I saw the mournful procession commence ; and after they were gone I turned awayj and found relief in tears. M This was a melancholy period of my life. My son now wanted a father's support; he claimed a double share of my tenderness, and, but for him, I could have wished to have shared the grave of Lord Wallingford. He was a most engaging child, and oftentimes, when I have wept for hours the loss of my beloved husband, I have turned for comfort to the innocent caresses of my adored boy, " Fitzosric often called to inquire after our health, always speaking with the deepest a^'l most heartfelt coin
eern for the loss of his earliest friend. His visits were short; but I felt a con* solation in seeing any one who had been the friend of my worthy husband, or who could talk to me about him ; an inexpressible pleasure seemed to possess my mind when conversing of one so tenderly beloved, so truly esteemed, and sincerely lamented.— Fitzosric still appeared the same generous friend; he seemed to love my son for the sake of Wallingford ; be paid the greatest attention to all my concerns: my steward had not been faithful; he detected him in op¬ pressing my tenants, and generously offered, for the sake of his dear la¬ mented friend, to see that my son and I were not imposed on.
" Lord Wallingford had been dead ten months^—the poignancy of my grief had abated: but, alas! there was not any thing that could erase it A ealm had succeeded, as 1 knew the loss was irreparable; but his dear memory I loved to indulge in secret Fitzosric now tenderly ventured to de* clare his affection for me, entreating that I would not reject his suit, but consider him not only a lover, but a sincere friend—-urgingthe great esteem Lord Wallingford had for him; and that he was confident, if it were pos¬ sible his spirit could know I had made choice of him as a second husband, he would be happy. " I assured the Baron it was not my intention to marry again; I felt it
impossible ever toforget Lord Walling¬ ford ; that my affections were buried with him in the silent grave ; and all that remained in my disconsolale heart, were devoted to my child, from whom no power could estrange them. He seemed entirely satisfied, and for¬ bore mentioning any more on the subject. " But though Fitzosric declined speaking to me, he made his affection known to my father, his uncle, and several other of his friends, as also to some of Lord Wallingford's, who, knowing the great friendship that existed between them, highly approv¬ ed of his addresses; and in less than & month 1 had all my friends impor¬ tuning in behalf of Fitzosric. I gave
the same reply that I had before given to him; they persuaded me to give over lamenting for bim who could not he recalled. My father, particularly, strenuously entreated I would accept the addresses of the Baron, and hoped to see me happy again. " By repeated entreaties I found it difficult to refuse them; my resolution was often argued out of the question, and my absurd notions, as they were called, were deemed opposition to my best friends. Fitzosric at times hinted how happy I should make him, if I consented to his wishes, and those of my family. Three months rolled away in this manner. I was heartily vexed that my father should join the con¬ federacy in tormenting me, and not
suffer me to indulge the ardent pro¬ pensity of my mind, that of mourning tony irreparable loss, and the affection I bore my son. u Tim Baron now became an ar- tlent lover. He took every care to acquiesce in every thing I wished—he apparently adored my son. His un¬ remitting attention certainly increased my esteem. It was not Fitzosric alone that I had to contend with ; but every one of my friends ; for he had been de¬ signing enough to gain them over to his interest I valued Fitzosric fur the sake of Wallingford ; and, led by their persuasions, my consent was extorted, and in the space of another month, unhappily, I became the wife of Fitzosric, who vowed eternal love,
and that it should never know a change. " I soon perceived the dreadful error I had committed, from which there was no retreat. The Baron's vowed love and constancy was of short duration. He soon began to treat me exceedingly ill. Oh! how unlike my Wallingford, from whom I never received a frown; nor did I know what a harsh reply was till I was united to Fitzosric. Lord Wal¬ lingford never called my conduct in question; now, alas! I could do nothing to please. My child, too, was neglected, and his little heart felt the reverse from the former atten¬ tion and fondness the Baron bestowed on him. During Lord Wallingford's VOL. II. c
life, when we had much of Fitzosric's company, I always thought him a mild peaceable temper; but now he gave way to sudden starts of passion, that terrified me, and every domestic ia the Castle felt the effect of it; thereby he was as much disliked by all my servants, as Lord Wallingford had been beloved, " In this disagreeable, dissatisfied manner passed away a year, most se¬ verely felt by me. Fitzosric's harsh, unkind behaviour was not calculated to make me forget my ever-to-be- regretted Wallingford. Oh! how often have I blamed my folly for en¬ tering into this unfortunate second marriage. It was not my own fault; I was so powerfully persuaded by all
my friends, that I found almost all would be offended if I refused their solicitations. Dear-bought experience! transient illusion! ruining one's own happiness to please others. Scarcely a day passed that did not witness my tears; and bitterly 1. have had cause to repent my fatal compliance, that made Fitzosric Lord of*the posses¬ sions of Wallingford. " Two years moved on with leaden wings—uncomfortable indeed ! Fitz¬ osric gave w r ay to every passion, and his will was as a law. My beloved child had now no parent but me. Fitzosric, who once appeared to idolize him, now totally disregarded him ; and he seemed angry whenever he saw me c2
take any notice of him. At this period, however, I was doomed to experience the most poignant distress a mother can feel. " The Baron came hastily to me one morning, and bade me prepare for a short journey, on a visit to a rela¬ tion's ; * arid we will take the boy with us,' said he. My heart expe¬ rienced a ray of pleasure, and 1 fondly flattered myself that my dear child would regain his favour. We were soon ready: Ethelwald and Bernulph, two of the Baron's servants, were to go with us in another carriage, as he was proud of his attendants. " The day was passed very agree-
ably, and I was superlatively happy to observe the fond attention which the Baron bestowed on my child. " When we quitted the company, Fitzosric requested a lady, who was there, would accompany us home, and spend a few days at St Egbert's Castle. She readily agreed; aud, on our return, the young lady went in our carriage, and my child returned with Ethelwald, to accommodate her. " Our carriage was at home long before thc arrival of Ethelwald. Full three hours of agonizing affliction did I experience lo know what could de¬ tain them. Fitzosric endeavoured to appease my fears; and I insisted on sending some of the servants to d» s - c3
cover the cause of their long stay; for I was certain some accident detained them. At length he consented that some one should go; and, not long after, I, heard the sound of a carriage enter the court yard. Oh ! how my poor heart beat with apprehension! I flew like lightning to the hall: there I saw Ethelwald and Bernulph, who looked at me, and quickly averted their faces, which seemed to express every thing dreadful. ' Where is the child V I exclaimed, not seeing hirm A sigh escaped from the bosom of Ethelwald ; but Bernulph walked away, without deigning to give me an answer. 1 was almost frantic ; neither seemed willing to satisfy my inquiring doubts and fears.
" At length Ethelwald replied, e My worthy Lady, pardon the wretch that is obliged to speak distressing news; for the reason that he cannot speak good : but you must know the misfortune that has befallen us, which grieves my heart to relate. Our young master sat on my knee, looking out of the carriage window ; I was rather sleepy, and fear it was that which has caused the dreadful misfortune which I shall for ever lament — I started, as from a dream ; Bernulph was fast asleep by my side ; but the child was gone !—1 called to the driver to stop, as I feared the child had fallen out of the window, and might have received some hurt; the driver was greatly alarmed; he turned the horses, and cl
we jumped out of the carriage to dis¬ cover where the child was. Alas! my Lady, about a quarter of a mile back we had crossed a brook, which was running rapidly; we got into the carriage to cross it, and out again wheu we reached the other side; where we continued looking and searching, in vain, far beyond those places which I remember the child had observed by the way. *« * Finding how fruitless our .search was, we determined to pro- teed to St Egbert's Castle, unknow¬ ing what to say, or how to act, as we could not discover our young Lord any where ; and my fears point to the Week; I dread lest he should have
fallen out of the window into the water. In fact, it must be so, or we should certainly have seen him.' " Unable to hear this distracting account, 1 fainted away and was car¬ ried in a state of insensibility to my chamber, where I continued several weeks, so much had the shock of the loss of my only heir to the estates of Lord Wallingford affected my spirits, ar*d (dunged rne into an abyss of grief and despair, such as exceeds all des¬ cription."
>**- c o
CHAPTER XV.
'* When I recovered, Fitzosric ap¬ peared rather more kind than 1 had seen him for a long time. He con¬ gratulated me on my recovery, and told me I had been ill nine weeks. * During which time/ he said, c I have made every possible inquiry for Lord Wallingford, either dead or alive; and I much fear he fell into the brook, and unfortunately was washed away by the stream.'
" My tears flowed abundantly, when I learned that so loug a space of time had elapsed, and no intelligence could be gained of what was become of him. The Baron entreated me not to grieve for what was unavoidable ; and, since it was impossible to sup¬ pose that he existed, to endeavour to resign myself to the will of Heaven. By the death of my son, Fitzosric be¬ came possessed of all the estates of Lord Wallingford. My recovery was very slow, and Fitzosric's behaviour was much as formerly: sometimes tolerably kind ; at other times severe to the extreme, without assigning any cause why he should be governed by such tumultuous passions. My grief grew into a settled melancholy; for I never could forget my son. Yet I was c 6
often obliged to assume a cheerfulness, foreign to my heart, in the presence of the Baron, lest I should offend him. However, I could not estrange my me¬ lancholy thoughts from the mysterious loss of my child: the more I reflected, the more there appeared something so singular, that I feared it was not alto¬ gether accident, though I checked the dreadful thought, being unwilling to harbour unjust suspicions of any body; but these ideas, instead of being rooted from my mind, obtained a firm footing there. " In this unhappy manner six years passed away, when the time drew near to a very extraordinary crisis cf my fate. I bad often been informed that Lord Fitzosric was a great liber-
tine; but his ill treatment to me had taken away all ray regard ; and I felt no kind of jealousy, when I knew he was on an excursion to a favourite mis* tress, as I was sincerely happy at his absence. 1 never then could account for it; but though he was by every body allowed to be a very handsome, engaging man, there was a sensation of horror always playing round my heart, whenever I saw him, which made me shudder. Yet I often wished I had the abilities to make him act with justice and honour. Alas! the natural inclinations of the Barou were far wide from either. " One day, after the Baron had been absent about a week, my «maid informed me an old man wished to
speak to me. I ordered him to be ad¬ mitted. He with tears related the cause of his distress — l Dear Lady/ said the venerable mourner, ' I have a daughter, the only comfort and support of my age; her name is Birtha; she is admired and beloved by all the good people of the village, and my Lord the Baron has stolen her from me. I hope your Ladyship is not offended, but 1 cannot help speaking as I do:'—and the tears flowed down his aged cheeks, which made my heart ache to behold. *' I begged him to proceed, that I might know how to serve him.—He continued— " * The Baron called at my cottage about a month ago, being rather fa-
tigued with riding, and asked to rest a little till his carriage arrived, which he had sent for. My Birtha placed before him the best refreshments our poor house afforded ; 1 could easily discern that he took more notice of Birtha than pleased me. After he was gone, I hinted to her my thoughts; her ideas were the same as mine, yet she did not suspect that he intended any ill. However, I grew more sus*- picious, and Birtha more on her guard, when he came for some frivolous pre¬ tence the next day. " * Almost every day he visited us. It was too great an honour for such poor folks as we to expect. But I feared to offend him by mentioning my thoughts. At length he made Birtha
a great offer, if she would consent to live with him a life of infamy.— Birtha's heart is honest, though poor ; and would despise an action that should bring the blush of shame upon her cheeks—and though a Lord, she dared to tell him, that she felt herself highly affronted, and degraded by such an infamous proposition ; and desired he would never call there again if he came on such a black errand. " * The Baron declared he would not leave the house till she had for¬ given him—but Birtha said, she never would—m*r should ever forget the insult he offered—and he went away seemingly much displeased. " ' Birtha informed me of it, and
declared if he ever came again, she would not see him. Three or four days after he came, but never saw Birtha, nor did he ever inquire after her ; so that I thought he only made the offer in a joke, to see how far poor people's honesty may be tempted.— But woe to the man who can trifle vvith the feelings of innocence, and, screened by his greatness, disgrace the elevated station he holds in life, by perpetrating the worst of crimes!— My child !—my only hope!—went to the market and never returned. Some of her companions informed me thejf saw her in a carriage with the Barou. My almost broken heart could account for her absence no other way. I de¬ termined to ask the Baron ; I thought if he was a gentleman, he weuld not
deny the truth. He saw my grief un¬ moved—he protested he knew nothing of Birtha; but I began to doubt his solemn assertions; though he was a rich man, 1 fancied he spoke false. He seemed angry at my suspicions, and I left him ; but in my mind I was re¬ solved to watch him wherever he went, and get some of my neighbours to do so likewise. " ' Vain was my search for nearly a week, when I accidentally discovered that he went to a house about seven miles off; there I found the Baron had carried Birtha I rushed into the bouse, and demanded my daughter. The Baron was surprised , but he could not now disown his knowledge of where she was.—My poor dear girl
sat at the table—she looked shock¬ ingly—' Oh ! my dear father,' said she, ' take me, take me hence.' ' It is my desire, my love/ I replied. * Well/ said the Baron, ' since I see how re¬ luctantly you quit your father, and how severely he feels for your loss, I will restore you to him. Siward, rely ou my honour and veracity, your daughter shall be with you before sun-set; but as you are fatigued, and you have a long way to go, take one of my best horses, and go home ; provide an en¬ tertainment suitable for our arrival; I will bring Birtha safely home in a car¬ riage ; for as she has not been very well, and almost every body it seems knows about her having left you; so 'tis for her sake I wish to return her, aud to have as few people staring at
her as possible. Nay, before your arrival, I had determined in my own mind to bring her home to-day; for she seems so melancholy, I heartily repent the folly I have been guilty of, and sin¬ cerely ask pardon.' "' Birtha fell on her knees; 'thanks, thanks!' she exclaimed, * let me re¬ turn to my father, and I will forgive every thing.* To which the Baron re¬ plied, 'Ifyou will believe the faith of an honest man, and I call Heaven to witness to my sincerity, you shall be with your father to-night' •' c Well, my Lord/ said I, ; I must believe you after you have made such a solemn promise; let me embrace my daughter, and then your orders shall
be obeyed. I pressed my dear girl to my sorrowing heart; and, fearful of offending him by seeming to doubt his honour, I took my leave. " ' I travelled leisurely home ; my heart was very heavy, and well it might. I reached home two full hours before the time the Baron appointed to be there. I busied myself in pre¬ paring what my cottage could produce, expecting his arrival. Then again my heart misgave me, and I doubted his honour. Night came, and no Baron nor Birtha. I watched—I went out to listen if I could hear the sound of any carriage—all was still as deafh—and so, to shorten my sad story, I remained all night till my mind became almost distracted.
(< i As soon as it was light, I mount¬ ed the horse the Baron had given me, and rode to the place. There, to in¬ crease my woes, I found the Baron had quitted the house, and took Birtha with him about half an hour after I left it. " e Mad with rage, grief, and dis¬ appointment, I returned to my cottage. It remained undisturbed , the wicked gentleman who had called Heaven to witness to the faith he vowed to me— had broke his awful oath—and had now entirely deprived me of my daughter. Unknowing where to seek or what to do, I have ventured to lay before your Ladyship this dreadful story, beseeching you, if you have any influence over my Lord, to entreat he
will restore me my daughter—and if he will—I will study to forget all that has passed, and bless the goodness that brought Birtha back to me.* " Shocked to the greatest extreme to think my husband should be capa¬ ble of such a villanv, and that he re¬ garded not oaths, however sacred, but prophaned tbem in the awful face of Heaven—too late I found by woful ex¬ perience, that his heart was of ada¬ mant—compassion could never melt it —shame could not controul, nor justice awe—nor piety restrain him. Kind¬ ness could never win, nor gratitude bind him.—What then was to be done for the poor Siward ? Alas! I could only partake of his sorrows without a hope of alleviating them. I never
shared the Baron's confidence, and if I should venture to mention the suf¬ ferer's complaint, he would vow ven¬ geance for daring to pry into his secrets. " So situated, how could I soften the poignant feelings of this afflicted father? To appease his anguish, I promised to exert every endeavour, and to give him the earliest intelli¬ gence as soon as I ctmld possibly as¬ certain where his unhappy child was. " The poor man thanked me pro¬ fusely and went away—leaving me a prey to the most afflicting thoughts that ever harassed a human frame.
CHAPTER XVI.
" My mind was so absorbed in me¬ lancholy reflections, that I wished to be alone; and therefore I dismissed my servant from attending me, that I might grieve unobserved. I had no in¬ clination to go to bed ; but as it was now a fine moonlight night, I opened the casement and looked into the in¬ terior court About midnight I thought I heard a private gate that leads into the Castle open. Curiosity prompted me to look who entered at that late hour. vol. n. D
My window was in the shade, so that, as I had wrapped myself up, they who were below could not perceive me. " My surprise was considerably increased by seeing the Baron and two men leading what appeared to me to be a woman; and as they passed beneath my window, she groaned two or three times, and the sound vibrated on my agonized heart She seemed to require assistance, and they moved slowly along, till I lost sight of them under the arch that separates the building. " I knew not how to act I could have gone towards the door that opened from that place, and met them : but then I considered it would be of
no use, as I, alas! knew too well the savage disposition of the Baron when roused, or detected ; and I feared for myself, without being able to assist the stranger. " It is needless for me to say, that 1 passed the night in extreme anxiety, a dreadful terror (as if a presentiment of the future) prevented me from clos¬ ing my eyes. When morning came I determined to seek, that I might dis¬ cover who and what the person was ; but my labour vvas lost, although my mind was full of curiosity to learn what to me seemed a mysterious affair, for there was something very singular in the circumstance. Why did Fitz¬ osric, Lord of these domains, bring a person privately, and to all appearance d 2
unwillingly, into this Castle, when he could have done so in the face of day if he pleased, and no one have asked him why he did so? I sometimes thought of Siward's daughter; but I could not suppose the Baron would be so wicked, and so cruel, -as to bring her home. My conjectures were very busy, and I very unhappy; and I often thought, that whoever the person was, they had been only brought there for a temporary affair, and after a week or so I persuaded myself, that the person for whom I felt so uneasy was not now in the Castle. " Months, however, rolled on, and yet I could not banish this mysterious circumstance from my mind. The Baron went out on a hunting party,
and I, more than usually full of the recollection of what had passed five mon ths before, strolled about the Castle, scarce knowing why or whither: for my heart was sick of many sorrows, and not the smallest ray of hope ap¬ peared for it ever to feel comfort 14 Beyond my chamber was a pas¬ sage, that led to a part of the Castle rather remote from that which we principally inhabited. The melan¬ choly which I wished to indulge in¬ duced me to look into these rooms, one of which I knew was kept for lumber ; another had been an ancient handsome apartment As I advanced towards the door of the latter, I heard a piteous groan, and, as it were, the voice ofa person complaining. i>3
" I was greatly alarmed. The door was secured with bolts. I soon drew them back, and, entering the apartment, saw a poor thin female, of youthful appearance, though the whole of her looked an assemblage of misery and despair. I was startled. Her astonishment equalled mine. c Oh! Oh!' said she, clasping her hands ia deep anguish, ' You are Lady Jane; pity an unhappy wretch, torn from every comfort—every hope.' " c Tell me/ said I, c are you Bir¬ tha Siward?' for my heart imme¬ diately presented me with the recol¬ lection of that unfortunate girl. " * I am/ she replied; the cruel Baron, envying the innocent happi-
ness I once enjoyed, and determined on my destruction, has robbed my aged parent of his only child, the com¬ fort of his declining age, and me of honor and peace. Oh! Lady Jane! sorry am I to wound your gentle heart with a detail of your husband's guilt: but spare to treat me with anger or resentment; the fault is not mine ; the Baron is alone to blame, and the time will come when his cruel heart will se¬ verely feel for the woes he has caused mine, and the excruciating pangs of a guilty conscience for his injustice.' " Thc tears rushed down her face, which was extremely beautiful amidst all her affliction, I could not help mingling mine with her's. I strove to comfort her, told her how I came to d4
be acquainted with her name, and promised to form some plan for her release in the course of a few davs. I ventured to ask her some particulars concerning the Baron Fitzosric, and if she could judge why he detained her a prisoner? " * Alas! my Lady, there is the misfortune. The Baron, I am sure, hates me ; and if he does, why does he not release me ? My aversion to him has been from the moment he took me from my father's; and well he knows it But now, as I am unhappily with child, he refuses to let me go til! I have recovered ; but he treats me with such cruelty and anger, that unless that release comes soon, I shall not live to be a trouble to him. O Ladv *t
Jane! you cannot form an idea of the distress of heart I suffer.' " ' 1 will tell you, Birtha/ said I; * perhaps it will be better for you to continue here a short time longer; for if yon was to go to your father's in your present situation, it might be too much for his feeble age to sustain. I vvill let him know that you are alive and safe ; and since your misfortunes can¬ not be remedied, suffer with patience and endeavour to compose your mind. Of this rest assured, you shall find a sincere and attentive friend in me. 1 will, if possible, prevent your wants; but say nothing of what has transpired to the Baron ; I would not wish him to imagine that I have any knowledge of your being here, for fear he should d5
remove you, by which means I should be deprived of the power of serving you.' " She thanked me fervently, and said she would do as I thought best. I promised to see her the next day as soon as Fitzosric went out, and took my leave of her for that time. " It will be impossible for me to describe my feelings ; yet my mind at that time was somewhat relieved by finding the true situation of the unfor¬ tunate Birtha Siward ; and I flattered myself I should be able to serve her* My next object was to endeavour to seek ^ome place where I could remove her to remain till she lay in. But as I could not hastily conclude how to act, I was
obliged to delay my project till I could find an opportunity favourable to my wishes* w But the next day my mind was doomed to endure a more severe afflic¬ tion than any I had ever yet suffered. 1 dreamed a most dreadful dream, which pointed out Fitzosric to be the murderer of Lord Wallingford ; and before night I was convinced of the truth, and made completely wretched.. " I endeavoured now to shun Fitz¬ osric, for I hated him for his crimes, and an awful terror and shivering seized me while in his presence. He imputed it to indisposition;and, to add to my uuhappines.s, his behaviour rather altered; lor, seeing me suffer d6
such dejection, he seemed more atten¬ tive, which attention 1 could have been superlatively happy if he had spared, for I really could not help trembling when he touched me. <c The severity of my grief did not exclude my thought on the wretched state of the unfortunate Birtha I con¬ tinued to visit her secretly every day, endeavouring to console and support her drooping spirits, while my own sad heart was breaking with unutter¬ able anguish. Near three months past away in this deplorable inanner. At length the period of poor Birtha's fate and mine drew nigh. " I had been to see the poor hap¬ less girl, and in sympathizing with
her sorrows, and endeavouring to dis¬ pel her grief, had created a transient hope, that triflingly re-animated her woe-worn features. Unfortunately the Baron returned home unexpected. Perhaps prompted by the fear ofa dis¬ covery, occasioned his immediately coming to Birtha's apartment He started at the sight of me. Terror was depicted in his countenance ; at tlie same time it was with difficulty he could conceal or suppress his rage; and in anger he said:— " ' Pray Lady Jane, how dare you enter this apartment, or attempt to pry into any secret of mine ?' " I looked at him with contempt, and replied, < Secrets that we are not
ashamed of can be of no harm: but your conduct to that hapless girl can excite no other sensation in your breast but shame and contrition. 5 "' Leave me this instant/ said lie, in a commanding , accent " < I shall not leave vou, I haughtily replied.«Allow me Birtha Si ward, that I may restore her, wretched as she is, to the arms of her afllicted father, and then I will leave your presence, ------not without'--------- " * You are a fool, Lady Jane.! « « Yes' --------- " ' And shall, severely repent your
present insolent behaviour. Am not I Fitzosric ? and who shall dare oppose my will ?' " 'You are a villain—and it grieves me that I have lived to tell you so.' " ' Retire/ said he, putting his hand on his sword, c or, by my soul, I swear'--------- " * Hold, Fitzosric! hear my resolve. I shall not retire, till my request i& granted.* " * Oh! Lady Jane/ exclaimed the poor suffering Birtha, terrified to see him now draw his sword, ' let not your kind compassion to an unfortu¬ nate wretch involve your safety. Cruel
man!—your wickedness will one day meet its reward;' and she fell on my bosom. " The Baron walked hastily too and fro, loading me and Birtha with the most bitter repioaches. Unable to bear such infamous treatment, I ventured to tell him he had acted basely by the poor creature, now the object of my pity, and the victim of his seducing arts ; but as I had been a long time convinced he never loved me, and had only married me from interested motives, I did not feel any way hurt by the supposed loss of an affection that had been only feigned, whatever he might be vain enough to think; and that his own heart must accuse him of having used me cruelly;
and that it was insulting both Birtha and myself, in adding cruelty to in* justice. " ' How, Madam!' said he, again lifting his sword. I put Birtha from me, for I was determined to speak* My life I did not value—I was really tired of it, and was in hopes that pity¬ ing Heaven would have ended my miseries, and taken me from a world of affliction; I therefore opened my bosom, and said, ' Be merciful, Fitz* osric—Strike!—let the same accursed hand that murdered the generous, the unsuspecting Wallingford—the same that planned the destruction of my adored child, end all my sufferings at once—1 court the blow.' vt * Perdition seize thy tongue, and
choak thy utterance!' said he, aiming to pierce my bosom ; which the unfor¬ tunate Birtha perceiving, rushed be¬ tween us to prevent the blovv ; and received the fatal point of his sword in her breast—She sunk into my arms. " * O Fitzosric !' I exclaimed, * when will the measure of thy guilt be full?' " He drew back—his dastard soul sunk within him, when he perceived the effect of his rashness. Poor Birtha, struggling in the agonies of death, seemed to fear only for me. ' Save yourself, dear, dear Lady, and heed not me ; the cruel hand that inflicted my miseries puts an end to them. Trea¬ cherously thou hast dealt by me Fitz¬ osric. Think not, thou guilty wretch,
to escape punishment; Heaven, sooner or later, will avenge my------wrongs. Father of Mercies, comfort my poor afflicted father------and forgive me.' " The poor sufferer expired, while Fitzosric stood appalled. " I lifted the bleeding victim to the couch, and laid her thereon. I was so much shocked that I could not utter a word; but the Baron could read in my eyes what passed in my heart I expected he would not suffer me to quit the place, for fear of my telling it. My attention was taken up with the lifeless form of Birtha. I wept The wretch perceiving my tears, denied me that solace to my woe.
" ' You must quit this place, Lady Jane/ said he haughtily. " Once more I cast a distracted look on Birtha, and suffered him to lead me from that dreadful place. He conducted me into the drawing room, where he left me to the tortures of my situation, and anxiety for the future, and secured the door. ts He returned in about half au hour : but during his absence, it will be in vain for me to endeavour to describe my thoughts — the anxiety and apprehension that tortured me every moment can be only imagined. " He affected to be very sorry for what had happened, and declared it
"\vas not his intention to do either of us any injury—it was merely acci- • dental. " ' And a very lucky accident/ said I, disdainfully ; for I could not conceal the horror and aver¬ sion my poor mind felt at that time; 4 perhaps some people might think— to be free from a mistress vou were tired of, and did not know what to do with; and a child which you could not with honor own.' f< ' From some expressions which you have this day uttered/ said he,' if you believed there was any truth in them, it must have occasioned your aversion; and that, I fear, has been long privately indulged, though I
never heard you mention such things before as you have just hinted. But that aversion (I may almost suppose amounting to hatred) has, in all pro¬ bability, been the reason why I have not had an heir to my estates that I might own with honor. I certainly have behaved very ill; my heart has often accused me of injustice towards you: I have been much to blame, without one cause to assign for my conduct' " I was silent; for indeed his be¬ haviour to me had long since chilled my heart, though he never could per¬ ceive it But I must own I really hated him ever since poor old Siward made me acquainted with his infa¬ mous conduct towards his daughter.
" Oh! how agonizing were my thoughts at this moment! I could not refrain tears. Now I thought of the wretched Birtha, and shuddered with horror at the idea of being witness to her murder, by a man whom, before the Almighty, I had acknowledged my hiihband ! Then I thought of my for- ever-to-be-regretted noble Walling- ford!.. .. my son ! Oh ! these pres¬ sing recollections tortured my brain almost to madness I 1 involuntarily uttered their names—repeating them at intervals, insensible of any thing else, even my own perilous situation. Fitzosric observed the emotions that swelled my bosom. I could not rest I was innocent, and yet my mind was distracted! — What then must the guilty suffer ?
" Fitzosric entreated me to calm the tumult of my spirits, and appeared sorry for what had happened. Night advanced, and the supper was served in. Fitzosric took my hand in order to lead me to the table ; but I shrunk with hofror from his touch* and looked Hvildly*round for protection. " Ethelwald came in with some wine ; he looked scrutinizingly at me; his looks chilled me with terror. The Baron ordered him to stay—I was more wretched by having him there to witness my anxiety. I asked for my maid Agatha; but he refused her attendance. He begged I would eat; and, as if to pass off my apparent dis¬ tress before Ethelwald, very kindly told me he was sure I should feel much
better after I had eaten. I attempted it ; but I could not swallow any thing. He pressed me to drink a little wine. With the hopes of being better, I did taste a small quantity. He wished me to finish the glass ; but I refused. I had scarcely swallowed it, when my head grew giddy-»-my eyes dim—and it immediately occurred to my fleeting !>enses that I was poisoned! I could just utter, in great agony, * Oh! Fitz¬ osric ! cruel, cruel man! the measure of your gilt is complete! traitor that you are P I sunk from the seat, as if bereft of life, and do not remember what followed for a length of time,"
VOL. II.
E
CHAPTER XVII.
" I do not know how long I lay in that state of insensibility. When I recovered I found myself in an un¬ known apartment, laying on a bed. I gazed with astonishment; for every thing was new to me. At a distance was a table, and a lamp on it; and I could perceive a man there leaning on his elbow, apparently watching me. " The occurrences of the preccd-
ing day at this moment rushed on my recollection, and I seemed as if awak¬ ing from a frightful dream. I saw the man was not Fitzosric; but I trem¬ bled, fearful it was one of his emis¬ saries. He observed me stir, and rose from his seat, advancing towards me. I then discovered Ethelwald! Surprise increased the terrible alarm my heart had experienced when first I beheld him. I rose up; my head felt disordered; and, almost overcome with dread, I asked for Agatha. He in¬ formed me she could not attend. " ' Be not alarmed, Lady Jane,* said he, respectfully advancing, ( when I inform you, that if you wish to live> you must accept the poor imperfect services I can render you.* e 2
, " * Live!' I exclaimed. * Had the Baron really a design against my life V " ' Dear Lady, seek to inquire no further; you are at present not in a state to hear a relation of what has happened; pray be persuaded that I am anxious for your safety; therefore do not venture out of these apartments till I see you again. I have attended by you fourteen hours, and I greatly feared you would never more awake. Nine hours previous thereto you drank a stupifying draught, and I, for these three hours, have been tortured with dread for its consequence. Thank God ! you are restored. I have con¬ veyed every thing for your use ; fire, provisions, books, and all other neces-
varies. Compose your mind, and be resigned till I see you again. I must now leave you.' " I thanked him, aud be left me. However, he took the precaution to secure the door; and I was glad in one aense he had, for I dreaded the ap¬ pearance of the Baron. " I walked about to examine the apartments more minutely, for I could not imagine where I was. Though I had been so long used to the Castle of St. Egbert, I could not form a conjec¬ ture in what part of it I was now situated. Sometimes my sinking heart trembled with the apprehension that I was con~ signed a prisoner to the care of Ethel¬ wald: but the respectful manner in e 3
which he behaved, wheu I recovered from the stupifying slumber, con¬ vinced me I did him wrong in sug- gesting the injurious thought. But the distracted state of mind in which I wa% often created unjust suspicions. —-Yet Ethelwald was one of Fitz¬ osric's creatures!—How strange, then, that this man should seem concerned for my life! f 1 I opened a closet; and, to in- cre&se my surprise, found it plentifully supplied with provisions, dried fruits, cakes, wine, and every thing I could wish: of fuel there was a sufficiency ; it only required my attendance to keep the fire up. I resigned myself to the will of Heaven, and trusted to that beneficent Creator for strength
and protection against all the evils I had reason to dread. " I did not see Ethelwald for thf%e days, during which time I grew com¬ posed. The Baron was my only ter¬ ror ; and now, absent from him, I had an opportunity of comforting my sad soul with the cheering rays of religion, which I was determined to pursue, as I had experienced the fallacy of all sublunary things; and thus my spirits grew tranquil. ". In the evening of the third day Ethelwald entered the apartment Having secured the door to prevent being discovered, he expressed him¬ self happy in seeing me so well, and apparently composed. e4
" I entreated he would inform me in what place I was; for I could not discover what part of the Castle I was in. " c Lady Jane/ said he,' you must first answer me one particular ques¬ tion, which I am going to ask. You know the report that prevails in the Castle, that the north chambers are haunted. Do you sincerely believe there is any truth in the report?' " ' I cannot say/ I replied; £ I have always been led to believe so; and I believe Lord Wallingford and his father thought the same. It has been a report of many years' duration, and I should naturally imagine there must have been a reason for so sup*
posing; or why were the north cham¬ bers locked up and entirely disused?' " * What now is your conjecture ? You have been three days and nights in the north chamber; have you been disturbed by any thing?* " I assured him I had not,—■' Why the question V " < On the night,' said Ethelwald, * that you tasted of the poison, I brought you here. But to be particu¬ lar, I must return to the events of the clay. " i About noon the Baron came to me, and said, that an accident had happened, that for his own preserva- e 5
tion it would be necessary to put you out of the way. 6 Lady Jane, 5 said he, * has discovered many things of which I have been guilty. You are acquaint¬ ed with some of the circumstances. We shall not be safe while she lives. I will not suffer her to leave the draw¬ ing room, for I really fear her ; there¬ fore we must be secure. At supper mix a glass of wine with a strong opiate, and I shall be released of all my fears at once/ " * I promised him I would, and be left me. I did not know how to warn you of your danger; for though 1 had been accessary to many ill deeds of the Baron, yet my soul was har- towed at the thought of premeditat-
ingly taking your life. I found the Baron kept you close in the drawing- room, and I could not obtain ah op¬ portunity of letting you know the dan¬ ger that threatened you. " ' At length the dreadful hour arrived ; I entered the drawing-rooni. The Baron desired me to wait: but I was determined to counteract his schemes ; therefore did not put so much in the wine designed for you as he expected. You took the fatal glass —fortunately you drank but tittle— but the Baron sat watching you with the greatest anxiety and expectation. " * Its stupifying powers soon seiz¬ ed you. Yon suspected it, and taxed Fitzosric with the horrid design of b6
poisoning yon. Soon you became in¬ sensible, which, the instant he per¬ ceived, he exultingly exclaimed — * My troubles are at an end—so perish all I dread or dislike! Convey her instantly to some secret place, and dig- a grave at the bottom of the gar¬ den, near the watch-tower, and bury her immediately ; then, Ethelwald^ all my fears will be buried with her/ He then left the room. " * What to do I knew not; but there was no time for deliberation. I however carried you into your own room, and locked you in there ; for I feared to leave you in the drawing- room, lest some of the servants, com¬ ing to remove the things, should dis¬ cover yon.
" * I then went into the garden, and there I met the Baron. * Now, Ethelwald/ said he, c I will shew you where I will have the grave—bring a spade, and follow me.' I did as he ordered me, and soon dug a grave; but he stood by me all the time, giv¬ ing me directions how he would have it I knew not what to do; for I had not the least intention of burying you, and 1 found it impossible to prevail on the Baron to leave that place. * No,* he said, ( he would see you buried, that he might have the testimony of his own eyes; for he would have no trick put ou him,' " * Now I was entirely caught—it being so sudden, I could not frame any device how to preserve you.
" ' I left him. The thought then occurred, that I could conceal you in the north chambers. I had discovered an entrance to them without enter¬ ing the door that was so strongly locked. " ' I went into your chamber, and was happy to find you breathe, as in a serene sleep. Some of your apparel lay on a chair. I rolled it up for my purpose ; and lifting you, carried you along the north gallery, down a few steps, winch winding again, I soon entered the north chamber, and laid you ou the bed, where, according to supposition, the Noble Dane was murdered. This was the only place where I could hope to secure you: for 1 was sure tbe Baron would not veil-
ture here. He always speaks of this place with chilling terror. " ( Now how could I deceive the vigilant eagle eye of the Baron ? Had he quitted the garden, I might have said his wish had been accomplished. But he had resolved to witness the interment. I knew also, that, if I was detected in imposing upon him, my life would be sacrificed to his revenge. However, I determined to trust to the event: if I succeeded, it would be well; if on the contrary, I could but die. " ' I therefore drew tbe bolster from the bed, and placed your head, insen¬ sible as it vvas, easy upon the pillows ; the clothes I brought from your chain-
ber I dressed it up iu, and wrapping what might be supposed to be the head with the long veil I took from your's, which, by some accident, was all over blood, I wound the supposed body round with a sheet, and, dragging it along, soon reached the grave. " c The Baron started as I ap¬ proached. He knew the veil, which flowed loose; and it seemed to create much terror: I deposited the body, and the Baron assisted me in filling it up. His heart exulted when it was closed.—* Now I am convinced,' said he ; ' and there is an end of Lady Jane/ plunging his sword into the body, while I continued to level the ground. When all was finished, we returned to the Castle.
" ' We past most of the night in consultation, and I did not retire to rest till morning dawned: previous thereto I came to see how you was. You slept easy—I left you, and went to bed for a few hours, " < Anxious to watch your waking, and not knowing how to do it, I asked the Baron's leave to go out for the day ; he allowed it, and then went out him¬ self. I then came to the north cham¬ bers, where I sat the remainder of the day; and as the Baron staid out all night, I had a further opportunity of watching you till you awaked. " * In the morning, when Baron Fitzosric returned, he made your death known; but would not permit any of
the servants to see you : Agatha, with tears, requested it; but she was pe¬ remptorily denied. And last night it was reported you vvas buried ; but he would not say where. " ' Bernulph died suddenly the night before last; and as he was the person who used to light the lamp in the north gallery, I made a voluntary offer of lighting it, as it would prevent any intruders here. Your Ladyship knows the fear every one of the do¬ mestics entertain of these chambers <• •—even my Lord himself is terrified at this place, " * I was very happy this morn¬ ing to see you open your eyes. And now, my Lady, if you can content
yourself here for a short time, I may have the blessed opportunity of liberat* ing you from this Castle; or, if you will wait, a favourable turn of your affairs may arrive, when you can regain your right. At present, if you discover yourself, your life will be in danger, and mine will thereby be involved/ " f Never, Ethelwald! never shall vour good intentions to me meet with such an ungrateful reward. I am con- tent here to await the event, if it will not give you too much trouble/ u Ethelwald then shewed me a secret spring which opened a small door i ? imediately by the side of the large one, that was locked, and barred, and bolted 5 and all the bars and bolts
locked down; and I saw it led direct¬ ly into the north gallery. I drew back with amazement; and it immediately occurred to me that this supposed haunted chamber had been designed to answer some purpose for imposing on the superstitious and the credulous ; for any one could go out, or come in, without opening the great door, which was> externally as well as internally, so strongly secured. " I learnt also, from Ethelwald, that Fitzosric declared he had seen me, and expressed a belief that my spirit haunted him, with no small degree of terror. " To shorten my narrative, I must tell you that three months passed away j
and Ethelwald continually supplied me with every thing 1 wanted, except clothes, and that I was obliged to ven¬ ture out one night to procure. " I was seen by some of the ser¬ vants. They fled from me with terror; by which means I was enabled to col¬ lect what I wanted. Sometimes I have ventured out in the north gallery for a walk. I have accustomed my¬ self to sing a pathetic verse to a mourn¬ ful melody, the better to prevent any one discovering me. I have often seen Fitzosric; but he flies me—his guilty soul starts aghast when we meet, and his terror so far overcomes him, that he has not the courage to interrupt me, ** By Ethelwald, who continues to
visit me every day, I hear of whatever passes in the Castle. Often I have saved the distressed by my presence or my caution. I have been happy in rescuing you three or four times. And thus has time passed on for nearly fourteen years. I feel contented*—nay, happy; because I am separated from the worst of wretches : and I flatter myself the time will come when 1 shall yet be happy. " A short time previous to my supposed death, I had a singular dream, which prompted me to obey theinjuction I received; and, before night, as I was walking with Agatha in a wood near the Castle, I met a person who assured me Lord Walling¬ ford had been murdered by his friend
Fitzosric; that person presented me the dagger which was taken from the body of Wallingford, and which I well knew to have been worn by Fitzosric when a friend of my husband. After this, you will easily imagine and be¬ lieve how hateful every attention of Fitzosric was to me. " Since here, I have learnt that the person who met me in a strange dis¬ guise was Ethelwald, who had taken the dagger from my husband's body, and had preserved it; but declared, that, by a dream he had had that morning, wherein he was commanded to give it me, that 1 migi>t kuow who was the murderer, he had obeyed, and, disguised, met me in the wood. About seven years ago he entrusted another
secret of great importance. He as¬ sured me of the Barou's base art to and he were to kill him. Their re¬ ward for so doing was very considera* ble. " Ethelwald feared to- trust Ber¬ nulph with his design, lest he should betray him. But he told Bernulph, that the guilt should be all his own ; but, nevertheless, he should share the reward. On returning from a visit, Bernulph waited in the carriage while Ethelwald took my son, who was asleep, in bis arm, and, making his way into the forest, where their car¬ riage waited, laid him down be¬ neath a tree, wrapped up from the dews of the night He had previously
written a paper to fasten on his breast, in hopes to succeed in his design; of » . .whichJb# k&pt-a-copy^which, Jwhen -he told me, to satisfy my fears, he gave me. It was— " «This child is of noble parents, though villany deprives him of them for a time. But the time will come when this unfortunate and now de¬ serted child will be owner of a vast estate, and be able to reward whoever protects him : the two hundred pounds which is left with him will be a trifle towards his support; and before that is expended, he may be restored to his friends. His name is Edric.'" Elgiva sat listening in mute atten¬ tion during the time Lady Jane recited VOL. II. F
the contents of the paper, till, by de¬ grees, her senses were overpowered, and she fainted away. Lady Jane hurried to her assist¬ ance, alarmed to the extreme at her sudden indisposition. She soon suc¬ ceeded in restoring her. " For Hea¬ ven's sake!" said Lady Jane, " what is the cause of this sudden illness." " Dear youth! beloved Edric !" exclaimed Elgiva, clasping her up¬ lifted hands, almost regardless of the surprise of Lady Jane; then, sudden¬ ly recollecting, she seized that Lady's hand, and, in impassioned accents, said — " Thy Edric lives! — thy Edric lives, dear Lady! — he is great! — is happy! —is. .beloved! ~ is all your
Fondest hopes Can wish!-*-The va¬ liant Chief who has struck terror into his foes — the victorious Edric the Forester!. .is. .your son !" " How ?" said Lady Jane, with energy. " Have you never heard of his conquests ?" said Elgiva, with rapture. Has Ethelwald never mentioned the youth that for two years has been the astonishment of England ? Edric and Fitzosric have ever been mortal foes. Edric has often driven him from the field of battle. Great is his aversion to him, as if prompted by instinct." " I have heard of him," Lady Jane replied, witb rapture ; " but never sus- f2
pected my Edric was that aspiring youth.—Oh! how 1 long to press him to my heart! My impatience to learn all about him prevents my listening to the joyful intelligence as I ought But speak; inform me all you know of Edric — that I may learn to thank Heaven for his preservation, and you for welcome news my heart has long been a stranger to." " The time will not permit," said Elgiva, " me to relate the narrative of my family. Suffice it to say, my father, who lived in that forest, was going out early jn the morning to attend to his employment , I have heard my mother say that he returned in about an hour, bringing with bjui a most lovely boy, wjko.seenasd, to be, between three and
four years old: his dress and the jewels with which he was adorned spoke him to be of superior rank. My father said, as he was walking among the trees, he found him laying fast asleep under a spreading tree, with a paper fixed on his breast. The words, my Lady, are exactly those which you have related to ine; for I have read the paper—I can repeat the word's by heart—and the discovery occasioned my illness. " My mother took thc sweet Edric, and as she had no children, deter¬ mined to bring him up as her own— possessed of sufficient to support him. She preserved the dress and jewels he was found in, hoping thereby fo discover to whom he belonged. In f3
less than a year and a half after this incident I was born. 1 have remem¬ bered Edric ever since I could remem¬ ber any thing. My brother, my friend; and blame me, who have been used to love him so long, if you think I am too partial, when I say he is most amiable, good, and just. He was my father's pride; he instructed him in the arts, first of agriculture, since then of war. " Edrie was presented by the re¬ commendation of a friend of my fa¬ ther to the King, who admired his military talents, his noble aspect, his apparent courage, and, perhaps, the condescending sweetness of his man¬ ners. He honoured Edric with the second command of an army to op-
pose the confederate Barons; and chose to give him the sirname of* The Forester/ because he was brought up h\ a forest Many ridiculed the King's *J o ill-judged favour, as it was supposed, for choosing one so young for such an important station: but Edric soon convinced all England how much they were in an error; scarce twelvemonths were elapsed, and the chief com¬ mander being dead, Edric was raised to supply his place. Several battles were fought, and Edric was victorious. He had nearly quelled the rebel lords, when, unfortunately, Shrewsbury was besieged, near which we dwelt We were obliged to abandon our dwelling, and flv to a little cottage near this Castle. Edric conducted my mother and me from the ravages of war to f4
that place in safety, and left us, that he might return to his army, ready to engage at day-break. " Soon after, the Baron seized my mother and me. and by force brought us to this place. Since then I know nothing of Edric ; but I trust Heaven will be his preserver; and I may live to see the dear companion of my ear¬ liest years again in safety." Lady Jane clasped her affection¬ ately to her bosom, thanking her a thousand times for her welcome re¬ cital. How ardently did she long to meet her beloved son, and to restore him to his native rights ! After the first transports of her joy
were a little abated, she asked if Edric knew she was not his sister? " After the JRing gave him his commission," said Elgiva, " and he returned with my father to take leave of us—I never shall forget the time ; for he has been a dutiful and affec¬ tionate son, and dearly loved my mother; and our hearts were grieved at parting with him, though it was so greatly for his advantage; for we knew not that we might ever see him again; then my father related what I have told you. " The surprise nearly overcame* me; for I greatly valued my supposed brother. But Edric, on the contrary, appeared happier. * Thank God!' h& e5
exclaimed,' I am not criminal!—I can love my adored Elgiva without being guilty. My amiable mother, such I shall always call you, allow me to offer my heart to where it first owned alle¬ giance. 1 have long loved Elgiva; but the belief that she was my sister, and that I was cherishing a criminal at¬ tachment, has caused me many dis¬ tressing hours. I was happy to em¬ brace the toils of a military life, in hopes of avoiding the error I so much dreaded, as 1 still found my beloved sister had too powerful an ascendancy over my heart My honored and re¬ spected father, you know not what a weight of anguish you have taken from my mind by this delightful dis¬ covery/
" My father caught him in his arms, and pressed his dear adopted son loJiis breast He turned to em¬ brace niy mother; nor was I forgotten ; but my feelings at that moment I cannot describe. " I was charmed to see him appear so superlatively happy. He entreated my parents to sanction his affection, as so many years had rolled over, and he knew not that he had any other parents to please or offend. And my parents so entirely loved him, that he immediately gained their consent to pay hife addresses to me My heart, from earliest infancy, had been in¬ clined to admire—to adore him ; nor would I pretend to deny how tenderly f6
I was interested in all his concerns: but Edric declared he would not aspire to my hand, till he had done some¬ thing to deserve it " When he left us to join the army, my poor heart sickened with dread.— His victorious return chased away every uneasy sensation. Every inter¬ val of time he could spare he hastened on tbe wings of love to us. Happy days!—never more to return !—never to be remembered but with regret, ta think they are past! And Heaven only knows when I shall see Edric again." " My sweet girl/* said Lady Jane, " you have encouraged me to hope for
the restoration of my long-lost son. Let me endeavour to inspire you with one cheering gleam. Accept for your¬ self and family ten thousand thanks, for your affections and tender care of my beloved Edric. The time, I trust, will come, when I shall see you happy, as I sincerely believe you to be deserv¬ ing ; and 1 feel a pleasure in being any way serviceable to a person esteemed. by my beloved and long-lamented Edric." Much conversation ensued, ami morning in soft radiance peeped in at the casements, when Lady Jane re¬ quested Elgiva to retire to rest, assur¬ ing her that she might rest in safety,. and that the next night she should endeavour to find her mother.
Elgiva thanked her, and retired to a small apartment adjoining; and the fatigue she had undergone soon plunged her into a profound sleep.
CHAPTER XVIIf.
Lady Jane's mind may be easier conceived than described. She did not retire to rest till she had offered up her thanks to the Supreme Father of Mercies, for the miraculous preser¬ vation of her beloved child, whom she had so long mourned as dead. St. Egbert's Castle had now a lawful owner existing; and her heart, which once had no value for life, now fondly longed to fold her beloved son to her bosom, to reinstate him in his rights,
and assist to drive the usurper from his ill-obtained possessions. She com¬ mended him and his cause to Heaven, and then retired, to strive to gain re¬ pose, though what Elgiva had related to her chased sleep from her eyes. We will leave Elgiva enjoying a sweet repose, and Lady Jane revolv¬ ing in her mind those mysterious events which prevented her from ex¬ periencing the balmy aid of sleep, and: return to Fitzosric.
Positive in his own mind that Elgiva had not returned to, nor en¬ tered the Castle, he stood, in the dis¬ guise before mentioned, just within the
gate, in order to seize her when she arrived. He had previously set a door open that led to a vault under the Castle; for he much feared, if he suf¬ fered her to ascend the stairs, her sur¬ prise would alarm Agatha, and he should have a difficulty in securing her, that he might have it in his power to reek his vengeance on her; for all his boasted love was fled, and only hatred and rage supplied the place. Happy it was for Elgiva that she escaped falling into his hands. After waiting near an hour, every moment of which seemed to be an age, in the impatient and turbulent state his mind then was, he began to imagine she had reached the Castle
before him, unobserved) and therefore might have arrived at her own apart¬ ment The instant the thought sug- gested itself^ he llew, rather thau walked there ; but, to his great asto¬ nishment, found only Agatha; who with great anxiety asked what was become of Elgiva ?, Fitzosric, franticly tearing off his. disguise, (which had alarmed Agatha,, when she discovered him so attired) declared he knew nothing of her, but supposed she did, and insisted on her informing him where Elgiva was. " Oh ! my Lord," said she, " who should know, if you do not—as yoit have been walking with her in the
garden. You forbade me to follow, you know you did, I have not seen, her since." " My vengeance shall overtake her," said he, foaming with rage;, " my disappointment shall fall with treble force, and she shall have rea¬ son to curse me to the latest hour ofi her life. Lights!—lights!—follow me —I will find her if she is alive." Agatha, trembling, took up a lamp to obey him. His noise alarmed the domestics, who came running about in great confusion. Among them, was Ethelwald, who earnestly de¬ manded the cause of the alarm. Fitzosric explained, as well, as the
fury he was in would enable him. Some were ordered to proceed into the garden to search for her, while others attended him to examine the Castle ; ahiohg the latter were Ethelwald and the affrighted Agatha. Having sought every apartment he deemed proper to enter, and return¬ ing after a fruitless search, he deter¬ mined to enter the gallery leading td the north chambers, having once dis¬ covered Elgiva there; but just as he was pushing open the door, his eye fell first on the terrified countenance of Agatha, and then on the rest of his servants, who were at a greater dis¬ tance, on all of whom the strongest symptoms of terror were powerfully depicted.
" What is the matter with you all, and why do you stare so ?" exclaimed Fitzosric. " Oh! for Heaven's sake!—Oh! for mercy!" screamed out Agatha. —" Let me go back—pray let me go —I cannot—I dare not go into that horrid gallery." " Art thou mad ?" he replied ; " Why are you so stupidly alarmed?" " Oh!—oh !—oh !" sighed Agatha, and fell down in a strong fit A few violent execrations fell from the lips of the Baron ; he then ordered some of the rest to advance, regardless of the almost lifeless form . of poor
Agatha; but they all stood petrified with terror One only ventured to reply to his despotic master. " In¬ deed, my Lord," said he, " I cannot —command any thing else, and it shall be my duty to obey you ; but iu this I must be excused.—I saw the ghost of our dear and ever-revered Lady not three hours ago, and it vanished just at this very place." u What!" exclaimed Fitzosric, clapping his hand on his sword, while an unusual terror crept over his whole frame —" Dare you say this in my hearing ?" " My Lord," replied the man, " the shock I felt at the cruel sight obliges me to speak; and for worlds I
'would not follow you into that gallery. Yes, I saw Lady Jane ; I am M>rry to say those eyes ever saw a sight so full of horror. She had the same clothes on that I san her in the dav she died ; they were covered with blood, and she held a glass iu her hand to which she often pointed," Fitzosric shuddered^—his counte¬ nance changed to a deadly paleness*— his heart was appalled—and he leant for support (and to conceal the various tumults of his agonizing sensations) against a column. During the man's relating the above, some of the servants ventured to assist Agatha; and as she came to herself, the Baron scornfully com-
manded them to take the fool to her chamber. Ethelwald, seeing his Lord's irreso¬ lution and terror, began in his turn to exclaim at the folly of his fellow ser¬ vants, who he would fain persuade had imagined all this ; then pressed his master to enter the gallery. Fitz¬ osric not being willing to go, Ethel¬ wald said he had no fear on the occa¬ sion, and he would go alone. Every one present were happy to be excused, though they all summoned courage to wait with the Baron at the door, watching the course of Ethel¬ wald, who made a diligent search in every part of the gallery, and returned without success.
The attendants were then dismiss¬ ed, and the Baron, leaning on Ethel- wald's arm, once more repaired to Agatha's chamber, to see if Elgiva had returned there; but, to his great mortification, she vvas not; and was ho where to be found, as the return of the servants from searching the gar¬ den fully explained. Fitzosric thought it now time to give over a fruitless search, and he retired, dissatisfied, and much terri¬ fied, to his own chamber; where a long conference took place between him and Ethelwald, on the subject of Lady Jane, though the very mention of her name at this time had horrors in it, which the guilty soul of Fitzosr ric had never felt before. vol. ii. a
" The fellow certainly speaks true," said he; " there has not been a night for this fortnight past, but that horrid vision meets my eyes. Here, in my chamber, last night, she sung her usual melancholy song. Oh ! I have kept my heart up bravely for several years; but must confess, and that with sincerity, these repeated tor¬ ments at times affect me." "Last night?" said Ethelwald. " Here, in my room," he replied, " at the foot of my bed, with the cursed glass of poisoned wine in her hand—she sighed most piteously, and blood seemed flowing from her breast. 1 knew her clothes were stained by an accident, but I gave ber no wound upon my soul."
" Oh, yes, my Lord," said Ethel¬ wald, " if you remember, while I was filling in the grave, you plunged your sword through the earth into the body. Indeed, it was well you did> for Lady Jane was not quite dead ; she stirred and breathed as I brought her along. Yes, my Lord, that wound was cer¬ tainly given by jou ; but whether your sword touched her breast, or any other part, that is impossible for us to tell." <c Bless me! how strange," said the Baron ; " she startled me, I must confess, last njght:—I jumped up in my bed, and, snatching my sword to endeavour to strike at the phantom, an irresistible something arrested and unnerved my arm. I repeatedly at¬ tempted to strike; but the blows were g2
vented on air, or fell with languid force on my bed. It was not fear !— Fitzosric never feared a mortal being! What was it then ?... .Oh, Ethelwald! the exulting spirit of the lovely crea¬ ture I once so much adored, and, to obtain her, plunged my soul into guilt, with a voice melodious, and as sweetly persuasive as I ever heard her when she was the charming, happy wife of # ,... .of......Ohl the name of my friend sticks in my throat, and almost denies me utterance........Yes !.. 'Pity the fate of Lady Jane'..were her words, and then she vanished!" Fitzosric paused a few moments, striving to stifle the agonizing sensa¬ tions he endured ; then, as if in deep thought, he said—" Yes..it was the
spectre of that beautiful Lady Jane, whom once I loved—whose gentleness 1 returned with cruelty and. .murder! .... She pursues me still! — Years have not effaced the deed!.... Oh! Ethelwald! summon all the power we are told of, to rid me of this torment¬ ing evil—even the half of my fortune I will bestow, that my future life may enjoy a ray of ease." Ethelwald endeavoured to comfort him, telling him he supposed it was equally in the power of the clergy to confine the spirit of Lady Jane, as it had formerly been in respect to the Danish Lord; bat yet, added he, the difficulty may be more disagreeable to you, Lady Jane being your wife; and her strange appearance plainly proves g8
she was murdered; by whom, at present, none knows but your Lord¬ ship and myself. But every one in the Castle remembers her sudden death and mysterious burial. There¬ fore we ought to consider very minutely before we put ourselves into the hands of the clergy; we shall confess our¬ selves, and"-'—- " Plague me no more!" hastily in¬ terrupted the Baron— c * every way I shall be equally tormented. Bring me wine—I will silence the upbraid ings of Conscience that way, and give way to every passion of my soul! If I can¬ not be at ease myself, it will be some comfort to me to be a plague to every body else. My very name shall carry terror in the souud of it Oh I t\m
Elgiva! this......But I swear she shall be found ! — somewhere in the Castle she certainly is, and she shall not escape." Wine was brought -*- Fitzosric drank plentifully ; but became so sul¬ len, that he did not change another word with Ethelwald that night At length he grew tired, and went to bed. But, by the gloom that was depicted on his countenance, Ethelwald con¬ jectured he had some desparate pur¬ pose at heart. He ardently wished to enquire what was become of Ellen, for he had missed her; and wherever she was conveyed to, it was so secret, that ihe Baron had never once hinted any thing of it to Ethelwald, nor mentioned her name since she was missing. g4
After the Baron was in bed, Ethel- wald wished him good night; but thc haughty and sullen soul of Fitzosric scorned to answer, though to the man who had been his instrument in many crimes, and in whose power he was as much as ever.
CHAPTER XIX.
Morning conveyed Ethelwald to {he chamber of Lady Jane. She had not slept during the night; for various emotions filled her bosom Elgiva, on the contrary, having endured many restless nights, enjoyed a serene re-* pose, and was still in a profound sleep, which Lady Jane did not venture to disturb. Ethelwald related the whole of what had happened the preceding G O
night, and the fruitless search made after Elgiva. Lady Jane informed him that that young lady was safe under her pro¬ tection, and hoped he would conceal her from the fury of the Baron. She then (her eyes sparkling with joy) re¬ lated that Edrie was still alive, and was the leader ofa conquering army £ Ethelwald started with surprise, and exclaimed—" Is it possible that the victorious Edric the Forester rs the child I left exposed ? Blessed be all- ruling Providence for his preservation! And was it the sweet captive that told you this ?" u The persecuted captive Elgiva,"
replied Lady Jane: "her mother brought up my sweet boy as her own. Tell mc, Ethelwald, and tell me truly, what is become of that inestimable mother ?" " Alas! my Lady, that is a secret to every one but the Baron. Her mys¬ terious absence has much alarmed me ; as few occurrences in the Baron's life are without my confidence. But this is a subject on vvhich he has always observed a profound silence. She may be gone from the Castle for what I know; and yet I sometimes miss him for an hour or more at a time." " The task must be mine to dis¬ cover that," said Lady Jane ; " for the unfortunate Elgiva is distracted on her g6
mother's account I have relied on your sincerity for many years. To you, Ethelwald, I owe my life, and every thing: you have acquainted me with many circumstances, vvhich, with¬ out your information, I should have been entirely ignorant of. I beseech you be secret as to the retreat of Elgiva ; for I know the Baron's resent¬ ment will fall heavy on her, if, by any chance, she should again fall into his power." " I will protect her at the hazard of my life," said Ethelwald ; " so pray do not harbour a doubt to my disad¬ vantage. I will make diligent search during the day: if I discover the lady, I will let you know ; if not, the task must be reserved for night—Farewell."
He then quitted the chamber, and Elgiva, soon after awaking, arose to a comfortable meal, and passed the day in a degree of tranquillity, when com¬ pared to those she had lately expe¬ rienced : during the course of which, Elgiva, ever ready to converse of her dear mother, at the request of Lady Jane, related to what family she be¬ longed : and though her Ladyship did not interrupt her narrative, yet she felt sensations difficult to conceal or des¬ cribe ; for the artless Elgiva gave the simple unvarnished tale of her family in nearly the following words. " Till within these last two years, I vvas unacquainted with any of my parents' family concerns; when my dear mother thought proper to relate.
to Edric and myself the strange vicis¬ situdes of her life. " Ellen Bertram (for that was my mother's name) was the only daughter of the Baron of Raby: she was the idol of her mother; but her father never had any particular tenderness for her. His mind was too ambitious and too avaricious lo think of any thing but obedience from his daughter. In the family was brought up a distant relation of the Baron, named Edgar de Rosenberg, for he was of Norman des¬ cent. Some imagined him to be the Baron's nephew, and some a youth brought up by his bounty. Edgar's person and manners were every thing that the most polished education, or highest gift of nature or fortune could
bestow. Lady Bertram loved him as her son; and being brought up with Ellen, their partiality increased with their vears. " The Baron of Raby, from whom his Lady bad never experienced much attention, was absent on an embassy to Normandy for nearly two years. About three months after he left England, Lady Bertram died. Ellen was then in her fifteenth year. Tbe kindness she received from Edgar dur- ing her father's absence—his grief for the loss of her mother—his unwearied attention to every wish of ber heart— the long affection she had received during many years—created a passion beyond friendship. She loved Edgar with the most ardent tenderness;
while Edgar's bosom reciprocally felt the same power, though he feared to lift his thoughts towards the lovely and accomplished daughter of his friend aud patron. " Dear Lady, be not surprised, nor imagine me guilty of flattery, when I speak of my beloved parents, and say my mother is lovely. You will ex¬ cuse the partiality of an affectionate daughter—Ellen is beauty itself; nor did I ever see in all my life so much beauty, grace, and dignity, as Heaven has profusely blended in the sweet form of my angelic mother, whom I lament and seek," Lady Jane bowed, and Elgiva pro- ceeded*
" By the time Lord Bertram re¬ turned, Ellen was turned of sixteen years of age; and Edgar and Ellen had enjoyed the pleasing hope of being united (as they had exchanged their hearts) at his arrival. But, alas ! his return was the beginning of their mis¬ fortunes. Ellen avowed her love, and Edgar preferred his suite, being at that time insensible of the Baron's real character, or the motives that actuated his bosom at that time, only conscious of their own affections, and contem¬ plating ideal scenes of visionary hap¬ piness ; which, my Lady, I am told is the customary thoughts of young peo¬ ple ignorant of the world, and, flatter¬ ing themselves they shall be happy. A stern denial vvas the result; and Edgar vvas ordered to leave the house that very hour*
" Obedience was all Lord Raby expected, whatever were the feelings of his unhappy daughter; and Ed¬ gar's he d d not regard; it was in vain to expostulate with one, whose heart was callous io every tender thought Suffice it to say, that Edgar had only time to write a few lines ex¬ pressive of unalterable affection to his adored Ellen, and left the house im¬ mediately, with scarce three hundred pounds, the gift of Lady Raby to him at her decease, for his future support The Baron did not know he had-a shilling in the world. " Ellen was confined in her cham¬ ber, and the Baron suffered no one to visit her but himself. At each visit he did not spare loading her with the most cruel aud unjust reproaches, and
strove all in his power to depreciate Edgar in her esteem. To account for the Baron's harsh conduct, I must say what I have often heard my dear mo¬ ther remark and lament, that he, while abroad, had contracted a friendship for an old Swedish Lord, immensely rich, to whom he had promised his daughter in marriage, and had given such accounts of her beauty, that the Swede returned with him to England for the purpose of espousing the fair Ellen. < 4 Disappointed in his hopes by the mutual affection which Edgar and Ellen had both avowed, he had no re¬ source but what has been related— turning Edgar out of doors, and im-
prisoning Ellen till the hour he deter¬ mined she should marry his friend. " Ellen was thunderstruck with astonishment and grief, when she re¬ ceived her father's commands concern¬ ing his friend, which was not till within two days of the time appointed for the wedding. So great was her love for Edgar, aud such an aversion to the Swede, that she determined to escape the sacrifice, even if she was reduced to beg her bread. " To elude suspicion, she feigned compliance vvith his wishes, and beg¬ ged to be permitted to adjust every thing for the approaching day. Lord Raby vvas pleased with her acqui-
escence, and gave her her liberty. Her composure and attentive preparations obliged him ; and convinced him bow ready she vvas to obey his wishes. u On the evening* preceding that day which was to unite her to the man she detested, she dressed herself in a plain suit of one of the women ser¬ vant's unknown to her; for whieh trespass she left a sum sufficient to purchase half-a-dozen such; and tak* ing only a handkerchief full of her plainest apparel, and what cash she had, silently quitted Raby Castle with¬ out any one's knowing who she was, leaviug all that was rich and magnifi* cent behind her. " Where to direct her course she
knew not Edgar had left the Castle ten days, and she had not heard from him, All was uncertainty. .she walked some miles undiscovered ; and, faint with fatigue, arrived at the door of a poor cottage. Her heart shuddered for fear of detection ; for after she had knocked at the door, she recollected to have called at this cottage with Edgar, sometimes for refreshment, when he had escorted her on a ride, which he did every day, during the absence of the Baron. " She was soon admitted, and craved a reception for the night; hap¬ py also to find her disguise entirely excluded her from the knowledge of the old inhabitant. She received the welcome it was in her power to afford;
and apologizing for its indifference, by wishing it was better — adding, ' So it should be; but I have a young man here very ill, and sick at heart I may say ; he has been here some days, being too ill to go farther!. .Ah ! Lord help us! such it is to be dependant on a great man's bounty. He was turned out of doors at a minute's no¬ tice ! and I verily believe his poor heart would have broke if I had not pitied him. Ah! thank God! though I am but a poor old woman, I know bow to be grateful to ray friends; and he, dear youth, has often been a friend to me when he was in prosperity.' H The old woman wiped a tear from lier eye. Ellei felt for the unfortunate stranger, and begged to know who he
was, if it was no secret ' Secret !* replied the woman; * no secret I dare say..Master Edgar, of Raby Castle ; every body knows Lord Raby has turned him out of doors..and, poor creature ! he takes on so, I am afiaid he will soon break his heart!' " « Master Edgar?' exclaimed Ellen, endeavouring to conceal her emotions, ' tell him, Maude has also been turned away, and if she could see him, could say something that would be a comfort to his poor afflicted heart!' " The old woman repaired to Edgar, informing him of Maude's dis¬ missal, Edgar, hoping to hear some¬ thing concerning his dear Ellen, re-
quested Maude might be admitted to his apartment <f The good woman introduced Maude, and retired. But Edgar soon discovered the supposed Maude was no other than his dear Ellen Bertram in disguise. " She hastily ran over what had transpired since he left the Castle; and concluded with hoping for some conveyance to a distant part of the country, before it was likely to be,pur* sued. The danger to which Ellen was exposed, roused Edgar to the dreadful idea of her loss, and marriage with another ; the bare supposition of such an event taking place, added tortures the most distracting. His indisposi- VOL* II. H
tion was more of tfae mind than the body; he arose, and hurried to procure horses, that he might convey her he loved more than life beyond the reach of falling into the Baron's power ; which he well knew would make her for ever miserable. " Ellen partook of a slight refresh¬ ment, while Edgar went to procure some conveyance. The old cottager was alarmed to see Edgar at that hour leave his bed, and strove to persuade him to delay till morning. But Ed¬ gar's impatience would not brook delay. " Heprocured a horse, and, though none of the best, deposited a good sum for its safe return. Then Jiurrjing to
Ellen, he mounted her behind him, well satisfying the cottager for her hos¬ pitality, and, aided by the light of the moon, journied near thirty miles be¬ fore morning, unknowing, and not caring, whither Providence directed their course. " About six o'clock they arrived within sight of a large town. Edgar left Ellen about a mile before they reached it, and rode there alone for fear of being discovered. There he sold his horse, and procured refresh¬ ments for his companion. Fearful of pursuit, he purchased a better disguise, and chose the habit of pilgrims for himself and the unfortunate Ellen. u Thus he returned to the object u 2
of his adorarion and cares; and they soon after entered the town unknown by any one, where the weary Ellen ob¬ tained a bed to recruit her strength and spirits, and rested three hours ; during which time, Edgar was busy in inquiring many things which materially concerned them both. " Ellen awoke much refreshed, and comparatively happy to what she was the day before. They then pur¬ sued their journey, first providing re- freshmeiits, lest the uncertainly they were in of reaching any town with safety, might reduce them to hunger. They also determined to pursue their journey c}n, foot, lest accidents might discover them if they ventured to take a horse.
" In this manner they passed se¬ veral fatiguing days and nights, avoid¬ ing the high road as much as possible. At length their provisions were ex¬ hausted, and they walked two days and two nights without tasting food, or, had not accident brought them to a spring* any thing to allay their thirst At which time, Ellen, overcome with fatigue of many days journey, and great anxiety of mind, fainted away.
h ^
CHAPTER XX
" Edgar de Rosenbero was dis¬ tracted ; be saw bis beloved Ellen al¬ most expiring with want and fatigue. The powers of Nature were almost extinguished in his breast, for he also was oppressed with the same wants, though he had been more able to con¬ ceal them from the dear object of his care. But now the sad situation to- which Ellen was reduced, roused him, to a sense of all his wants and misery at once* u Frantic with grief aud despair,
he poured forth his complaint and prayers to Heaven, while be held the unfortunate object of his coneern to his breast He feared she was dead. He accused himself of being the author of her woe ; and in all the bitterness of anguish, lamented their wretched destiny. " The night was dark, and, to in¬ crease his distress, the angry Heavens presaged a storm. No habitation ap¬ peared, to which he could convey the unhappy wanderer.. he looked round ..and looked in vain..yet one ray glanced on his distracted senses ..be saw a trickling stream issue through thc bank near which Ellen had fallen, from which he hastily procured some water, and restored her to her senses.. H 4
" Ellen, although restored to life, had not power to move a step further. ExhWtf&ed and sick at heart as they b&th were, they sat down to bewail their mutual misfortunes. " It was in the excess of their prayers and complaints, that they be¬ held a venerable man standing before them. His beard w&s white as snow, and fell on his breast. < My children/ said he, * embrace the cheering con¬ solation of hope; you are wicked in ddubting the iriercies of the Supreme God, atod in thus giving way to des¬ pair.— Nay, let me certainly speak conviction to vour hearts. In the midst of your distresses—even in this solitary wild, where scarce a human footstep passes in the course of a week, I am
here to assist you, and cherish ex¬ hausted nature. Murmur no more, for Heaven's decrees are infinite; but follow me; I will convey you to a sim¬ ple but wholesome repast, and where you may repose your weary limbs in safety.' <c Edgar and Ellen fell on their knees before their benign and vener¬ able visitor, pouring forth their grate¬ ful acknowledgments. But as they arose to follow the benevolent man, Ellen again sunk to the ground for want of strength, as her long journey and want of food had so far enfeebled her, she was not able to standi " The good man observing her hapless situation, kindly assisted Ed- n5
gar in raising her ; and, lifting her m their arms, they in a short time reached his dwelling; though not without much difficulty, as they had to climb a steep ascent-—his dwelling over-hang¬ ing where they were, whence he had heard their complaints. " Bread, milk, and fruits, were all he had to set before them; but they enjoyed in them a rich repast. " The Hermit (for such he was) resigned his bed, which Ellen gladly accepted, as she stood in great need of salutary repose. So indeed did Ed¬ gar ; but he remarked to his kind pre¬ server that his unfortunate companion was not bis wife; aud therefore he could not enjoy the balmy aid of sleep
till she had risen, if he had no otber convenience. The Hermit bowed, and, scraping together a few dried leaves, threw over them a mat, on which be and Edgar sought repose till morning. " Ellen, from, the few hours' sleep she had received, awoke blooming as the morning: and although the couch of Edgar was hard, yet youth and a good constitution, as well as the na¬ tural want of rest, made him rise refreshed and happy; especially as he perceived Ellen wore her accustomed serenity. " At breakfast their narrative was related to the Hermit; who, in return, related the reason which made him embrace a recluse life. He had been h6
a clergyman, but had met with so many things to disgust him with the wdfld, having out-lived all his friends &n& relations, he determined to devote tft&femainder of his days to piety ; and having fixed on that remote part for his dwelling, the Lord of the Manor, when he discovered his residence, kindly presented him that spot, to live in during his life. " Here, at the request of the Her¬ mit, Edgar and Ellen passed several days, to recruit their strength and spi¬ rits ; and here also, by this worthy man, they were married : and, agree¬ able to his request, they remained with hinr several weeks, as he seemed to derive a great pleasure from 1 their society, and enjoyed great satisfaction
in making two unfortunate young people happy. " Here Ellen learnt domestic eco¬ nomy, preparing the frugal meal to set before her beloved husband and her father (as she called the heavenly man). And here Edgar was taught to des¬ cend to low estate, and labour for sup¬ port, as he well knew he must under¬ take something for a livelihood, as the sum he had would never support him in affluence, and he thought it best to begin in time. " The Lord of the Manor was very good to the Hermit; and, having seen Edgar and Ellen, deigned to take some notice of them. The forest-keeper of that noblemuu had lately died, and he
mentioned to the Hermit his want of some one to supply his place. Edgar humbly ventured to offer himself for that situation ; who; recommended by the Hermit, soon obtained it, and were removed to a comfortable dwelling verv near the good man's habitation, near Ellesmere. " The beneficent Lord of tlie M&«- nor (Lord Somerville) often visited them, always happy to see Edgar's attentive care to ail his concerns. lie once ventured to enquire their origin, seeing, from their behaviour, that they were far above the common.rank of people. Edgar acquainted him they were of noble parents, more especially his wife; but that some circumstances required their situation and residence
should be a secret; and politely re¬ quested he would not wish to know more than was in his power to explain. Lord Somerville being a man of real beneficence and humanitv, wished to know no more than was agreeable to relate. He was a great friend to Ed¬ gar de Rosenberg, and, by every en¬ deavour, strove to make his dwelling and situation as easy and profitable as a reasonable man could desire* 4f They had not lived in this calm retreat above three months, when my father found our dear Edric. I have before related how happy they were with their charge; but they would have been trebly so, had they known to whom the dear boy belonged, to have restored him to his lawful parents,
In a year and a half afterward, I was born, and, if it were possible, increased their happiness. " Ellen de Rosenberg had by this time forgot all grandeur, though born to shine in the highest spheres of life ; yet love and esteem for my father ren¬ dered every situation of life easy, and with joy she descended from the proud Castle to share the humble dwelling, and be the companion of the man of her heart,.to superintend his little dwelling and tender family, .to cheer his heart when oppressed by toil, with the smile of content and delight, .to make labour easy, and the frowns of malignant fortune lose some of her envenomed shafts. Her domestic duties never soured her temper, nor
took from her that dignity of manners or elegance of conversation which used to be her peculiar grace when the ad¬ mired heiress of Bertram and the beloved inhabitant of Raby Castle. On the contrary, her whole soul cen¬ tered in my father, and his affection equalled her's. " Thns happily was our dear Edric brought up with us, Lord Somerville, ever solicitous to make our situation more comfortable, as he admired the unwearied assiduity of my father to his employments. Edric, when sup¬ posed to be seven years of age, used to accompany my father, and was very diligent and attentive to every thing he was ordered to do, and was very industrious according to his tender years.
" My mother had several children, beside myself, who all died young. Thus our time passed away. Edric being brought up to my fatheris em¬ ployment,, aud I to assist ray mother, till within these three years, when Edric suddenly evineed such a pro¬ pensity for arms, that it was difficult to restrain his impetuosity. My father ex¬ postulated with him, and endeavoured to convince him of the small hopes of advancement a young man in tlie humble sphere of life he was could expect;. but Edric seemed fixed, how¬ ever he concealed his real sentiments for a time. " About this period, Lord Somer- ville,from whom he had received much kindness, took my father more into favour, telling him he was very cezr
tain he rather suffered life than en¬ joyed it; and for his long-tried inte¬ grity in the concerns lie had hitherto © *j undertaken, offered him a situation at court of great consequence. My fa¬ ther could not, without ingratitude, decline an offer every way so advan¬ tageous ; though time had convinced him his situation could not admit of an increase of happiness, as domestic life with my mother was his highest ambi¬ tion. However, he accepted it; and, though his business called bim to court, he chose my mother to remain where she was; for indeed he still feared the resentment of the Baron of Raby, and thought it most prudent for her to remain concealed in the con u try. *' Edric was with us; but often«p-
peared thoughtful, and was unwilling to reply to the tender inquiries of my mother and myself, as to his health. My father often visited us, and per¬ ceived some anxiety lay ia Edric's heart Rosenberg had been in his situation about a twelvemonth, and being much respected^ he flattered him¬ self he could obtain sufficient friends to procure some situation for Edric ; ie made his thoughts known to Lord .Somerville, who kindly took upon him¬ self to conduct Edric to London in his carriage* But wishing pleasantly to surprise my father, and unknown to bim, he first presented Edric to the King as the son of Edgar de Rosen¬ berg. The King was pleased with his manners; and through the solicita¬ tions and friendship of Lord Somer¬ ville, the King gave him a captain's
commission, as there was an insurrec¬ tion raised against him ; and Edric was appointed to thc army that was sent against the rebels. Edric had only time to see my father and declare the favours received, when he joined the army. " He acquitted himself with such honour, that the King vouchsafed to bestow on him a token of his favour to wear ; and he rapidly advanced to be the commander of a powerful army. " Victory flew before our beloved Edric's conquering sword ..the fa¬ vourite of the King..the favourite of his country. And so satisfied wjas the King with the conduct of Edrie and my father, that he also received a sig-
nal mark of hts favour, for his great care and attention in the important situation of bis affairs; and therefore he created bim Baron Rosenberg. u And thus my mother and myself were situated, when the rebel army in¬ vested Shrewsbury. Lord Somerville, Who was an attentive friend, was in London ; and we had no where to fly to, my mother compelled to be secret for more reasons than one, and assume a cheerfulness now foreign to her heart; for I must acknowledge the joys we used to experience were much abated by my father and Edric's ab¬ sence ; and although they held situa¬ tions of the highest honours, they did not compensate for domestic felicity, when with rapture we used to prepare
the frugal meal to set before them, as they returned from their daily labour; and with anxious and aHectionate eyes, watch the approach of those so dear tons. Oh! now we, had nothing to look forward to, to make us happy; for all our comforts were destroyed by the supposition, that my father would re¬ ceive great emoluments, and, being honoured with a title, some silly peo¬ ple might think that an equivalent for happiness; but I am sure those that think so, will be greatly mistaken in the end. " In fine, our dear protectors thus many miles distant from us, we were obliged to fly, when the armies met to engage, and therefore fell into the hands of Fitzosric# We have scrupu-
lously concealed who we are, fearful of augmenting our distresses, if the Baron ^hpuld be one of Lord Baby's friends; by which reason, we should perhaps suffer more than if it were really known who we are. And my father being a favourite with the King, the Baron, who was one of the rebel Lords, might enjoy the cruel power of detaining us. 17
CHAPTER XXI. " No, my love S" s$i4 !#4y J^ e # clasping her to her bosom, " yo¥ shall not be cruelly detained; I will seek for your beloved and amiable mother* my affectionate youthful friend. .Ellen Bertram shall not be forgotten or neg¬ lected in St. Egbert's Castle! ♦ .and I find cruel fortune has left me some¬ thing yet to lovel something for which, after so many years of misery, 1 wish to live!. .Ellen Bertram was ray earliest friend, and Jane was equally beloved by her!.. oh! what v^rioun emotions I have experienced during your recital!. .my Edric I my friend J at once discovered!. .he, whom I have so long mourned as dead!. .and that dear friend, the kind protectress of vox*, ii. i
ray then deserted child !"...... Lady Jane could say no more, but burst into a flood of tears. Much conversation ensued, as soon as her Ladyship was able to quell the tumults of her throb¬ bing heart; and many inquiries con¬ cerning those dear to her; and Elgiva gave a succinct account of every inci¬ dent she could call to her recollection during the last seven years, partly concerning her father and mother, and partly of the conduct of Edric, that Lady Jane apparently grew quite happy, and longed to experience that felicity in the meeting with those she held most dear, which her fluttering heart fondly anticipated. Towards the'close of the day, they were interrupted by Ethelwald ; who came to inform Lady Jane he bad not
been able to discover any thing con¬ cerning the fate of Ellen. He bowed to Elgiva and retired. Elgiva felt a tremulous shock at the sight of him, being still apprehen¬ sive of the enraged Baron; but Lady Jaue bade her be comforted; she would venture out of the chambers a* night, and hoped she might be more successful than any yet bad been. Leaving the ladies to their conver¬ sation and conjectures, to wait the ap¬ proach of night—let us return to the Baron Fitzosric. Having drank pretty freely, be en¬ joyed a sound repose; and determined, when morning came, to visit Ellen
again, in hopes to bend her to his Wishes ; for he really felt a strong par¬ tiality in her favour. Though at the same time his heart burnt with resent¬ ment towards Elgiva. He visited Ellen every day to carry her food, and repeat the declaration of his passion; though tbe dignity of her manner prevented bim from offering her any insult... Sometimes she would not vouchsafe him an answer ^ at other times she would converse with an agreeable free¬ dom) as if she had been void of any suspicion ; but it was merely to elude bis inquiries, and prevent him from forming any idea of who she really was. H$ softly unlocked the door of Ellen's chamber, and discovered her on her If pees at prayer before a cruci¬ fix. So entirely were her thoughts
engrossed .with devotion^ that the Baron stole on her unperceived. Her attitude, and the fervency of her prayer, raised the admiration of Fitzosrie> and struck his heart with an irresistible awe; so much, that be did not dare to interrupt her. At lerigth be heard ber request Heaven's protection for her husband and daughter! At the word husband, be started ; and doubted whether he clearly to** derstood what she said. And Ellen soon perceived her unwelcome visitor, who so rudely broke dta her orisons. " Why this early intrusion, my Lord ?" said Ellen, rising from her knees,
* " Madam ♦, madam .." said he, hesitating, ** I come to offer you my haad and fortune; to remove you from this temporary confinement. .and lead you w T here pleasure courts and af¬ fluence awaits you 1 Will you accept me as a husband ?" <* it ts>dn honour, my Lord; I do not wish, nor can I accept" u And why not accept, since it will relieve you from all your present difficulties?" " It is not generously done, my Lord, to force an unfortunate woman into difficulties, whom malicious fate has cast into your power. And if you thus arbitrarily treat me, for no fault whatever; what am I to expect, if it
were possible for me to accept your offer?" " Every thing in my power to atone for my past conduct, and the in¬ quietude I have caused you...." " It is not in your power to atone for the misery you have caused me! and to prevent any further requests of a nature that distracts me to think of ... .know, my Lord.... I am already married!".... " Married!" said Fitzosric, recol¬ lecting she named husband in her prayer; " and pray, madam, why was I so long kept in ignorance of it ? " " Because, my Lord, I did not see there was any necessity for acquaint-
ing you with it For 1 am certain it is no concern of yours, whether I an* married or not!.." " Disappointed again!" said Fitz¬ osric mentally, " but I will obey the dictates of my soul..she shall not escape me.... ^ and attempted to take her in his arms. But the haughty Ellen de Rosenberg eluded his grasp, and with a scornful frown, bade him know his distance, .nor dare presume to add insult to the wrongs he had already heaped on her. " Cruel, wicked man !" said she, " have you hot basely forced me and my child into this abhorred Castle ; distanced from all my friends .. unjustifiably de¬ tained a prisoner by your tyrannic power. .divided from my Elgiva. .and torn frbm every earthly comfort? You
may punish me with imprisonment • • invent new torments to aflliet my heart and body! but my mind is free..my soul is above you! and know, proud Baron, it disdains you! and despises vour malice!" Fitzosric stood motionless with as¬ tonishment, to think, how she, in her defenceless situation, should dare to reject his solicitations, and avow her contempt so boldly. He was hurt to the soul to hear her declare she des¬ pised him. .him,.whom he proudly and vainlv imagined no woman could look on with indifference. Yet Ellen had said she disdained and despised him! this to a mind so haughty and despotic as he possessed, sunk deep into his heart, with an intent to medi- i 5
tate new mischief L. yet awed by the determined manner she spoke, and fearful of exciting her anger, he chose to silence his intended requests ; but the fury that raged in his breast, and laboured to vent itself on the unfor¬ tunate object of his resentment, he could ill conceal. Certain that he should not gain his point, by expressing what he felt, he very submissively entreated her par¬ don, if his words had in any manner given her offence; assuring her, it was most distant from his thoughts to cause her either uneasiness or anger; and that she must have greatly miscon¬ strued his sentiments, in receiving his declaration so unkindly. He apolo¬ gised for his treatment of her, laying all the blame to the ardour of his ex-
treme affection for her; and assured her, he would not do her any wrong; hoping also she would entertain a more favourable opinion of him, than to harbour any suspicion to his disad¬ vantage. « My Lord !" said Ellen, " I en¬ tertain no idea of the kind., my cause is committed to the Almighty Ruler of the Universe! in his goodness is all my hopes.. in his merciful protection all my trust. I have no dread of what is in your power to inflict on me!. .a superior power shields me from your injustice, and supports me through all the evils you would fain doom me to suffer!. .leave me, my Lord, 1 entreat you!. .that I may conclude the tribute of a grateful heart, to the beneficent i 6
and ttll-^r^ious Beihg who hae sus¬ tained me in the wekry pilgriniage of lifeI.iSo sliall you be entitled to my thanks." Ellen then turned from him with a degree of composure; and Fitzosric, awed By the mention of that Supfieme Being which conscience accused him of having repeatedly offended, dared hot interrupt ber further; but left the chamber, carefully securing the door. When he reached his own apart¬ ments, be threw himself into an arm¬ chair, and gave vent to the turbulent passions of his heart, which burst \vitft greater violence, because, in the presence of Ellen de Rosenberg, he had suppressed as much as possible his resentment He now had an op-
porlunity of giving that resentment utterance: he loaded her with every unjust and insulting ep!thet,and vowed he would not be talked out of his rea¬ son, or the dictates of his passions, by the preaching of an insolent woman-— one so totally io his power, that he taxed his senses with a singular weak* ness for giving a hearing to what she said.— Ci To dare," said he, u to reject my passion !—to resist my importuni* ties!.. ..but then she is married, she says... .to whom ?.. .that I neglected to ask... .Why then she shall be mine! At dead of night I can, against her will, steal softly to her apartment— my love and my revenge shall be gra¬ tified by possessing her^—her proud heart will be humbled, and it will be my turn to triumph!—No more shall haughty Ellen tell ihe she dkdams me.
She shall find my heart as hard as her own, steeled to every sentiment of pity or remorse!—Oh ! how I glory in the thought! But if I should not succeed, the scornful beauty shall not triumph over my purpose. She sliall no more see her husband — her Elgiva — no 1 nor the light of to-morrow's rising sun I My sword shall lay her dead at my feet, and my heart shall exult to be¬ hold her in the agonies of death!—Oh, all ye passions that possess my soul! be firm, shrink not, nor waver from my resolution l" Thus, in fury and resentment, the Baron passed the morning, meditating and devising new schemes to torment the afflicted Ellen; rejecting some, and admitting others which he imagined would wound her feelings the more.
After dinner he rode out for the remainder of the day with some friends, and did not return till after supper; and then he was so much intoxfcated, that he went directly to bed. Ellen at that time had no share in his thoughts: indeed he was incapable of thinking of any thing* At midnight Lady Jane ventured from the north chambers, in hopes to discover where Ellen de Rosenberg was concealed. Elgiva had previous¬ ly informed her where she had been searching — the gallery, the chapels, the various apartments leading there¬ from, the lumber room, and that where the body of Birtha Siward (for sq it was) lay; therefore it was useless for Lady Jane to examine then*. She therefore boldly determined %o search
th6 chaihber of Fitzosric ; for in it was a closet large enough to conceal any body. She entered at the private door, which she often did when she went into that room; and, to her great satis¬ faction, found him in a sound sleep» from the effects of his wine, which made him snore very loud. She opened the closet^—but, alas! no Ellen was there, She then determined to search his pockets, to see if he had any key; for Ethelwald assured her he knew no¬ thing of the matter: and, to lier infinite joy* she found therein a key, which she knew opened the stair-foot door, lead¬ ing to the turret in the south tower. Swift ais lightning were the foot- <sfe|m of t^dy Ja»e> till fche reached
that place: having locked the door after her, she ascended the stairs, and perceived a light iu the chamber above, the effect of Ellen's lamp. Lady Jane's appearance was, as hat been before described, sufficient to ter¬ rify the beholder. This night she was more particularly so, in case of ett- counteriBg Fitzosric, or that he should have been awake when she Entered his chamber. Ellen he&rd the door unlock, and dreaded the approach of the Baron: unable to avoid him, she commended herself to Heaven, and fervently im* plored protection. Just at that moment Lady Jane entered the room,
EHfn started as the mysterious visitor entered; and an irresistible something, allied to fear, stole insen¬ sibly over her senses so much, that it rendered her unable to move or speak. She perceived it was not Fitzosric; and as the alarming object approached more near, she saw the clothes were spotted with blood! She gazed in fixed astonishment, and, recollecting the countenance of her beloved friend Lady Wallingford, exclaimed " Mercy, Heaven!—what dreadful vision is this? —who has been guilty of so foul a deed?.. ..Jane !.... ray dear Jane! say.... who?".....and she sunk on her pillow, overcome with amaze¬ ment. " Fear not," said Lady Jane; " rise instantly; let not dismay over-
come Jour spirits—rise and follow— say not a word—-be quick, or all is lost. I will conduct you safe, where yon shall see Elgiva,and all your heart can wish/* Ellen, without answering a word, hastily wrapped her apparel round her while Lady Jane waa speaking, and silently followed her awful con¬ ductress. They descended the stains, Lady Jane closed the door; then proceeded down the next stairs, aud continued along the great gallery, passing swiftly by the door of Fitzosric's chamber. They then entered the north gallery, and hurried along to the north cham¬ ber, the door of which Lady Jane easily opened, and bade Ellen enter, which she did, Lady Jane then left her, that
she might return and replace the key in Fitzosric's pocket, whieh she fortu¬ nately did unperceived, and quickly repaired to the north chamber. Astonishment tied Ellen's tongue, as she saw what she imagined the mysterious vision depart; and she threw herself on her knees in humble thanksgiving to the Almighty for her miraculous escape ; when Elgiva ap¬ proached, who, sinking also on her knees, equally thankful, clasped her beloved mother in her arms, and em¬ braced her with the warmest affection. At this happy ifcoment, Lady Jane returned, and secured the door to pre¬ vent intrusion. Her appearance rathe* alarmed Ellen de Rosenberg; but Lady Jatie immediately threw aside
her habit, and appeared in a plain white vest; saying, " Be not alarmed, my dear long-lost friend! Providence has concealed me a long while, happily to relieve you from imprisonment.,and every evil which the ungoverned pas¬ sions of the Baron might inflict on you. Oh! let me bless the day that secluded me from the world, if I have b^en in¬ strumental to your safety and deliver¬ ance... Your once-loved Jane is not dead!, .she lives, to press her amiable friend to her breast; and to thank ber for all the tenderness she has bestowed on her dear son Edric!" Ellen and Lady Jane flew into each other's arms> and embraced with transport. Elfon de Rosenberg's sur¬ prise being sojaewtet abated, and her mini restored to fti*»<pajity by the
presence and joy of Elgiva, requested an explanation of the mysterious cir¬ cumstances she had heard and seen; and also expressed her astonishment to imagine how her dear Edric was discovered to be the son of her long- lost, though much-esteemed, friend. il - Your curiosity shall be gratified to the utmost," said Lady Jane ; " but suspend it a short time till I lead you to a more remote and secure part of the Castle, .distant from the intrusion of that base and unworthy man..I have the unhappiness to say, is my husband. .though he has believed me dead for several years ..... Oh! when I relate my sufferings^ dear amiable Ellen, your tender heart, I am sure, will pity me...Years of unutterable anguish IJh»r^ euiurerf sl«c# I saw
you...Death has deprived me of my idol..Wallingford! and my beloved child was also mysteriously torn from me. Great has been my affliction'for his sake ; but your sweet Elgiva has relieved me of a weight of sorrow.. has renewed ray desire for l^ife. .in the sweet hope that I shall one day see my son, and press to Iny beating heart, not the sweet child as when I lost him, but the noble, the aspiring leader of a victorious army!" Lady Jane took one hand of Ellen de Rosenberg and Elgiva the other, and led her into an interior apart¬ ment. They requested her to retire to rest, and strive to compose her agitated spirits; but Ellen's anxiety to inquire all she could learu of Lady Jane, chased aw&y every sensation of
the want of rest from her eyes. She entreated Lady Jane would so far oblige her, as not to suffer her to con¬ tinue in suspense; but be particular in letting her know every circumstance that had befallen her since last she had the pleasure of seeing her. Lady Jane, finding she could not prevail on Ellen to seek repose, and suspend her curiosity till next day, readily gave her a brief account of every thing that had happened. Mu¬ tual explanations took place, and it was eight o'clock in the morning before either thought of retiring to rest. END OF TKE SECOND VOJ-UME. r t i*M ty D. N. SUVRY, Bgrvitk StMtt &*h Lnto*
Edric the forester: or, The mysteries of the haunted chamber: an historical romance
EDRIC. THE FORESTER, CHAPTER XXII. Lax^y Jane now thought of con¬ sulting Ethelwald what measure it would be most prndent to adopt He did not however arrive so early as was expected, and it was quite evening before he came, when he informed Lady Jane that he had been out on particular business for the Baron the greatest part of the day; who had been in a most violent passion, but \ould not say exactly for what; still at times, execrating the name pf El- a 2
giva, and vowing vengeance whenever he met her arain. Ethelvvald advised Lady Jane to prevail on Elgiva to disguise herself carefully, and to loa\e the Castle. Shrewsbury was but a few miles off, where she could procure a eonvcNam e to take her to any of her friends, w ho would undoubtedlv come to relieve her mother. " I think/' said he, '* if the young lady can have sufficient cou¬ rage, it will be most prudent ibr her to go alone ; for two people being to¬ gether will subject them to observa- tion; and, rely on it, Fitzosric has spies every where to intercept their flight. You, most revered Lady Jane, nor your friend, will cast off your de- pendance on Providence, when you
resign this amiable young lady to its protection. Fear not—the good can have no fear." f: But how can she leave the Castle}" said Lady Jane ; 4t tell me, good Ethelvvald: fur I am all anxiety —how can she possibly leave this place unobserved]" " There rests the difficulty—it is totally impossible for her to go out at the portal. Were I the person who guarded the door, it would be no easy ta*k, as there are ceutinels on the draw-bridge : but the gate has two new attendants, most determined and daring men—new coiners ; and it strikes me, that the Baron has some desparate deed in hand, as he is fre- a3
quently in consultation with thera They are sometimes changed for two others of equal ferocious aspect—so that I am convinced the Baron medi¬ tates something, which he studiously conceals from me : and for whv 1 think so, I will give you a reason. " This morning, when he arose, he seemed very angry that he had slept so late. While I was preparing some¬ thing which he ordered, I missed htm suddenly. After about a quarter of an hour's absence, be entered the chamber in a violent passion, so that he could 'not articulate a word ibr rage. The idea immediately struck me, that you had released this lady; but from what he attempted to utter I could not collect any thing satisfac-
tory. He often pronounced Elgiva, threatening what he would do: and when he was able to speak, he said : <s If she had fled from the Castle, which he believed it nearly impossible to do, there yet remained a way to be revenged ; for it was still in his power to wring Elgiva's heart at every pore." " Elgiva's heart!"—exclaimed La¬ dy Jane, " what could he mean by that? —If they fly beyond his barba- roius reach, how can he be revenged?'' '* Of that I know not," said Ethel- wold ; " but be assured, there is something dreadful in his mind. But f will proceed, and you must judge w hcther my suspicions are ill founded, a4
He ordered me to take horse imme¬ diately, and go to ——— on some business, and return as soon as pos¬ sible. 1 obeyed. 1 suppose 1 was gone about three hours; and when I carne back, was informed the Baron was in the drawing-room. Thither 1 hastened lo acquaint him with my re¬ turn ; but, to my surprise, found the door fastened on the inside, and the Baron was talking very loud. What he had been saying 1 know not; but I heard a strange man's voice answer him these words— " < Were I as o?»ce you knew me, you would as soon have entered a lion's den as to have dared to treat me thus. You 1 have not offended. You pretend to serve the same king as 1
do. What then is my crime? An¬ swer me, Fitzosric: for only by the insidious arts of unmanly treachery could I have fallen into your unjust power.' " ' Away with him—the villain ! Treachery!—Does he dare say this in my presence?—Choak the word in his throat!' said Fitzosric. " * Are you a man/ resumed the stranger, e to treat a prisoner thus?— My hands confined, unable to defend myself against your assassins. Let me tell you, Baro.n, this inhuman deed will reflect eternal disgrace on you. My wrongs will mount to heaven, and ask for vengeance there; my life you A O
may rob me of, but my honor is un¬ tainted. 7 " A confused noise now rung through the apartment. I heard the clank of chains, but could not clearly distinguish what was said. At last all was silent, and I retired from the door, fearful he should discover me listening. Whoever the prisoner was, he was conveyed out at the other door. " Soon after, the Baron called for me. When I approached him, I per¬ ceived he was much agitated, and his mind so much engaged on what had happened, that he seemed quite in¬ attentive to what I said ; and thus has passed the time till now."
" Who can the prisoner be, Ethel¬ wald ? My heart is solicitous to know his destiny. Is there no means?" said Lady Jane. " Alas!" replied Ethelvvald, " you see I am not in his confidence. The men I before mentioned are his assis¬ tants in this affair; and you know it will not be prudent to inquire any thing of them. My life, I dare say, would be the forfeit." " What is to be done ¥* " Submit with patience to all Heaven's rigid decrees; for in this unfortunate man's cause I can do nothing; nor where he is confined I a6
know not. , For IJlgiva-r-as there does not.remain the least, probability of her escaping at the Castle gate, let her, when night has wrapt the Baron and all the inhabitants of the Castle in deep, go into the garden. I will leave the door she entered this place at open. Give her this key; it will open a,door about half way down the wall on the left hand side, which will immediately communicate with the road toward Shrewsbury, if she turns to the right; and my prayers, if the prayers of a sincere penitent can avail, will be for her safety." Lady Jane took the key with thanks, and he departed. She then returned to the ladies to inform them
of her proposition, and to prepare for Elgiva's departure, which took up some time and consideration. Elgiva's heart throbbed with transport at the thought of releasing her mother, and bringing friends to vindicate the wrongs which Fitzosric had heaped on them; and she knew she could now quit the castle with more satis¬ faction, as her mother was safe under the care of Lady Jane. That amiable lady she hoped soon to see restored to the world and her rights. While Elgiva, with a joyful heart, was preparing for the expedition, Lady Jane mentioned what Ethelwald had related concerning the prisoner, and wondered who it could be. She
uttered a fervent prayer for his safety, and sincerely wished him freed from Fitzosric's cruel power. Elgiva's cheerfulness received a severe shock as Lady Jane named another prisoner. She called to re¬ membrance the mournful sound that proceeded from the watch-tower, and vibrated on her heart when she met Fitzosric in the garden. She called to raind the agitation and surprise he appeared to suffer, when he observed she took notice of it. The sound was still in her ears, and she related to Lady Jane the etfect it had on her mind ^ beseeching her, if it wag in her pewer r to search into the mystery e£ the concealed unfortunate in the
watch tower; and trusted, through Ethelwald's means, to discover who the prisoner was. Lady Jane assured her no pains should be spared to discover and assist the prisoner to the utmost of her power. The Castle clock had struck eleven, and the inhabitants of the Castle were retired to rest, Elgiva's heart beat with unusual agitation, as the hour of her departure drew near. Sometimes her spirits sunk, and she dreaded to leave her mother. Then again cou¬ rage assumed its empire, knowing that by her going, it was the only way to save and release her. Thus
agitated between hope and fear, she took the key that was to lead her to safety; and, wrapping herself up in a long dark cloak given her as a dis¬ guise by Lady Jane, and embrac¬ ing them alternately, quitted them, while the tears started in their eyes at parting.
CHAPTER XXIII.
Before we proceed to follow the steps of Elgiva, it will be necessary to revert to the unfortunate Edric, After having been treacherously seiz¬ ed, and dragged to a dismal prison, he knew not whither, nor could he form any idea of what could be the cause of his confinement, unconscious of any crime. Day after day passed on without his being able to ascertain where he
was, or by whose order he was con¬ fined there. He was constantly at¬ tended by two men, sometimes more, who regularly brought him food, though it was of the coarsest quality. If he spoke to them, he was always answered in an insulting and vulgar manner. He soon perceived they were too much the creatures of their wicked employer for him to attempt gaining his liberty by the promise of any future reward. His door was strongly secured, and his window at too great a distance from the floor to permit him to ascertain the situation in which his prison stood. In this miserable manner passed away several weeks. Day after day lingered away in the same dismal uncertainty. Edric grew melancholy, and his health ap-
peared evidently on the decline; and want of sufficient nourishment soon brought him to a very ill state. At length the day arrived that he was led to suppose, by the conversa¬ tion and manners of his keepers, that he should be liberated; but he was rather astonished to find, when they were going to lead him to his expected freedom, that his hands were not re¬ leased from his chains, and he was conveyed down stairs, and along a covered passage till he entered the drawing-room of St Egbert's Castle. Here his amazement was redoubled, and his heart beat with unusual pal¬ pitations. There was something in the appearance of that room that was perfectly familiar to his eye and reeo!*
lection, though he knew not how to account for it: for at that time he did not know he was in St Egbert's Castle, or in the power of the Baron Fitzosric, though he firmly believed he had fallen into the hands of a dan¬ gerous and designing enemy. Yet the paintings in this superb apartment claimed his attention ; and a secret veneration, mixed with anxiety, filled his heart, and caused him to sigh, for reasons he could uot account for. After he had waited about half an hour, the haughty Fitzosric entered. Then—and not till then—did he dis- cover who had so treacherously way¬ laid and detained him: but could form no conjecture why he had acted so, as Fitzosric had sworn allegiauce
to the Conqueror, and had withdrawn himself from the confederacy. How, then !—or why—servants of the same king, fcould Fitzosric dare to secure and detain him? They started at si^ht of each other; and the Baron expecting to crush the youthful war¬ rior with a display of his greatness and power, insultingly began to load him with invective and reproaches; all which Edric received, and replied to, with as much patience as could be expected from a person in his situa¬ tion. A part of this interviey^, and the conversation that ensued was over¬ heard by Ethelwald, though he did not know who the prisoner was, And ' Fitzosric was so exasperated witli-
rage and disappointment for the un¬ accountable disappearance of Ellen, that he was almost going to sacrifice the unfortunate Edric to his resent¬ ment with his own hand. A moment's thought, however, brought a tempo* rary respite, and with disdain he ordered him from his presence; while his heart was bursting to be revenged on some one for the disappointment of his wishes. The mysterious escape of Ellen tortured the guilty Fitzosric to the soul. He could not frame the most distant idea how it could have been effected. No one was privy to the plan of her confinement; he himself was the only person who had ever attended her; the key of her prison
was never suffered to be out of his pocket. He found il there when he awoke; and he found the doors ex* actly as he had left them the preced¬ ing day. To account for her miracu¬ lous disappearance was impossible; yet he strove to fancy she was some¬ where concealed in the Castle; for which reason he searched every place he could think of. He then went to the room lately occupied by Elgiva, where he found Agatha at needlework> who, unknowing what was the cause of his coming there, came in for her share of passion and resentment; for he did not know who to vent it on -j and began to think, if there was such a thing as witchcraft, Ellen could have escaped by no other means.
All the day he continued thus dis¬ turbed, vowing vengeance, if either Ellen or Elgiva fell into his hands again. It was in this fit of rage that he ordered the prisoner Edric to be conducted to him ; resolutely deter¬ mined that he should suffer for all ; and to reek his vengeance on him for the disappointments he bad met with from Ellen and her daughter. He really was about to plunge the dagger into the breast of the unhappy youth, when a moment's recolleetiou made him drop his hand ; for, during this interview, he had gazed on Edric with sensations unfelt before ; and he imagined in bim he beheld the ghost of his once-loved friend, (for every fea¬ ture of Lord Wallinford glowed on his
countenance), unnerved his arm, and prevented his giving the blow. He ordered Edric from his presence, yet determined he should die; and he im¬ mediately suggested the idea of giving him poison. After the men had re-conducted Edric to his prison, they returned to know and receive Fitzosric's orders* He quickly revealed his intentions, desiring them to give him a powerful poison in something which he usually drank; and when dead, to let him know, that he might consider what was most proper should be done with the body. Thus commanded, the men departed to obey his orders—which were immediately put in execution.
Vol. hi.
CHAPTER XXIV.
i Ei-0iVA, possessed of the key, which she fondly flattered herself would soon deliver her from the Castle of St Egbert, hastened to obey the direction given her by Lady Jane ;—anxious, atso, to give liberty to lier mother, and to leafrn some tidings of her father, and her beloved Edric. She directed her steps through the o-arden where she had met Fitzosric, and remembered once having: heard
a voice seemingly in mburoM com¬ plaint, which appaf&frtly prodeeded from a w&tch-*tower at the fkrt|iesTeir- tremity of the garden, and* at a con¬ siderable distance from the castle. She did ««rt immediately recollect the Way Fitzosric led her towards the tower; but when she reached the garden of the Castle, the complaining voice re¬ curred to her memory, and she sighed a wish that it was in her power to assist the person she supposed was there confined, suffering some hard* ship from Fitzosric. But her' own liberty was her dearest object, and too precious to neglect, or think of any thing else; and she ranged about th# garden, hoping to explore the 1 outlet described by Lady Jane. b 2
She pursued her way beneath the garden wall, fancying it to be the right path ; but was surprised to find it soon terminated, and the avenue leading therefrom conducted her into a thicket of trees, almost inextricable, into which many walks joined as a maze, which greatly perplexed her, and she began to imagine there was no end to the pursuit. She had walked for near an hour, and grew much fatigued with her ex¬ cursion, and at that time fancied her¬ self far distant from the Castle; for her mind was too much occupied by her own troubles to make any particu¬ lar observations; when, suddenly rais¬ ing her head, she observed the tower
of St. Egbert's Castle, and perceived .she was just entering the avenue of trees leading to the back gate ; there also appeared a light in Fitzosric's chamber, and one in that she lately occupied. Fearful of approaching too near^ she again quitted the Castle, wonder¬ ing by what strange chance or neglect she had returned to it, and soon found another walk, which she was deter¬ mined to trace, hoping it would be more fortunate than the former. But, iu the end, proved of as little effect as the preceding; for after a walk of some length, she again saw she was within a few paces of St. Egbert's Castle, and the light still remained burning iu Fitzosric's room. aft
Her vexation was now extreme, and she began to imagine, if there was a possibility of enchantment, that the Castle must be under its influence; for the farther she believed herself from it, the nearer she always found her- self. Fatigue obliged her to find some place where she might sit down to rest, and sorrow and disappointment claimed their ascendancy, and pressed to be indulged. She therefore retired for a few minutes to an arbour to vent her te*ars, and rest from her fatigue, where she hoped she might not be observed. The night was unusually serene— the winds had ceased to blow—scarce a leaf nodded on the trees—all nature seemed lulled to soft repose. So calm
a silence prevailed, that the least noise might be heard ; and as Fitzosric often walked out by night in his garden, her tears redoubled lest she might be dis¬ covered, and again feel the iron rod of his arbitrary power: but he had re¬ tired to rest-—his tyranny slept—his vengeance was satiated on his unhappy prisoner, and at that moment he cared for nothing else. When a little recovered from her grief and fatigue, she again determined to seek the outlet described, and make her escape. She had every thing to fear; for if she had a wish to return to Lady Jane, or her mother, she could not find the way, as it was only by an accident she ever discovered her. In her situation there was no retreat, and b4
the necessity of pursuing her first and chiefest desire, appeared every mo¬ ment of greater consequence. Unknowing which path would lead her to the desired place, she yielded her cause to Providence, and took the first path that presented itself. Ac¬ cordingly she entered that opposite to her, and found it wound by a variety of turnings to the left It was entirely overshadowed with trees, inasmuch as the light of a brilliant moon was un¬ able to penetrate ; and she traversed the deepening gloom with secret dread —fear accelerated her steps, and she swept the ground with uncommon rapidity. Again the unhappy Elgiva was
doomed to meet with disappointment; for the path did not reach the inclos¬ ing wall, as she hoped to find it would ; but, to her infinite surprise, she perceived it was terminated by the Watch-tower, which she believed to be at the farthest extremity of the garden ; and, looking back, the Castle and lights were not to be dis¬ covered. Breathless with terror and despair, she thought of resting herself for a short time on the steps ascending to the watch-tower, to gain composure; as also to endeavour to ascertain where the door was situated in the wall, that would favour her escape from the garden of St. Egbert's Castle,
b 5
She was just going to scat herself, when her apprehensions were most powerfully alarmed on observing the door was open. The wish to escape, and the hope that there was a proba¬ bility of doing so this way, induced her to embrace the opportunity before her. She entered the tower, and turned to the left, where appeared a small room with one window, the case¬ ment of which was open, and looked towards the river Severn ; a chair was placed near the window, as if some one had lately been contemplating the beauties of a calm moon-light night, and the soft murmuring of the tide as it flowed against the shore. Over¬ come by various conjectures, she sunk down in the chair, hoping to tranquil¬ lize her troubled spirits. She observed
the moon playing on the bosom of the water, as it softly rippled beneath ; all was hushed as death, excepting only the slight svvell which rolled towards the shore, now some way retreated from its banks, and whose gentle mur¬ murs soothed her troubled spirits into a melancholy calm. A few minutes elapsed, and she heard the Castle clock strike one—and it sounded at a great distance. While she was attentively watch¬ ing the motion of the water, and listen¬ ing with eagerness to the most trifling sound, she fancied she heard a small noise. Her heart beat with unusual alarm, fearful that her retreat had been discovered* The distance from the window to the ground was too great b6
for her to attempt to jump thence with safety ; yet she determined to do that, if there were no other means. She listened to convince herself; she was sure the sound could not be fancy. It approached nearer, and her heart trembled with every dreadful appre¬ hension. She now distinctly heard the sound of footsteps near her; she therefore arose and drew near the door, close to which appeared a wind¬ ing staircase, illumined only by the moon. She drew aside from observa¬ tion, and stood behind the door, to ascertain the cause of her alarm. She then saw two men cautiously descend the stairs, bearing another, apparently lifeless, on their shoulders. Al this mysterious transaction, terror almost overcame every faculty: but all her
hopes of liberty, perhaps of life, as also that of her mother, depended on the exertion of the present moment; and she summoned all the courage she was mistress of, to assist her in a time which appeared so full of evil. When the men had reached the foot of the stairs, they opened a door which led towards the river, and they again descended several steps. Elgiva was too much concerned at this strange spectacle, to omit observing its termi¬ nation, happy that they had left the door open, which, in all probability, might favour her escape. She there¬ fore crept softly down the steps, cau¬ tiously watching the men, who were making towards the water : but when she reached the pathway that the
^vater had not long left, she ran as swift as possible, impatient to leave the Castle of the detested Fitzosric, yet mindful of what they did with the body, which she could by no means neglect. She therefore crept behind a tree that was fallen upon the shore, beyond the observation of the men, whom she saw precipitate the body they were carrying into the water. They then hastily returned to the watch-tower; and she fancied she heard them bar the door of that place. And, although she knew not which way to take, she was happy to find herself beyond the inclosure of St. Egbert's Castle. Now her anxiety and curiosity was drawn, towards the body^ which she
saw floating towards her; and she could not leave the spot till she had elucidated the truth of the mysterious affair she had just witnessed. She had not a doubt but this was the unfor¬ tunate person mentioned by Ethelwald to Lady Jane; who, at her departure, she requested to examine into the na¬ ture of his confinement, and to use her efforts to extricate him from the wrath of the cruel Fitzosric. She now ima¬ gined it was more in her power to know, than ever it could be in Lady Jane's. While she was revolving this am¬ biguous affair in her mind, the float¬ ing body passed her, and a soft wave washed it on shore at a short distance from her, and there left it.
Elgiva wrapped her cloak round her, and flew to the spot to see if she had any recollection of the unfortunate object of her concern. But what words can convey her astonishment and distraction, when she found it was the body of her beloved Edric! Frantic, she dragged his sad remains farther on the shore ; then knelt beside him, giving way to the most heart-felt anguish and indescribable agony. .. She kissed his lips..she invoked his dear name. .repeatedly she pressed his hand to her bosom..her only friend was lost, .for, in the hopes of finding Edric, were all their expectations of liberty centered. While Elgiva was thus employed, she felt a warmth glow about Edric I
it might be fancy; but she thought she heard him sigh..." Perhaps he is not dead!" exclaimed she, "he might yet be restored ; but, alas! there is no one to assist me! Heaven, in its mercy, aid me to save him, if life yet lingers about his heart." Again she pressed his hand. His pulse beat strong. .her heart experienced a ray of hope; for he had been such a short time in the water, that if he was not dead before he was cast in there, she flattered herself he might yet be saved. The distressing situation she was in, and the ardent desire she had to save him, gave her increase of strength.., She raised him from the earth ; and, leaning his head against her shoulder, was convinced she did not mistake. The dear object of her care sighed
heavily; which made her again call upon his name. The sound of her well-known voice recalled the almost fleeting spirit of Edric ; he opened his eyes. .looked wildly round, and said.. " Where am I?.. .who are you ?.., sure it is all a dream !"«*.* i i New terrors new assailed Elgiva ; she was afraid the m&i might return from the watch-tower, and they would be both again taken. Her joy at hear¬ ing him speak was nearly productive of as bad consequences as when she thought he was dead. Edric soon dis¬ covered her under thedisguise, and, as well as he was able, returned thanks to Heaven for sending her to him. With some difficulty she assisted hifn to rise; and then it was that she experienced a
happiness unfelt before ; she led him to the tree, where he rested a few seconds, while she hastily told him what she had seen, and urged him to fly from that spot as soon as possible, lest tliey should be pursued, Edric's clothes being wet, Elgiva dreaded that, for want of sufficient change, his life might yet be endan¬ gered. "That," replied he, "shall soon be done; only let me cast my eyes around, that 1 may ascertain what part of the country I am in, and I shall soon find friends to relieve my wants. I know who detained me! my most in¬ veterate enemy, Fitzosric 1" " At St Egbert's Castle?" replied Elgiva, " therefore you know the river that Hows at our feet is the Severn. Oh t
let us bless the Mercy that preserved you; and let us haste, my beloved Edric, from this place, if you are able, for I have much ta reveal; and much to dread." •« St. Egbert's Castle," said Edric, " is not more than six miles from Shrewsbury; there J have friends that shall soon revenge my wrongs* and level the castle of the proud tyrant with the earth." " First you must hear what I have to relate," replied Elgiva, " and then take your measures accordingly: I have just escaped thence in hopes of finding you to redress our misfor¬ tunes, and there my dear mother awaits your coming to release her."
" I can walk now," he eagerly re¬ plied, scarcely able to articulate ; fot his heart swelled with anger, when he found Elgiva had escaped thence, and that the amiable Ellen Rosenberg was there waiting his powerful arm to redress her grievances. The idea in¬ spired him with strength—"let us be¬ gone," said he; " there is no time to be lost; the treacherous Baron shall soon experience my vengeance." Without saying any more, they rose to depart; and soon as they tra¬ versed the shore beneath the impend¬ ing cliffs, they came to a road, which* to their great satisfaction, Edric im¬ mediately recollected, " We have but dne thing to con*
sider, Elgiva," said he ; " and that is, that hearer than Shrewsbury we can get no accommodation with snfety ; do you think you can walk there? You see our situation; there I shall be in the bosom of my friends ; and there I can lodge you securely." " Undoubt- edly, n replied Elgiva; " for since I have found you, I feel no fatigue; let us proceed as fast as possible." They pursued their journey with all possible despatch, and fortunately arrived at Shrewsbury at four o'clock in the morning. Edric went to a friend's house, who arose to receive him, and welcomed him with every demonstra¬ tion of unfeigned joy and friendship. " Allow me," said Edric, " a change of apparel, for I have been nearly
drowned, and have walked six miles in my wet clothes. This is my Elgiva, whom you have often heard me name, and for whose mysterious loss you have witneKSsed my anxious solicitude. But I can say no more till I have had rest, and recovered from what has hap¬ pened." Sir Bernard Melbourne and his Lady had risen to welcome the fair stranger and his friend. A warm bed was prepared for Edric, which he thankfully accepted, and, bidding El¬ giva adieu, he retired to change his clothes, and obtain a few hours' rest. Although he was anxious to hear all Elgiva bad to say, be thought it pru¬ dent to suspend his curiosity and in-
quiries till he Was a little recovered* Lady Melbourne conducted Elgiva to a chamber, where, bidding her good morning, she left her to repose.
CHAPTER XXV.
EttsuvA rested from her fatigue J but the events of the last six hours prevented her from obtaining sleep) and she could not sufficiently return thanks to the Almighty for her being the instrument in providentially pre¬ serving the life of her beloved Edric* She now found that the prisoner in the watch-tower was no other than him* She remembered the groan that issued from that place the night she met Fitz* osric in the garden, when her bosom VOL. hi, c
experienced every agonizing thought As she fancied, she was no stranger to the sound, though at that time she did not dream that their only hope, their dear Edric, was in the power of that same tyrant Baron of whom they expe¬ rienced such dreadful apprehensions. A short slumber enveloped her, and robbed her of some uncomfortable thoughts till towards, noon, when she arose and joined Lady Melbourne in the parlour, anxious to hear how Edric was. Sir Bernard had just been to see bimi and informed her he was in a profound sleep, and seemed to rest ^eryeasy r K but expressed a wish that ^§ should aipt be awaked, as it might
be of the most salutary effect after what he had undergone : " For," said Sir Bernard, u he is much altered since we saw him last; I looked on him as his head rested on the pil¬ low, and I thought, poor young man! his countenance looked almost worn oat with fatigue -—and sure, much must his heart have suffered to have caused such a visible alteration. He has been missing now above three weeks from us, and I know the most diligent search and inquiries have been made after him all over the kingdom. No trouble nor expence has been spared •—all his friends have united in his cause—Lord Rosenberg is almost dis¬ tracted for the mysterious loss of his wife, his daughter, and his excellent son. You, Madam, I understand, are c 2
that daughter for whom he feels such anxiety; and it will be a happiness I despaired of enjoying, to let him know you both are found,,and glad his heart with tidings of so much joy." " Indeed, Sir, you glad ray heart to mention my father," said Elgiva ;-— ** pray when was he here?" " About a fortnight ago," was the reply. " And was he well ?" " Well in health," Sir Bernard an¬ swered ; " but in spirits much de¬ pressed, having, as he thought, lost, by some strange event, all he held dear*'
" We will remove the anxiety I am certain he feels," said Elgiva, " as soon as Edric awakes." Breakfast was now served to El¬ giva, and she and Lady Melbourne had much conversation. They then walked in the garden,-and admired its beauty, as its parterres were decked with the most blooming flowers which perfumed the air. Aftet Walking about an hour, they returned ; and Sir Ber¬ nard informed them Edric was dress¬ ing; and would soon appear. 1 He also said he was happy to find that he did not seem to suffer any ill consequence from the aceident of the preceding night. This intelligence was a cordial to c3
the afflicted spirits of Elgiva, who dreaded every ill. Her fond affection for that deserving young man had created the most alarming doubts of bis recovery, especially when Sir Ber¬ nard mentioned the alteration in his looks. She had not observed it herself; for the joy of finding him, and his being restored to life, when she ima¬ gined he was dead, took from her all thoughts of examining how he looked m y tp her it was sufficient he was alive. And now every moment was burdened with anxiety; her heart beat as she expected his approach. He entered the parlour—Sir Bernard's remark was verified—a visible dejection was on his features—a paleness and languor shaded that noble countenance, once beaming with health and animation;
and he was also considerably wasted in his person. Elgiva looked at him as she rose up to welcome him, and could not refrain tears. « Why does my Elgiva weep?" said he, fondly pressing her to his bosom ; " I am not ill—you see, it has pleased Heaven that the water should have no effect on me," " Oh ! you are so changed!—You look ill, Edric—you must have suffered much since I saw you last. Oh! let me be acquainted with all that has happened to you since we parted." Edric led her to a seat, and placed himself in a chair by her side;" he then breakfasted, and endeavoured to c 4
rouse himself from the languor his frame visibly experienced. Sir Ber¬ nard was sorry to see his friend ap¬ pear so ill. After the repast, he re¬ lated what had happened to him since he had been absent; taking Elgiva's hand, he said—- " My beloved Elgiva r from tie moment I missed you and Ellen Rosen¬ berg from the cottage, where I fondly trusted I had left you in a place of safety, my bosom has been a stranger to rest. Whatever occurred in the interval between that time and when I was torn from my friends, was in¬ different to me. Your father, when he learnt that your mother and you were missing, I need not wound you by saying how severely he lamented a
misfortune, which I much feared would shorten his days; as your loss, and the uncertainty of what might be¬ fall his adored wife, were sensations that bore a far too powerful ascen¬ dancy over his mind to admit of miti¬ gation. " The state of affairs which obliged him to be in London made him ex¬ ceedingly unhappy; for, although I promised, and I trust he could believe me, that I would make every neces¬ sary search, and find friends to assit me; yet he still feared no one would continue the search with such un¬ wearied assiduity as himself; for he certainly knew that (myself except¬ ed) no one could be so much in¬ terested. cS
. " Lord Rosenberg c^nie to Shrews¬ bury to me; we made every inquiry, and used every exertion human power could do tp discover where you fyad gm& Sometimes we vainly imagined you had fled, fearful of any new dan¬ ger, to London, as the troubles of the times were every way alarming : but then we thought, if you had fled for security, you certainly would have eased our anxious hearts, by letting one or other of us kpow what had caused your removal from the cottage, and where to find you. " In this uncertainty your father was obliged to return to London, and trust to my unwearied diligence in finding you out; 1 was to let him know
the instant I had discovered where you had retired. " But previous to this I must re¬ turn to the battle., which we hourly expected ; my duty now claimed a more particular attention; but my cares were divided: for, in the heat of battle, instead of thinking of the dan¬ gers that surrounded me, my whole soul has been taken up with thinking of you, your mother, and Lord Rosen¬ berg. After the battle was over, I determined to revisit the cottage, to see if any tidings had been received of you. I cannot express my feelings, when I found that the old woman had returned to tlie place, and assured me she did not know what w&s become of you* » ^hep she one day was re* c6
turning home, she found the cottage door open, and the place deserted; and since that time she had neither seen nor heard from either of you. a I now trusted, that, fearful of being discovered, you might have fled to London* to Lord Rosenberg for protection. Anxious to resolve my doubts, I hastened to London; but found you had not been there* I cannot express the distraction my sad intelligence gave him; for the situa¬ tion of affairs prevented his quitting his office. I instantly departed on my restless and unhappy search. I saw the anxiety that swelled my friend and father's heart, and judged of his suf¬ ferings. It will be needless for me to mention every thing particular. I
visited every place where I could form any fancy that you could be re¬ tired to; but vain were all my efforts, and, broken-hearted for your loss, I returned to my army, which still was at Shrewsbury. " Here I gave way to sorrow, Crief had gained so great a power over my mind, that its oppression was visibly noticed by all ray friends. Here 1 received a visit from Lord Rosen¬ berg, whose mind was equally op¬ pressed. I was grieved to see him suffer such affliction ; but the ill suc¬ cess of my fruitless search made me very unhappy, and I had not the forti¬ tude, or confidence, to inspire your father with any flattering hopes. Your loss was very singular; but I trusted
that, .when it pleased Heaven, your being found would be in as mysterious a manner. " After I had been about three weeks at Shrewsbury, my uneasiness every day increasing, till it amounted almost to distraction, I resolved to go once more to the cottage, flattering myself at intervals that the person who inhabited it might have heard something from you. To my great grief, when I arrived there, the woman could give me no farther information than I had received before. I was returning to Shrewsbury in the most distracted state of mind, rendered still worse by being unable to give your worthy father any hopes. + «
" About half way on the road, as I was ruminating on, and indulging my melancholy thoughts, I was sur¬ rounded by several men, who, though I made as much opposition as possibly my single arm was able to do, they seized me, and, wrapping something round me, conveyed me 1 know not whither. It was in vain I asked them the reason of their violent proceed¬ ings ; I had only the most insolent and taunting speeches in reply. " Some time elapsed before 1 found they stopped, and opened a door. When they had brought me within side, they took care to fasten the door, and then they conveyed me, I per¬ ceived, up stairs; and, when in the room they designed me to stay in, took
off the cover which had prevented my seeing to what place they were carry¬ ing me. " I then made several inquiries, to know why I was taken away in so strange a manner; but I could get no satisfactory reply. They had the in¬ solence to tell me, to make myself con¬ tented, for there I was to remain as long as I lived ; and, loading me with chains, left me to my own dreadful conjectures. " A few days convinced me it was impossible, either by remonstrance or any other means, to ascertain where I was, by whom detained, and for what reason. I gave up the point, and silently submitted to my unavoidable
destiny. However, from this strange transaction, I firmly believed some one must have serious designs against tny life; or why was I privately taken away 1 If 1 had done any thing to offend my King, surely, I thought, when he had the power of advancing or deposing me at his pleasure, he would not have acted so very incon¬ sistently as to secure me privately, without saying in what manner he felt himself displeased; of course, if I suffered by his displeasure, I ought to have been taken to some public prison, and have known for why, " My own misfortunes lost all their poignancy, when I considered Lady Rosenberg, yourself, and your father. Who was now to seek for you? Who
was to alleviate the anxious cares of my esteemed father and friend ? Ah! he could not tell why I was so cruelly silent; he knew not that I was a pri¬ soner in a most mysterious and under¬ handed manner; and there was no way left to convey the melancholy in¬ telligence to him \ I was also absent from the army. .how was I to account for desertion? What could be the common opinion of my quitting it un-* authorised and unknown at such a cri¬ tical period? Here, grief..or those ideas that want a name, drove me almost to distraction ..the baleful in¬ fluence preyed incessantly on my heart • .the more so as you and youT mother were never absent from my thoughts. u Week after week passed away in
the same dull round of anguish. I knew not who was my oppressor.. my accuser..or the cause of ray confine¬ ment. I began to think we all suffered under the same wicked power..but tortured my idea to imagine who it was likely would act so base, and so inhumanly. " My provision was of the very worst quality, which from being un* used to, I soon grew very ill, and in* deed apprehensive of my life. I ate with caution, and very sparingly ; for I often thought it was tinctured with poison, from a strange sickness that sometimes affected me after I had eaten. Those suspicions, and want of proper nourishment, soon brought me very low; and my apprehensions and dis-
tress for your safety, brought me to aa very ill state of health. " Time brought on me a settled melancholy; want of food reduced me to a languor, which it will take some time to remove. Grief for the sake of those I so much loved, increased the depression that had seized me. I was regularly attended by thfree or four men, w f ho took particular* care I" should, not make my. escape. They only entered ray abode to bring my provisions, and retired to the*-outside of the door, which they always fastened, and I could hear them talk. My window was too high for me to reach, ' that I might form a conjecture where I? was. I knew I was not very far from Shrewsbury; but I would have
given the world to know where niy enemy had secured me. " A lapse of time passed away; which, in my deplorable situation, seemed an age; and all my flattering hopes had quite forsaken me.*when, yesterday, I was suddenly hurried away to appear before my enemy and m y j u dge, as the subsequent behaviour seemed to indicate* tl My chains were* not removed. Attended by four ruffians, I was con* veyed through various apartments till 1 advanced into a very superb room, the appearance of which struck me with unusual awe ; for it was familiar to my remembrance, though I cannot tell where; and after looking about me
with admiration and wild astonish* ment, in hopes to Tecover my recollec¬ tion, for some time, I saw the Baron Fitzosric «nter, which convinced me into whose hands I had fallen, though I could not frame a thought what could make him my enemy, as he was now a friend in the cause of William our King. " It will be needless for me to re¬ peat the scandalous manner he treated nie with. I could never h&ve thought that any one, much more the renowned Fitzosric, would have so insultingly behaved to a person who was totally in his power ; the more unmanly, as I w>s in my chains, and surrounded by the wretched beings, who, for his pay> consented to become the Vilest of the
human race. Were it not for those chains, would I have borne his inso¬ lence one moment? I would have trusted his single arm to mine, and have acted like a man. But Fitzosric's conduct is mean and dastardly ; never till yesterday did I suspect he was ca* pable of acting with such injustice. "After he loaded me with re¬ proaches, and drawn his sword with an apparent intent to sheath it in my body, a sudden recollection seemed to cross his mind, and made him change colour several times while' he was speaking. At length, he haughtily ordered me from his presence. His r order was immediately complied with, and I was again hurried to my prison, ,
" Being secured) I was left to in* dulge my distracted thoughts and fears alone, for about an hour; during which time, and for the first time, I began to think that you and your mother had fallen into his hands, which redoubled my afflictions, as I, being a prisoner, could not endeavour to re* lease you; nor had I power of com¬ municating my thoughts to your father, either to implore friends to rise in your defence or mine. u While I was musing on those melancholy reflections, two of the men returned, and, after a short time, took off my irons. I was in hopes they were going to liberate me: but when I asked the question, one of them
insolently replied, 'It is the Baron's tirder; and I suppose he thinks those irons w r ill be in the way.' I could not imagine what could be the reason of so strange an action; but supposed there was some ill meant; and I de¬ termined to lie on my guard, " Soon after, another man cathe in, with two goblets of wine, and they began drinking. I had not tasted any thing but w r ater during my confine¬ ment. They entered into conversation with each other, and soon almost emptied their glasses, when one of them, turning to me, said—' Indeed, Sir, I heartily pity you; you hav6 lived very hard since you have been here ; and I am sorry it has not been in my power to make it bstter.~Will you VOL. HI. D
please to drink with tis V I expressed my thanks, and drank what remained in, one pf the glasses ; when another of them s$id-^ Oswy, you have three or four bottles below— give master ,o»e*-4he Baron shall never know he has had any thing but water for me; and I wish, with all my heart, it may do him good; for he seems horridly cast down of late, and I am sure he wants something to cheer him.* " ' Aye, willingly,' replied the first; and away he ran to fetch it. He soon returned, and, drawing the cork, said — c There, Sir; you will acknowledge you never tasted better in all your life:'—and he began pouring some out. I again expressed my thanks ; but said 1 did not wkh for any more at present;
if he would leave me a glass, I would help myself presently—as I hoped it would be a means of procuring me a night's rest, which, from the trouble I had experienced, I stood much in need of. " My request was complied with. They set me a glass, and, very cheer¬ fully bidding me good night, soon after retired. I did not see any one till about two hours after."
d2
5
CHAPTER XXVI.
" As soon as they left me, my sus¬ picions were very busy. Their amaz¬ ing kindness in giving me the wine, and assuring me of its goodness, created apprehensions that there was something more than ordinary in their so suddenly pitying my distressed case. I began to fancy the Baron knew of all this, and that his design was to take me off by poison. Suspecting this, I was determined to be very cautious, and, if there was possibly a way of
deceiving them, to dive into their in¬ tentions. I poured out some of the wine—I examined it—it looked very thick—I tasted it, and found my sus¬ picions were just; for there was a very nauseous taste when it was pallated. Yet I wished them to believe I had drank some; and, for this reason, 1 poured out a full glass, and, stepping on the chair, my hand just reached the window, and I poured the contents through it; and so I served a second. " When Oswy entered my prison, it was near dark. I thought he ap¬ peared visibly disappointed when he saw me sitting there. He took up the bottle, and, looking at it, shook his head very craftily— ' Aye, Master,' said he, * it is no use giving you wine; you dS
have not drank much, I see.'—* My friend,' I replied, ' I am fearful of its hurting me. You well know I have been long unused to it; but I dare suppose 1 have drank almost a pint, and mean to drink another glass be¬ fore I sleep, which will not be long, for I never felt so drowsy in all my life.' " c I thought I perceived a secret pleasure spread exultingly over his face, when I told him I felt drowsy. My mind felt so confident that what I suspected was just, or I should have been shocked at suspecting any one would have been guilty of what my wretched situation prompted me to imagine. c Well, then,' said he, * I will bid you good night; and do not be sparing of the wine, for I will try to bring you some more to-morrow. 3
" I thanked him, and returned his wish of good night; and he left me. " Still it run in my mind that some design was going forward—Os- wy's looks bespoke it. The surprise he felt at seeing me—his examining the bottle—the scrutinizing eye he cast, when reproving me for not drinking more—and the pleasure he seemed to feel, when I told him I was drowsy— made me believe my suspicions were confirmed; and I determined to try some artifice to develope the meaning of this extraordinary sudden kindness. " I poured out another glass, and served it as I had done the two former; then about half a glass, and set it by my bed-side; and, throwing myself d4
down in my clothes, waited the event; for I resolved not to suffer sleep to* close my eyes, till I discovered whe¬ ther my suspicions were just or unjust. "I heard a clock at a distance strike twelve, and I thought I heard voices whispering at the door, which confirmed me that my conjectures were right; for it was an hour that they never before had come to me. Time went on, till I suppose it wanted about a quarter to one, when Oswy and another cautiously entered with a lamp, and set it on the table. " Oswy then said, ' All is safe, I find, and he is secure. Look, Lucius, he has not left above half a glass in the bottle; and see, he had not power
to drink any more, for there stands the glass with some by his bed-side. Now sleep secure, Baron Fitzosric, for thy enemy is as dead as a nail. Had he fifty lives, what he has drank would silence all; for I put enough in, lest he should fancy something by my kindly offering him the wine; and therefore half a glass would have quieted him if he had touched no more. " ' I long to finger the reward,' said the other; " but what is to be done with the body? Are we to bury it? Have you dug a grave V " ' A grave, you fool! What! and run the risk of being asked what we are doing! No — the Baron and I have contrived a better scheme than i)5
that. The tide is now going out, we will carry him down stairs, and threw him into the river; and then, if his body is picked up, his death will seem by accident, and we shall be rid of the crime.' " 'That's a good thought,' said Lucius, rubbing bis hands ; i come, let us make an end of the business as quick as possible.' He then advanced towards me, and touched my hand— * Oswy,' said he, * he is not yet cold !' " ' No matter,' replied the other; 'perhaps that is because he lays upon the bed; but he can never come to himself again, that I am sure of; and when We throw him into the river, why
there is an end of our troublesome charge—so come, help him up/ " They then lifted me up, and I, aware of their intentions, let them take me, as if I were really dead. I was happy to hear they meant to throw me into the river, because I could swim well, and hoped soon to be beyond their reach. " The clock then struck one, and they descended the stairs with me; then down another flight, and walked down to the water, where they threw me in, closing the execution of their plan with a few oaths about my being so heavy. " When in the water, I held my dO
breath, and floated a small distance,, fearful that they might see if I made any exertion. At length a wave, and a little effort of my own, cast me on shore. I opened my eyes to see if the men were there; to my comfort they were not; but 1 found somebody ad- vancing towards me, and> fearful the person might be one of Fitzosric's people, I closed them again* and lay as if I were dead, " But how shall I express my astonishment and joy, when the person approached, to find by the complaint, it was the voice of my long-sought Elgiva. Fearful of being observed, I allowed her to imagine me dead for a few seconds, till I ascertained that we were entirely alone; and then I rose^
and though wet, we sooa after set out on our journey hither; where, thank Heaven, we arrived in safety." Thus Edric concluded the recital of his sufferings, since last he parted from her and his friends. The whole party expressed their happiness at his miraculous preservation ; and admired the goodness of the Supreme Being,. who had protected him through every danger, and defeated the vile inten¬ tions of his oppressor. Now, anxious to learn what had befallen Elgiva and her mother during their long and painful separation, she gave a minute detail of every particu¬ lar, and all the mysterious occurrences that had happened in the Castle of St.
Egbert during her stay. Edric's heart swelling with rage and indignation, frequently interrupted her by declar¬ ing the detested Castle should be stormed, .and the murderous villain compelled to submit. " Hold, Edric," said Elgiva, " while you breathe re¬ venge for our injuries, you forget that my mother, and our dear friend Lady Jane, are there; and perhaps might fall victims to Fitzosric's fury, if he could not escape your just resentment. But listen, I have more to tell you, if your impatience will hear me. " I have related to you how, in flying from Fitzosric, I discovered the retreat of Lady Jane, till then believ¬ ed to be murdered, and every one firmly supposed her wandering spirit
walked in the Castle. I have ex¬ plained my terror, and her good¬ ness, in preserving me, and restor¬ ing mv mother. Now, Edric, some- thins: I have discovered that con- cerns yon nearly. Lady Jane, widow of Lord Wallingford, is-----your mother. You are the child, which on her second marriage with the wicked Fitzosric, gave him such con¬ cern, as you stood in his way to the estate, and therefore it was necessary you should fall a victim to his avarice and ambition," The countenance of Edric exhibited every mark of astonishment, anxiety, and joy. He doubted his senses—he fancied it all an illusion—the remote Edric, the heir of Lord Wallingford!
—Oh! it was too much to credit—too much to support the amazing emotions if it were true. -Then the many afflic¬ tions., the cruel treatment Lady Jane had suffered, which made his heart sink while Elgiva related them. .Now that much wronged woman was de¬ clared to be..his mother!—His heart was breaking at the recollection of her sufferings, and the tears rushed to his eyes as he vowed to redress her wrongs. Sir Bernard Melbourne congratu- lated him on the discovery of his family, and advised the youthful warrior to cheek his impetuosity, as the lives of Lady Rosenberg and Lady Jane, whom he wished to release, might fall a sacri¬ fice to his fury, if they attacked St
Egbert's Castle by assault. Asalsa that that noble mansion, by Elgiva's account, was his paternal domain ; and therefore it,would be destroying his own property to endeavour to take it by storm. " In this case," added he*. " let me, who have numbered more years than you, be an adviser. En¬ deavour to gain admittance by strata¬ gem. Take with you a chosen band, in whose fidelity you can rely. I will be one; and let your assault be at night, when all in the castle are hushed in sleep. Elgiva says she had the key of the garden given her to let herself out; that .will let us in unobserved ; and we will take care to be of sufficient force to repel their attacks/' Measures were accordingly agreed
©n ; for no time was to be lost. They. first despatched a messenger to Lord Rosenberg, desiring his immediate at¬ tendance, as Lady Rosenberg, and her daughter were found, but could not command time to say more. v Sir Bernard's proposal was to call together* about fifty friends, to enter the c&stle garden if possible, A body of troops were then to surround it, to assist if those who had gained the in¬ terior met with opposition, and, upon a signal given, to commence an attack upon the Castle. Elgiva explained as well as she was able the way she was directed to find the gate; but which she could not discover the preceding night; and, by
the unerring hand of Providence, was miraculously led to the watch*tower. By the direction in which the watch- tower stood, they supposed the gate was in the wall proceeding thence to the Castle; and as it was defence¬ less at low water, thought ta defer their operations till midnight, when they might more easily reconnoitre the situation of the place, and attack it while all were sunk in sleep. Sir Bernard then smilingly said to Elgiva, " we cannot hope for your at¬ tending us, unless the great affection you have for your mother should in¬ spire you with courage, and the hope to release her. I can scarcely desire it; but, perhaps, when in the garden you mentidn, you miglit be able to
conduct us more easily into tho> Castle." " It w r ould grieve me," replied Elgiva, " to suppose you could for one moment imagine me wanting in affec¬ tion or desire of preserving my mo¬ ther; as also the inestimable Lady Jane, in whose cause I feel as if in¬ spired ; and begin to fancy myself an instrument in the hands of Providence to redress her wrongs, and restore her to that property which is her own. I endure the greatest anxiety to return to them, to share their distresses, to cheer perhaps their solitary hours. Yet my heart is happy in the idea, that our situation is known, for that was all we wanted ; knowing, that iC my father or yau were acquainted with
otir confinement, you wOuld soon dome to our Telief. Therefore I will attend you. I know no tnoTe of the entrance into the garden of St. Egbert's Castle, than that from it I was desired to seek the gate in the wall on the left hand, that I could not discover; btit the watch tower terminated the last path I pursued. If we should be so fortunate to gain admittance into the garden, perhaps I could not be able to enter the Casfle; however, 1 will willingly accompany you. If I can render Lady Jane or my mother any service, I am certain Edric will endear vour to save me from any danger." " You shall be my chief care," said Edric, " if you can so far conquer your fears, as to lead me to the Castle
in defence of your mother and mine. I will not doubt you, after having re¬ lated what you undertook to liberate her. To explore the dreadful apartments of that place alone, must give you more distress than accompanying me» But only let me confirm my right to the Castle of St. Egbert, and I will soon sweep superstition from its walls." Sir Bernard undertook to raise a competent force of friends to accelerate his views ; and planned the attack on the Castle by the side of the watch- tower. The tide would be retreating at midnight, and the moon would be only rearing above the turrets of the Castle ; so that whoever passed be¬ neath the wall, would be in the shade, and they could walk on the shore un-
^perceived. Edric, Elgiva, and Sir Bernard, with a party of friends, w r ould explore the gate in the wall, and if they could get admittance there, force their way into the Castle. The party that were to surround it, were to take every one prisoner who attempted to escape. The plan being thus adjusted, Sir Bernard left Edric to his ease while he went to collect his friends ; and when he returned in about four hours after, assured him he had a very formidable force waiting to attend him. The day was passed in mutual ex¬ planations of various subjects, whilst at intervals their hearts beat with the most anxious expectation for the ap-
^proaching eVent, that would give lr* 'Iberty to two amiable women, and place the rightful owner on those domains, which had been so cruelly wrested from his possession. About half an hour after ten, Sir Bernard introduced a number of friends, to the amount of forty, all per¬ sons of distinction ; who beheld the long absent Edric, their favourite leader, with every mark of respect and affection ; and each vowed to support his cause. The situation of the watch- tower was explained ; and they pro¬ posed to wait the arrival of Edric at the end of the lane leading to the river. Edric, Elgiva, and Sir Bernard were to go on horseback, because they
were fearful for his health, after being for such a time in so weak a state. Besides, if so many men were to go on Jiorseback at that hour, it would be a means of spreading an alarm, if they were seen proceeding towards the Castle. Every necessary arrangement was made, and, trusting their cause to Heaven, who is the protector and avenger of the innocent, they departed, to reach the appointed place, where they were to wait the arrival of their friends.
VOL. ill.
CHAPTER XXVII.
Elgivaj with a cheerful heart> pre* pared for their enterprize, wrapping herself up in the disguise given her by Lady Jane \ she mounted a horse, fervently praying and trusting they should succeed. Sir Bernard and Edric mounted their horses, and placing Elgiva be¬ tween them, hoped a speedy aud happy termination to the singular cause they were engaged in. Bidding adieu to
Lady Melbourne, to whom they pro¬ mised to send a messenger of their success, they departed. The night was uncommonly beau¬ tiful., the moon shone with amazing lustre .. and illumined the country around. Their conversation during their ride, was entirely occupied by recent events, and the flattering hopes of those to come. At length they reached the end of the lane terminated by tlie river; where> on the shore, they met their friends, who were faithful to their pro* mise. Elgiva recollected the painful sensations that oppressed her the pre¬ ceding night, when she and Edric were making their escape from the
Castle, and contrasted them with the present. Edric's might be supposed the same, when we consider how long he had been imprisoned by Fitzosric. Dismounting, they left their horses to the care of some attendants, while they proceeded to search for an en¬ trance into the garden of St. Egbert's Castle. As they passed the watch-tower, the Temembrance of what had taken place there, and his miraculous escape, struck Edric with awe and devotion .. Elgiva with wonder and admiration. They could not pass it without falling on their knees, and returning thanks to their Almiglity Preserver, as well as to implore his future protection.
After uttering their fervent prayers, they rose from their supplicating atti¬ tude, trusting in that support that never leads us w r rong. They then proceeded along the wall, examining every pier they came to ; but no door presented itself. The lofty towers of the Castle of Fitzosric in sullen ma¬ jesty now reared above their heads, and they feared they had passed the door. But upon examination, they found an apparent breach in the wall, which made them suppose it would open into the garden. The key in Elgiva's possession was applied, and, to their infinite joy, it opened into the garden of the Castle; and, by its near appertenance, Elgiva was certain she had passed it the e %
night before, previous to her appro- bending that she had mistook the path that led thereto. Edric, Elgiva, and Sir Bernard, with about forty friends, entered the gate; and those friends were deposited in the adjacent arbours, in case of any alarm. The path into which this gate led, w f as immediately against the door of the Castle that screened Elgiva when she fled from the Baron ; and she was astonished to think how she could miss it when she wanted to effect her es¬ cape ; but, upon examination, it was painted so exactly like the wall, that the difficulty of discovering it was easily accounted for. She advanced alone to the door of
the Castle. Hope animated her spi¬ rits, and gave her strength; but, to her great distress, the door was fastened. Edric and Elgiva returned to the recess where they left Sir Ber¬ nard, to consider how it was most likely to succeed, While waiting there, she fancied she heard the door open, and, looking, thought she perceived it close. She dreaded Fitzosric ; but did not appre¬ hend he would advance from that part of the Castle. However, she again ventured to try the door; and, to her infinite joy, found it yield to her hand. Elgiva, followed by Edric, Sir Bernard, and three others, found en¬ trance to the Castle, and easily pur- e4
sued their way to that part of it which led to the north chambers. While they were pursuing their course up stairs, Elgiva fancied she heard the sound of footsteps, which echoed on the marble pavement Ap¬ prehensive of their danger, she be¬ sought them to stand aside, fearful it might be Fitzosric, who was the person ever uppermost m her thoughts, if she suspected any danger. They drew aside, and plainly heard the sound of footsteps approaching more near. At length a form appeared, sufficient to overcome the firmest heart with terror. It Mas Lady Jane. She had been for a walk in the garden, after all the inhabitants of the Castle had
retired to rest; and, returning, had surprised Edric and Elgiva, who re¬ tired on her approach. Elgiva whis¬ pered Edric, that she was certain it was Latly Jane that passed them, and she was determined to follow—and instantly pursued. " Oh, my dear Lady Jane!" said Elgiva, casting her¬ self into her friendly arms ; " I have brought friends to redress your wrongs. Numbers now environ the walls of the Castle: several are with me to give you liberty and peace. Oh! I have much to say ; let me present to you our adored Edric. These are his friends; and many more await the signal to advance and crush the des¬ troyer of your rights." The sudden surprise staggered the e o
fortitude of Lady J&ne; for she had no idea that Elgiva could have conveyed the discovery to Edric in so short a period, muck more that he had col¬ lected any friends to assist him. The swelling tide of joy bore down every other sense, and she sunk into Elgiva*s arms, unable to giv6 that welcome to her beloved, long-lost son, she so ar¬ dently wished. A few moments recalled every re¬ collection and observation of Lady Jane: for when Edric precipitated himself at her feet, he bore so great a resemblance to Lord Wallingford, that, had not Elgiva previously mentioned who the expected Edric was, Lady Jane would have discovered a simili¬ tude, although she might sot be able to account for it.
It will be needless for me to repeat the meeting of Lady Jane and her beloved son Edric, witnessed only by Elgiva, Sir Bernard Melbourne, Sir James Taunton, Arthur Lord Belville, and Sir Aubray de Vere. Lady Jane raised the young warrior — Nature strongly pleaded in her breast; for the form of Edric wanted no testimony to declare who he was—he appeared so exactly like Lord Wallingford when he was about the same age as Edric, Elgiva had previously related the mys¬ terious events relative to him from the time he was found by Rosenberg; it only wanted him to appear, to confirm the authenticity of those events. Oh I who shall express the happiness of the long-suffering Lady Jane at the res¬ toration of that son so long supposed
dead, as she pressed him with rap¬ ture to her bosom, and fervently re¬ turned thanks to Heaven for its mira¬ culous preservation bestowed him. Lady Jane now led her son and the party to a superb apartment, and requested them to be seated; when, throwing off her disguise, she em¬ braced Elgiva, and welcomed her with eviery degree of affection and friend¬ ship a heart sensible of obligations eau bestow* " My dear Ladies/ said Sir Ber¬ nard, ** let your transports subside for a short time; for we have very weighty business in hand: the Castle is sur¬ rounded, and they only wait our signal to commence the attack. Consider—
we must be brief, lest any danger falls to our friends. Let us but secure you and Lady Rosenberg, whom I am taught to expect to find here; then we will assist onr young friend's right to the name and estates of your late worthy husband, and restore you to your usual state, to liberty and life." " First let me behold my dear Lady Rosenberg," said Edric ; " let me see her in safety, and I shall be happy: a few moments will satisfy the anxiety of my heart—then let us pur¬ sue the destroyer of their peace, and secure him before he has an opportu¬ nity to escape, or the power to design further evil." Lady Jane immediately conducted
them to Ellen Rosenberg, who joy¬ fully welcomed the return of her daughter to her relief, as also her deaT Edric. Time would not admit a recital of what had transpired within the last twenty-four hours—it was too precious to bestow in vain repetitions of what might be explained at a more convenient opportunity; and the thought of having gained access to the Castle elated the whole party. " Now where is Fitzosric, the destroyer of my family—the would-be murderer of the hapless Edric ? — let me secure him before he is capable of doing further injury"—said Edric. " He has retired to rest," Lady Jane replied; " therefore he will easi¬ ly fall into your power."
" Elgiva," said Edric, " lead me the way, that I may redress our wrongs —the usurper shall uo longer triumph over me—persecute you—nor imagine he is free from the supposed murder of my dear mother. — Come! lead on, my love." Elgiva trembled at the thought of being instrumental to the Baron's mis¬ fortunes, though he had so very much ill-treated and insulted her. However, the cause of justice was at stake, and she complied. They left the chamber, Lady Jane and Ellen praying for their safety, being previously led by Lady Jane to the door that opened into the north gallery, where one solitary lamp served triflingly to illuminate the cheer¬ less gloom*
Just as they were departing, their attention was called by sound of voices ascending the stairs leading from the garden. They put themselves on the defensive ; but soon found it was their friends, who, impatient of delay, had entered the garden, (Elgiva having left the gate open,) and, fearful of any accident happening to their friends had rushed forward with impetuosity to* assist them. Assuring them that nothing had transpired to give any unusual alarm, they left them with the ladies, while they proceeded to the chamber of Fitzosric; where, sunk in sleep, he dreaded not that he was on the point of answering for all his horrible crimes.
Having passed along the north gallery, and the folding doors, they entered the illuminated gallery,, in which the chamber door of the Baron was situated. Elgiva pointed it out, and was going to retire ; but, anxious to know what passed, she could not withdraw, but remained in ardent ex¬ pectation of what might ensue. Though Edric assured her she need he under no apprehension; for they only meant to confine Fitzosric, and bring him to justice. They then entered his cham¬ ber, and Elgiva returned to her mother and Lady Jane in the north gallery. Fitzosric was in a profound sleep, iu which state Edric might have sacri¬ ficed him to his just resentment, and the murder of his father, as also that
(he supposed) of Lady Jane; but, dis¬ daining to take a mean revenge, he called him to awake. The Baron, raising himself on one arm, sternly demanded who so dar¬ ingly interrupted his repose ) « Wallingford! thy friend ¥> replied Edric. On this* day twenty-one years ago* do you remember? he and you headed your forces to oppose the Danes. On that fatal day Walling¬ ford received his death... .by whose hand ?... .Fitzosric !. .time may have worn it from your mind. .habitual evil deeds may have banished reflection from you ; but I must tell you Wal¬ lingford died by the villanous hand of the treacherous man he esteemed a
friend! Arise!..l am now here to avenge his foul murder.' 1 The Baron was rather taken un¬ awares, but rising to take his sword, perceived there were more people in the room than the person who spoke to him, else he would have considered it a dream. The figure of Edric struck terror into his heart, and he gazed on him with wild amazement At length he gained sufficient courage to say, " Who are you that dare to name Wallingford?..Thy looks re¬ semble the murdered Edric, my foe!.. What! have the waves cast thee again upon the earth to torment me!. .Last night thy life was forfeited to my ven¬ geance. . .Am I deceived 1 * .or art thou the ghost of Edric? for both you re¬ semble,"
" I have not time to waste in idle words," said Edric, " nor to answer such ridiculous inquiries—Arise! and know, proud Baron, that the period of thy lawless usurpation draws nigh to its conclusion. Thou, who could basely murder thy most valued 4 friend, Lord Wallingford. .who could marry the widow, only to deprive her and her infant son of their rights. .that could destroy that son, the lawful heir of these estates; and after innumerable iilsy murder the hapless victim, Lady Jaue. These., these wrongs are enough to make Wallingford, or Edric, rise from the grave to oppose such tyranny, and place the rightful heir in the, domains of his aucestors. Yes, there is another Wallingford! The cliild you supposed dead, has been
cherished to oppose you ; and now he comes, the instrument of avenging Heaven, to crush you/* The Baron Fitzosric looked with sullen cbntempt, yet with teridr, on Edric, as he spoke; for he had been assured that Edric was dead, by his people, who had attended him diiring his confinement in the tower, and had administered the poisoned wine; as also that his lifeless body had been thrown into the river. Rememberinff which, he firmly believed the person who had spoken «uch truths was a spectre; for no one creature, as he imagined, could have obtained the un¬ welcome information that fell from his lips. The resemblance he bore to Lord WalKngford, the -certainty that he
was the exact representation of Edric the Forester, he thought if it were possible for spirits departed to re-visit this earth, it was surely him. And being unwilling to rise, and fully per¬ suaded in his own mind that the ob¬ ject before Mm was only the errors of a fearful imagination, he turned his head away, and hiding his face with Ms hands, exclaimed—" Depart!—de* part! and trouble me no more." Edric not supposing that the real cause of the Baron's wish to turn his eyes from him, and to remain in bed, wa& that his guilty soul imagined the injured shade of the unfortunate Edric was now before him, demanding ven¬ geance for his wroags. And the re¬ semblance he now bpre to the late
Lord Wallingford, took away his strength and almost his speech; for how was it possible to avoid Edric, if the grave yielded up its store to tor¬ ment him. The idea that it might be possible for Edric to be alive never once entered into his mind, assured that the assassins he employed would not deceive him, nor fail to execute his horrid command. A living object he had no dread for, because his power was too strong to bear any opposition; but when those appeared before him, whom he firmly believed were dead, then the guilty conscience, toa big to be confined in the narrow limits of a human body, accused him of all the evils he had ever done; and he would have given the world to have been nothing.
Sir Bernard said, " my Lord Fitz* osric, we must be obeyed; you must rise immediately, there is no time for a de* lay ; as you must be brought before a court of justice to answer the various accusations alleged against you." Thfe Baron now contemptuously looked round, and perceived there were several persons waiting for his dressing, He rang for his attendants to assist him. Ethelwald and some others came to him, to whom he explained the vio¬ lent intrusion of the party present, threatening vengeance on them for suf¬ fering las repose to be disturbed* When be was dressed, Edrie said, 46 Now i must inform* you 1 who I am. Too well you know I am Edric the
Forester, whom you could not subdue by fair means; but, like an unmanly traitor, confined me—almost starved me — treated me with insult—when you knew I was in chains in the powder of your assassins, and thereby unable to defend myself. Your murderous arts thought to have poisoned me last night. Providence interposed and fcaved me from adding another to the list of murders your conscience is clouded with. I was cast into the river, and miraculously escaped." Fitzosric started..and bit his lips in anger and revenge; but without deigning to speak. His haughty soul was bursting to reek his vengeance on the unexpected Edric, but he found him surrounded by too many of his VOL. |Ii. f
friends to gain his point, else he would have plunged his sword into the bosom of his adversary. "My more immediate business," said Edric, "is to compel you to re¬ store two ladies, Ellen and her daugh¬ ter Elgiva. They Jiave been confined in this castle -many weeks, and vio¬ lently separated from their friends. The discovery has certainly been very mysterious; but I should have found them long ago, no doubt, if you had not so basely confined me. I demand that they be immediately delivered to me, and permitted to leave the Castle." ** It is all a scandalous falsehood," said Fitzosric; " I know of no such people—they are not here. Why am 1 to be insulted with such inquiries ?"
%t By your leave we will walk into another apartment, Sir Bernard," said Edric, " where we can come to the rights of this affair. I affirm that the two ladies I mention, are somew r here in the Castle, and I insist on their being restored to me*" Tlie Baron was secured, for fear he should make his escape; and by col¬ lecting a force (though in a wrong cause,) he might yet be the means of much mischief. They therefore re¬ paired to the drawing-room.
f 2
CHAPTER XXVIII. As they entered, Edric said, "this is the room, my friends, where Lady Jane was poisoned. And after that act of wickedness no person has ever seen her, exoept, &s traditibn ^oes, her restless spirit winders, to strike the guilty soul of her murderer with horror." At this moment Lady Jane, anxi¬ ous to observe if her son was likelv to receive any danger, entered the dfaw- irig-room, to the great terror of Fitz¬ osric, who shook every limb: but she soon retreated, and walked in the north
gallery, while her bosom throbbed with the strongest emotion. The Baron struggled with contend¬ ing passions, and friding it impossible to elude the persons in whose power he was, after some consideration, began to regain his natural duplicity —sometimes with haughtiness, that spoke the contempt he felt for those around him. But finding all his arts of no effect, to torn the determined mind of Edric, he again solemnly as¬ sured them, that he knew nothing of either of the persons Edric had alluded to ; then disdainfully asked if he had any thing else to say. "Much," replied Edric;* * &nd iirst, I claim this Castle iiad its lands F3
as roy right, which you have so many years usurped. I am the lawful heir of Lord Wallingford. In me behold . Edric!. .that child whom you designed to have murdered, to secure to you his estates. Providentially I escaped the snare, and by a miracle am now before you, to demand my rights; which, if you deny, my Sovereign will compel you to resign." Fitzosric looked sternly on him while he spoke * ,he shook with terror; as the resemblance he bore to his mur¬ dered friend was extreme. A thousand thoughts rushed on his tortured mind, and he now perceived the cause why he always so much hated Edric the Forester more than any other com- mander in the King's service; and up-
braided Heaven and Fortune that he was ignorant who he really was, or he would not have lived to humble him in the manner he had, in the sight of so many, at the present period. At length he recollected, that Edric awaited his reply, and he said, in a haughty accent, " the Castle and estates of St. Egbert I never will re¬ sign till, as you threatened, the cause comes before a superior power than at present demands it. It is true, you bear a resemblance to my deceased friend ; and some one, I suppose, has spirited you on to act as you have done, and form an illegal claim to this my property. I never will believe that you are the son of Wallingford ^there¬ fore remove from the Castle, and learn. ? 4
to revere my clemency, and bless my forbearance that I do not strike you dead at a blow.,a vile impostor as vou are. V " I can bring proofs," said Edric, " substantial proofs ..., whereby my rightful claim can be asserted! they are in the possession of Ellen, whom I hav& demanded." " Oh! the traitress!" cried Fitz¬ osric in a rage, "had I known that, she should not have existed one hour •!" " A few minutes ago," continued Edric, " yon said you knew of no such person ! You see, my friends, our in¬ formation is well founded ; but now 1 thave possession of this place, 1 will
search every part but I will discover where you have concealed her." " 'Tis false!" exclaimed Fitzosric, recollecting Edric's having made a claim of the Castle, " and I would not believe that you w r ere his son, even if him you say was your father, or Lady Jane, were to rise from the dead !" Lady Jane had been listening at intervals to all that passed, and un¬ willing longer to delay declaring Edric's right to the Castle, entered the drawing room, and addressing herself to Fitzosric, whose terrors he was en¬ tirely unable to conceal, said, "The time is now arrived that calls me to declare the truth, and restore the law¬ ful owner to the possession of his rights, f 5
which have been too lon^ held from him by fraud?, murder^ and oppression. The young man present, is Edric my son!. 6 the only heir of my murdered Lord Wallingford . .murdered by the hand of his treacherous friend, Fitz¬ osric ! The son of Wallingford is now before you ...him, whom you hired as¬ sassins to destroy, the night we re¬ turned from Bretheren!. .the Almighty would not suffer those assassins to lift their murderous hands against an un¬ offending innocent child !.... .mysteri¬ ously he has been preserved till this hour^ and shines forth the champion of his Sovereign ; when it could scarcely be supposed, the obscure offspring of a forester could be capable of atchieving such deeds. He now appears before you as the champion of suffering inno¬ cence ! the Lady Ellen, who for seve-
ral years he believed to be his mother. To demand his lawful possessions.* to claim retribution for his father's cruel murder..and the death of his mother. .with all the wrongs you have made him suffer." Fitzosric started at the sight, and the terror of her discourse. He firmly believed it was the spirit of Lady Jane rising to defend her son's cause. The thought almost drove him to distrac¬ tion* for he i found himself beset and exposed on every side ; and covering his face with his hands, he threw him¬ self on a couch, and gave way to the «■< pressing agony of thought that in¬ volved him* While he was indulging his own*- f 6
oppressive sensations, Lady Jane pro¬ ceeded*. "It is now no longer neces¬ sary for Conceal ment.. let me declare the truth . .and take one murder from the guilty soul of the Baron !. .he has always thought I suffered by poison, and was buried in the garden !. .but Heaven thought proper to frustrate his design! j I have lived a disconsolate ted solitary life in a remote part of this Castle, thirteen years ; watching every action of that perfidious..that ungrateful man !. .and, thank Heaven, live to assert my son's claim, and see the usurper meet the reward of his crimes!" Fitaosric, with rage and anger, struggling in his countenance, ex¬ claimed, "Ha! I have been deceived!
..bring the traitors forth, that dared to conspire against their master..! will have them suffer death for im¬ posing on me.. and first on you, Madam, for the many terrific moments you have caused me and my servants, with your supposed phantom !" Then rushing towards Lady Jane, would have sacrificed her to his fury, if he had not been prevented ; and Lady Jane took shelter in the midst of her son's friends. Any further conversa¬ tion, they considered would be useless at the present time ; and calling to the servants of Fitzosric, demanded to be conducted to a place of security, to keep a traitor safe till morning, when he would be conveyed to Shrewsbury gaol.
, ^Confine me in thia place," sai<r the Baron, " but L solicit it as a fa¬ vour,,. and r eertamly expect you will grant it* that, you will.not. convey a person of my rank,to a public prison, till my crime is known..or my inno¬ cence cleared up.".. .The,request was complied with ; and the.Baron was led to a secure apartment; where, fasten¬ ing: the door, and leaving.six of Edric's friends to guard it, they repaired with Lady Jane to the north chamber. v
CHAPTER XXIX.
They were met at the door of tha haunted chamber by Ellen Rosenberg and Elgiva; who, with the friends that remained with them there, waited with impatience to welcome Edric's return, as also that of Lady Jane, for no persuasions could prevail on her to remain in the north chambers, as she was apprehensive Edric's safety might be endangered if he followed the im¬ petuosity of the moment, by rashly en¬ tering the chamber of the Baron... Her extreme anxiety urged her to fol? low him, and listen attentively to what
passed there and in the drawing room. No longer able or wishing to conceal herself, when the Baron Fitzosric in¬ voked the injured spirits of Walling¬ ford or Lady Jane, to speak in behalf of Edric, she thought it a proper oppor¬ tunity to appear and declare the truth. Lady Rosenberg and her daughter, Who had suffered such insult and de¬ tention by him, could not help Te- joicing to think their oppressor was secured, that they could now leave the Castle in safety. Her anxiety to see Lord Rosenberg, after such a long and painful separation, claimed every thought; and every moment seemed to hang on leaden wings, till she set out to meet him; especially as she had been informed he might be expected.
in a few days • at Sir Bernard MeU bourne's, at Shrewsbury; as an. ex¬ press had been sent to him, to come there as soon as possible. And Elgiva was equally anxious to see her father; and, in expressing her joy at seeing him again, relate the mysterioua aecw dents that had prevented that happi¬ ness so long. Lady Jane now requested Edric's attention to what she had to relate, and her joy at seeing him, as well as that experienced by Lady Rosenberg, was extreme. Lady Jane would haveibeen willing to acknowledge Edric the Forester, the son and heir of the de¬ ceased Lord Wallingford, without the testimony of the paper, and corro¬ borating circumstances revealed b^
Ellen; for he bore a remarkable re¬ semblance to that nobleman. The night was passed in mutual* recitals, and explanations, which made those extremely happy who. were most concerned in. the wonderful event;, which proved;, that the immediate hand of Providence always attended every circumstance and. action, oi Edric's life, Rwas eight ^clock in the morning before any one thought of the fatigue of. the preceding day. Lady Jane bade Ethelwald-prepare chambers for as manias, could'be possibly accom¬ modated, as, she judged it necessary to obtain a short repose previous to the. h4i£ines3 of the day*
Edric enjoyed a slight slumber, and soon arose, wishmg io see Ethelwald, and have a private conversation with him concerning many occurrences- which had happened during the long period of hte supposed death. The Ladies could not receive much benefit from their repose, for their minda were too crowded with recollections of the preceding day, to taste the comfort of sleep, and too much overjoyed in the recovery of Edric, and the hopes of being restored to liberty and their friends. Lady Jane also, impatient to see Edric, still having more to commu¬ nicate, and also to propose a proper escort to attend the Ladies to Shrews¬ bury, lest they should fall into the hands of Fitssosric's people, for she re¬ membered Ethelwald had told \m\
that the Baron had despatched his people in all directions, to intercept their flight. Edric ordered the Baron's carriage tp be prepared to convey Ellen and Elgiva to Sir Bernards, there to await the expected arrivai of Lord Rosen- herg. They were to be escorted by ten of their friends op horseback, in ease they met with any opposition tram :$e Baron's party. Edric was sorry 4o parft with them so soon after their Jbeing found; but judged it best to «ead them to Shrewsbury, wthtle he settled the business at the Castle. He wished Lady Jane to accompany them; but she declined, saying, she did not inow but Ja^r presence might be ne* cessary at ithe Castle, aud ahe could
trot bear to quit the place while she harboured the smallest thought of hfc* son's being in danger. The ladies therefore took an affectionate leave, and set out on their proposed journey ..elated with the hope of being* re* stored to Lord Rosenberg, as also that they enjoyed freely the benefit of the fresh air, without apprehenskn of the tyrannic controul of the Baron Fitz* osric. Lady Jane now ordered Agatha to be conducted to her. Ethelwald had explained, previous to the interview, that Lady Jane, who was supposed dead, had only retired to the north chambers to secrete herself from the tyranny of the Baron, and to wait an opportunity of asserting her rights—
that it Was no spectre, but the lady herself, who so often walked about the Castle: but so igreat wa& the super* stition and fear of every one that had beheld her, even Fitzosric himself, had not sufficient courage to speak to her. He found some difficulty in per* suading Agatha to accompany him, especially to the north chambers, 5 of which place she still felt uncommon 'dread. She had heard something of the bustle in the Castle the preceding night; and knowing that her master, when enraged, cared not on whom lie vented his fury, was under the most alarming apprehensions for her own safety, and had prudently retired out of the way, considering that self-pre¬ servation was the first law of nature.
The strange manner that he had some* where concealed Ellen—the myste¬ rious disappearance of Elgiva — the passion in which he returned to her when Elgiva was mtssing-^the tin- merited reproaches she received from him on that account, were still fresh iu her troubled memory.; and she dreaded what might be his design to¬ wards herself. Then, suddenly, the recollection of the astonishing account which Elgiva related, when she was searching for her mother. The skele¬ ton which she found concealed in the * couch, and which she herself was thoroughly convinced was the body of Lady Jane, made her doubt the words of Ethelwald; and knowing he was greatly in favour with the Baron> tiay, bis confidant in every action* dreaded
that the present request was all a fic¬ tion, and for some reason only meant to delude and imprison her also. . Etbelwald observed the terror which was struggling in Agatha's bosom, and which was so strongly pourtrayed on her countenance; and the more he persuaded the more she was alarmed. At length he told her, that Edric, Lady Fitzosric's son by Lord Wallingford, was alive, and that it was he, who, coming to the Castle io assert his claim> had put the place into such confusion; that he had se* cured the Baron, and was now in the Castle, The novelty of seeing this wonder¬ ful young stranger, now caused Aga*
tha to be full pf her inquiries, concern¬ ing what sort of a person was Lady Jane's son?—where he was found?— by what means he escaped, when every body thought he was dead ?— where he had been all the time ?—was he handsome?—and a number more inquiries, that Ethelwald thought her tongue would never cease. " All this," Ethelwald replied, " I cannot at present give you any par¬ ticular account of. I always flattered myself he was alive, though no one but myself believed so. As to his person, Agatha-^he is very handsome, and of a noble commanding look— about twenty-one, I suppose—and the exact resemblance of Lord Walling¬ ford. I, you know, have seen his VOL. 111. G
lordsMp, andtlbe pMuire in fliedraw- i^g^rDo^i is extremely like hiinl"— « 0h#fctfr!" said Aga^ia, interrupting hka, " I n^^lr fe^uld bear to look at thsftpictulrein my Iffe, because I had been told he was it&rllered. Once, I Wtfw, I ventured, after my lady had been describing him, to look at it, 1 saw it was drawn for a very handsome man ; but the eyes seemed to fix on me so strong, and so seriously, 1 was frightened, and ran out of the room ; and ever since, when I go into the drawing-room, I turn my head away, and never look at it." " Silly Agatha," rejoined Ethel¬ wald, " I did not imagine you could be so led away by romantic folly: but I must infom you tnore of this Edric.
Young as he is, he has been for three years the terror of the country. He is that very Edric, sirnamed the Forester, that carries terror in his arm, and has been every where victorious. He every¬ where opposed the Baron; and you know we have often longed, to see him, though we dreaded lest he should at¬ tack this place. For fear of that, the Baron withdrew from the cause he had espoused. And by some strange, un¬ foreseen event, the certainty of which I am not at present acquainted with, he has heard his mother is alive, aud then came suddenly to the Castle to vindicate her wrongs, and assert his lawful claim," Agatha's countenance sometimes expressed the most animated hope, g2
then suddenly changed to chilling fear; for she could not flatter herself that Lady Jane was really alive. However, anxious to see the hero, that had often been mentioned with admiration, at other times with terror, she suffered herself to be led by Ethelwald along the north gallery: but when she arriv¬ ed before the door of the supposed haunted chamber, all her courage for¬ sook her, and she fancied Ethelwald had deceived her with false reports; for the padlocks still remained on the door, the keys of which were either buried, or put out of the way, so that no one could find them. Ethelwald opened the door on the side, which admitted them, to the astonishment of Agatha, who never
dreamt of such an inlet It led them into a noble apartment; but in that they entered next, she beheld her dear Lady, whom for thirteen years she be¬ lieved to be dead, and wjiose remains she would have declared unburied, (^rounding her supposition on the re¬ lation of Elgiva), sitting in conversa¬ tion with a handsome young man, who (according to her slight survey of the much-dreaded picture) entirely an¬ swered Ethelwald's account—the exact resemblance of Lord Wallingford's portrait, when apparently about his own age. Agatha's feelings overcame her. The jo£ she experienced at seeing Lady ;J$ue restored from the dead— her son also, that she had long thought g 3
lost, never to be returned—took away every power of utterance and sense. Lady Jane perceiving her falling, flew to assist the terror-struck maid ; and when she recovered, she found herself, not in th% arins of an often-dreaded spectre, but supported by Lady Jane. This wa» joy indeed for Agatha, who sincerely loved her mistress* She uttered innumerable inquiries in a breath; for her anxiety and impatience would scarcely allow her to hear any thing in proper order. Agatha had much to say, as well as to hear; but the cxtacy of the mo¬ ment bore down every other sense. She rapturously welcomed Lady Jane's return, and that of Edric, whose noble
deportment and handsome person had quite overwhelmed poor Agatha with surprise, admiration, and awe. , She waited to attend auy command to her fellow servants: many, she knew, high¬ ly valMsd Lady Jan^ l?nt who. would mot,believe m woird Ethelwald^said on the subject, and was happy to be the herald of good news.
a 4
CHAPTER XXX.
The guilty conscience of Rtzosric, during the absence of Edric and his friends, wanted no other monitor. Too well the appearance of Edric con¬ vinced him he was the son of Lord Wallingford, to offer any opposition to his claim. The appearance of Lady Jane drove him almost to distraction. For her to be alive! he knew Ethel- wald must have deceived him ; as to no other he imparted the design of her death, though he did not say for what cause. Ladv Jane had also now presented
herself in behalf of Edric's rights! There had been a hint too given, that Lord Wallingford had been murdered! Then he reflected on his base conduct towards Lady Jane, who, to do her justice, he confessed to his soul had never given him any kind of offence, except the day when Birtha Siward was killed ; then, and then only, she had dared to speak what she thought her duty not to conceal; and, con- \i need of her husband's infidelity, in¬ gratitude, and injustice, it was a proper time for an unoffending wife to assume her reason, and acknowledge she was wronged—wronged in every ten¬ der point!—for had Fitzosric been only her husband, (without the sus¬ picion of unfair dealing with his friend Wallingford, her first lord—without g 5
tlie idea that her child had been also destroyed by him,) how could he jus¬ tify his conduct in concealing a female in the house, whom he had dishonoured and preferred to his most injured and unhappy wife, the greatness of whose soul had attempted to soften the mis¬ fortunes of a poor, unfortunate, and afflicted rival. To sustain his charac¬ ter, and conceal all those disagreeable and dangerous proofs that Lady Jane appeared to be possessed of; which, if but whispered, might endanger the world's good opinion of him, he had determined to Sacrifice to his rage, and disappointment of his continued inter¬ course with Birtha, as also that she might toot be able to reveal his con¬ duct, or the ill treatment she received F to any one.
Stiil he bop$d that something would occur to prevent Edric's accu¬ sation and claim taking place ; and he began to think, if the rumour of this affair was spread, he might be ashanied of looking his friends in the face. AU he hoped, was, that the affair might be privately adjusted, without his going to a public prison; for he did not know what the generality of people might think of the business. Old Siward, he knew, was yet alive, and had often reproached him, as much as he dared, with the loss of his daughter Birtha. Sensations never felt till now op¬ pressed the Baron, He,who had so artfully deluded, concealed, and im¬ prisoned others, was now a prisoner g 6
himself, unable to ascertain the extent of his misfortunes. He resolved, if his case should be driven to extremity, ra¬ ther to put a -period to his own exist¬ ence, than suffer by the hands of the public executioner; and therefore re¬ signed himself to fate: but not with¬ out hopes; for he flattered himself that he, being so powerful a Baron, should overwhelm and confound all their accusations, and continue to en¬ joy his vast estates without molestation. While various troublesome thoughts occupied the solitary hours of the Baron, Edric was not idle. He 5 at¬ tended by Laidy Jane and 'a few of his friends, made an examination of every part of the castle. . Lady Jane led him to the apartment where the un-
buried remains of Birtha Siward still called the pitying heart to lament her destiny, and place her unfortunate body in a decent grave. This Edric de¬ clared should be immediate, as he could not bear to have so wretched a spectacle remain in such a horrid state in any part of his possessions- Orders were immediately given for her funeral, which he determined should be performed with every solem¬ nity and respect due to her misfor¬ tunes. Lady Jane gave way to the feelings of her heart by a flood of tears, when]she called to mind Birtha's sufferings, as well as her own un- Merited ill-treatment, from one of the most ungrateful men that ever pressed the earth.
Edric led Lady Jane from a scene that shocked hi$ heart, when he con- sidered that the murdered unfortunate now before him, was the victim of lawless oppression, deceit, and un¬ controlled passion. From Lady Jane's sympathising ^nd affectionate account* he could not find any .thing designing or to blame in Bertha's conduct. She might have remained virtuous and happy, but for the licentious designs- of Fitzosric.. the comfort of her father'^ age, instead of bringing his grey heirs* with sorrow to the grave. The hap¬ less girl that called forth their pitying tear*v bojre an excellent character. Them was no one who could accuse her of fevity <rf conduct, or wishing,- (which too frequently happens), to attract the attention of the pt&er sex,
which is too often the bane of every fe¬ licity, while a false pride and grandeur silences the upbraidings of conscience when they are well provided for. Lux¬ ury, ambition, and ignorance turns many an humble girl's brain, in the vortex of licentious intercourse, till she finds herself neglected, despised, forsaken, and not till then is the idea open to conviction. Birtha was none of those. .she had not a wish to please, unless it was the person destined to be her husband. Religion and duty, with a conscience void of offence, or design¬ ing to offend any one, was her simple character. She knew the Baron was married, and therefore knew he could not act honourably by her—and to her accustomed horror of an illicit con¬ nexion, she deemed it the most cruel
wrong and insult to any woman to accept the regard and' enjoy the love of a married man. Often w r ould she say, both before and after her being betrayed by the BBron,, that she could not-conceive it ever possible for such a soul to know ease, imagining that, however involved in a guilty con¬ nexion, there - must be sometimes a moment of serious reflection, that would en*bitler every enjoyment, if such a one was not wholly lost to every sense of virtue, especially when a vir- tuous, unsuspecting, and affectionate wife was made the dupe of cruel arti¬ fice, and base ingratitude. And she would have preferred the scantiest pit¬ tance of homely fare^ with innocence, to all the rich and pampered luxuries of the great, without its approving
monitor, virtue. The idea of doing to others as she would be done by, was so strongly impressed on Birtha's mind, that, though compelled by the Baron to submit to her sad destiny, she grieved as much for Lady Jane as for herself, knowing how afflicting such a misfor¬ tune would be to her, if she was a wife, and the object of her affections, unmindful of his sacred vows, pre¬ ferred another to herself. Lady Jane related the sketch of Birtha'^ character, and the unfortunate affair that terminated her life, to her son, while he was pensively ruminating on the subject; then leaving the cham¬ ber till the time appointed for the fune¬ ral, they walked lo other parts to make a more particular survey.
Passing along a small gallery, he thought be perceived a man, as if cau¬ tiously wishing to avoid him, glide towards a door, and disappear. Edric recollected who he was; and now at ]ite*^ fl«* after hira and seized him- Tha fellow fell on bis knees overcome wkh terror; for he thought whea ikst h^ saw him, that the injured spirit of Edric had risen to demand veageance for his cruel mutder. It was Oswy I— He begged Edric to spare his life, and he would confess all. Edric, anxious to know the extent of the Baron's w ick- edness, iwrdered Oswy to be secured, happy that he had discovered so pow¬ erful a witness in his behalf. The confession of Oswy was made in the presence of Lady Jane and
Edric with his friends, and was— That the Baron had designed to sacri¬ fice Edric with his own hand, but was prevented by the great resemblance he bore some one of the Baron*friends: that himself and three others were* to have a great reward for securing the person of Edric, which was to be doubled, if they undertook to give bias poison, so that the Baron might be free from an enemy he dreaded. The poison was accordingly administered ; and when" they informed him that Edric had drank plentifully of the wine, he ordered them to throw the dead body intathe river Severn, that, if found, it might carry the appearance of accident (the account of which has already been related by Edric). Oswy was then secured in a proper place till
the time of the Baron's examination took place. Lady Jane now took up her habita¬ tion in the inhabited part of the Castle, and only retired to the haunted cham¬ ber to offer up her prayers, and return thanks to the Almighty for its affording her a shelter to save her from intended destruction. The funeral of Birtha Siward was about the fourth day after Edric> being in the Castle. She was conveyed with every mark of esteem and respect to Shrewsbury; and Ellen and Elgiva being informed of the event, joined the mourning party, and wept the tears of sensibility, grief and pity, over her grave*
A plain white marble protected her remains, and while it bore her name, expressed her melancholy fate; on which the weeping maids of the vil¬ lage where she dwelt, have often shed tears of sorrow and regret, while they prayed to escape a similar misfortune. It encouraged them to continue in the paths of virtue—to shun the glittering allurements of the great—nor lift their thoughts too much higher than their own sphere — as generally ruin and disgrace attends a too easy belief of a lover's vows, especially when fortune places too great a bar, or that the lover is already married—for what but ruin and shame can attend an intercourse with a married man.
CHAPTER XXXI.
On the fifth night of Ellen and her daughter being at Shrewsbury, they were surprised by the arrival of Ro¬ senberg ; for it could scarcely be ex¬ pected that he could be there in so short a time. But his impatience to see his beloved Ellen, and his dear daughter, prevented him from feeling fatigue; and he travelled night and day to behold those dear objects, that he feared were lost to him for ever. His ecstacy at seeing them safe is easier conceived than described. Ellen now engaged his attention by a minute detail of every thing that had happened, since her being unfortu-
nately driven from her house at Elles- mere, till the arrival of Edric, so un- expectedly, to her relief. Elgiva had given her mother an account of her mi¬ raculous meeting with Edric, and the relation be gave of his confinement and intended death ; she had now to repeat it to her father, whose astonishment is not to be imagined. They all passed a very happy even¬ ing ; joyful indeed, in being restored to each other, after so long and painful a reparation. In the morning, Lord Rosenberg, impatient to see his esteemed Edric, made him propose a journey to St. Egbert's Gastle, to congratulate him on the accession to his title and pater¬ nal domain ; as also to pay his respects to Lady Jane, and congratulate her with the acquisition of so truly valuable a young man as was her son Edric.
But first he said he had a little inci¬ dent to relate to Ellen, which, he flat¬ tered himself, would give her unspeak¬ able pleasure, as it would not only be a means of leading her from obscurity, but doubly add to her happiness as well as his own. Lady Rosenberg had been so truly happy in being restored to her hus- band, and the brightening prospects that seemed to smile on Lady Jane and her son, that she did not think she could experience an increase; how¬ ever, she requested Lord Rosenberg to proceed. " My cares," said he, " became so strangely divided, and my time so en¬ gaged, that I could not seek after you according to my wishes. The loss of Edric, my only hope, (as he had as¬ sured me he would exert every effort to discover you,) was such an affliction,
that I sunk almost beneath its weight. About ten days ago I bad information sent me, that Edric was at Waltham Abbey in confinement, for some oflence he had given an officer. I immediately asked leave of absence, and made known my business, for every one was anxious, like myself, to know what was become of Edric the Forester. My request was granted, and J set out for that place, but met with a severe dis¬ appointment when I got there ; the information was true, with regard to * the name : a gentleman named Edric Conway was confined there for the be¬ fore-mentioned offence; I desired to see him, which was granted, for the King had honoured me with an order to see the prisoner. I was rather dis¬ appointed in not seeing our beloved Edric ; but the gentleman's behaviour was so obliging, and explained the nature of his present misfortune wkk such accuracy, that I promised I would VOL. HI, H
lay his case before the King at my re*- turnf and, if possible, obtain his re¬ lease. He thanked me, and I-took my leave. . : - — Returning homeward, my mind, as usual, oppressed with thoughtv even¬ ing advanced, as 1 was about three miles from town, and I saw a person laying in the road apparently lifeless. I alighted from my carriage to see if any accident had befallen the person who clairued my pity and attention. He lay on his face, and a quantity of blood lay round him. As I lifted him Up, good Heaven 1 what were my feel¬ ings, when, at that moment, I beheld (de not be alarmed my Ellen, fot now he is #ell, thank God Q my former friend and patron, niy (ever-esteemed LordJKaby.-He had been attacked by robbers; who had? wounded him ih iheee places^ teavihg H|ihn ! for de&d, Jand; a short tiaicj would h&v# j)Ut ; a pe-
rlod to his existence, if good fortune had not led me to assist him. ic As 1 supported him in my arms, my servants brought water, which seemed to revive him ; we lifted him into the carriage, for I was afraid he wanted better assistance than what was in our power, and there was no advice to be got nearer than London* " Having doneoitr best endeavours to bind up his wounds, I ordered the driver to proceed as fast as possible home: we were not long before^we reached my house, where I ordered him to be put into my bed, and went myself for tlie most skilful surgeons to attend him, " When they arrived, they fare me very flattering hopes; I and «the next day had the satisfoetion of hearing him speak. He l^new me; but I w«te Mraid n2
of mentioning any thing about you, lest it might make him uneasy, and prevent his recovery. *' The day after, he conversed freely, thanked me fot my care and timely as¬ sistance, with great fervor, but still avoided mentioning you. I thought it was occasioned by a continued resent¬ ment on his side, and for some time forbore speaking of you. But when I considered we were happy in the sta¬ tion in which it had pleased Heaven to place us; that we wanted nothing ; I thought it very wrong not to speak of you. " I asked him if he knew how his daughter was ? he shook his head:— < Alas! Edgar,' said he, * blinded by ambition, and unmindful of her happi¬ ness, I insisted she should marry a fo¬ reign BftMeman; and about ten days after I drove you feonnny house, the
marriagre was to be celebrated. The evening preceding which, Ellen ab¬ sconded, no one knew how, or where she went to, (but every one believes she took refuge in a convent abroad); 1 sent every where in search of her, and all possible inquiries were made, but without effect. I have been confirmed in this idea by all my friends; because no person that 1 know, either relations or acquaintances, have seen her; and it is something singular, if she lives, and is not in a convent, that she has never been to see any one that belonged to her.' cv ' Poor Ellen,' said I, ' she has suffered much trouble and anxiety since you saw her last, I dare believe.' " i And mine,' replied Lord Raby, ' can equal her's, Ah! Edgar, I was much to blame in preventing her mar¬ riage with you, when you enjoyed her
affections. I have often wished it was in my power to make you both happy, Forgive me, Edgar—were it possibly to recall,past events, there is not a being on earth I would sooner bestow her on than yourself; 1 am very sorry, but have given up the hope of ever seeing my Ellen again.* " He sighed. .1 said, < My Lord, did you ever hear of the honours I have received? I have held the situation I enjoy about three years. .1 could have been superlatively happy, if your fair daughter had enjoyed it with me.' " < Yes; replied Lord Raby, < I heard that one of the name of JRosen-* berg was highly favoured. 1 came to London to convince myself whether it was my once favourite Edgar. I asked after his wife—for something struck j»e, that as I had never heard from you any more than from Ellen, you mights
have been married for aught 1 knew, and gone together abroad. But I was informed, you were married to the daughter of a very poor man, and that your wife still attended her father's declining years ; therefore I was cer¬ tain it could not be my Ellen. " * I haveoftendesigned to speakwitli you; but as soon as the recollection came into my mind, that the error of ambition had made me deprive myself of my daughter, and the pleasure 1 once took in your company; and. thinking it w r ould only cause me fresh grief of heart to repeat events that hap¬ pened so many years ago, I forbore coming to you ; though, when the king, honoured jou with a title, I would fain have congratulated you on the acqui¬ sition, as I sincerely believed you was worthy of it. Add to that, you will find by roy will, which I made several years back, that I did not forget you;« h4
for I have adopted you my heir, if Ellen does not return, and that I begin to despair of; and the title of Raby I have designed shall descend tc you. " I dropped on my knees, and re¬ turned him sincere thanks. My heart was full., Lord Raby could scarce re¬ frain tears. I asked if he would be happy to see Ellen, and forgive her. * Willingly!' he exclaimed; ' But, alas ! I fear she is lost for ever!' My tears rushed to ray eyes; for I sincerely believed you were lost, indeed, for ever I " I then related to him the whole of our history, and of our melancholy separation, assuring him that you had not been heard of since the battie of Shrewsbury; that no expense nor trouble had been spared to discover where you was secreted; and of the miserv I endured till chance should
favour me with the knowledge of your retreat. " Lord Raby at first expressed hi* entire approbation of our condnct, and seemed delighted at our happiness, and that of my son and daughter, for so I styled our Edric ; but the joy he experienced was soon checked, when he learnt your mysterious loss, and our inability to find you; and was much astonished that Edric was also missing. " He declared, that as soon as his health was restored, he would search the mystery out; and suggested the idea that it was some private enemy who had acted thus, to distress and * wound my feelings; or why was Edric also absent at this important period. He was sensible that nothing but a grievous misfortune would have pre¬ vailed oil Edric's being absent from H&
the army* He thought it was a com¬ mon cause, and ought minutely to be examined and attended to. " 1 told him my businessthat day at Waltham Abbey, when I was so for¬ tunate to meet with him, though in such a situation, was on suspicion that Edric was detained there; but was disappointed. However, I determined tp lay the young Edric Conway's case before the King, and I did not doubt of having him released ; whictv agree¬ ably to my promise, I sent by a mes¬ senger ; and Edric Conway paid me iis respects in person the following day. " Lord Raby soon recovered, and grew quite hearty, all but his anxiety to find you and Elgiva, whom I repre¬ sented about the same age as wh§n you left Raby Qjastle, 1 al§o mentioned < JjSlgiwty .rtta^nent to Edric, which
seemed to give him great satisfaction ; for he declared, he had always held, the amiable Edric in the highest esti¬ mation, though he never imagined under wliose care he had beenv reared.. " The day previous to that in which- he proposed to leave me, the welcome messenger arrived with information that you were found, and orders for me to repair to Shrewsbury, to hear further particulars. I shewed Lord Raby the happy command, and had only time to give an account of my absence for about ten days, and set out post, travelling night and day till I had the happiness of seeing you. Lord Raby said he should follow im¬ mediately, as he was anxious to see you. Being only just recovered, I begged he would take the usual rest by*the way, that he might not endan¬ ger his health. And now, my dearest u6
Ellen, you may soon expect to behold Wir father." Ellen wept several times during Lord Rosenberg's relation, and ex¬ pressed her happiness in the expecta¬ tion of seeing and being forgiven by her father, whose severity and am¬ bition bad Compelled her to forsake his protection, which at times had caused her great uneasiness. The day was passed happily—Sir Bernard and Lady Melbourne strove who should excel in kind attention to their guests. Late in the evening Lord Raby arrived, and was received with open arms and unfeigned affec¬ tion by his long-lost daughter. Tears of joy precluded words on all sides. Lord Raby assured Ellen of his entire forgiveness, and the happiness he en¬ joyed in once more beholding his ami¬ able and beloved child.
Lady Rosenberg then presented Elgiva to her father; he was surprised at the sight of her,.to think he had such a relation..so much like his daughter at the time of her leaving: him, and regretted not having known it before, that he might have had a share in forming her education to that situation in life ha hoped to see her enjoy. The happy party then partook of supper, and soon after retired to rest,, proposing to pay a visit to Lady Jane and Edric at St. Egbert's Castle early in the morning.
CHAPTER XXXIL
The cheerful sun rose supremely grand,, and. invited the happy Lord 5 " Raby to escort his long-lost daughter/ and her affectionate husband and child, to St. Egbert's Castta. Sir Bernard and Lady Melbourne were of the party, anxious to behold Lady Jane, who was declared the mother of Edric* They set out in different carriages,. attended by a party of friends, de¬ lighted that such a pleasing oppor¬ tunity offered as the congratulation of Edric to estates and title, when once all his estate was his sword. Brought up as a forester, he had no other title: - now fortune had blessed him witli
lK)th; and what was far more de¬ sirable, he knew to whom he owed his being, which was a happiness he nevei? dreamt of enjoying. They arrived safe at St. Egbert's Castle, where they were welcomed by its excellent inhabitants with every demonstration of joy,, after the several parties were introduced to each other. Edrie, whose joy at seeing his friend and Lord Raby so happily agreeable* as also wishing to explain the cause of his long absence, took a hand of each and led them to the drawing room> leaving Lady Jane to conduct the ladies and Sir Bernard* A most happy day ensued of mu¬ tual explanations; till. Edric intro¬ duced the subject of Fitzosric's vil¬ lany, and wished to take the advice of all his friends how to proceed in such an affair. " For myself," said he, " the
last attempt, I pardon him most hear¬ tily; for though he proposed to take my life, Divine Justice would not permit it; and my seizure and captivity was^ decreed by the unerring hand of Pro¬ vidence, to explain to irie the mystery of my birth—to restore me to my rights —and to succour Elgiva, Lady Rosen¬ berg, and my amiable mother, " Lady Rosenberg and her daugh¬ ter are safe ; but Jiow can I pardon the treacherous murder of my father?— the intended destruction of myself when a child—the misery and distract tion it caused Lady Jane for my sup¬ posed loss—his infamous treatment of her in various instances—and, last of nil* designing her death; which no¬ thing but a miracle could prevent-— nay, he believed her dead, and saw her b buried. If I pass over the murder of Birtha Siward, and treat it as an acci¬ dent, as it really was—4mt the instru-
ment which gave her death was aimed against his unoffending wife. The hapless young creature seeing his in¬ tention, and wishing to save her bene¬ factress, rushed to prevent the blow, and received the fatal point in her bosom. The cruel Fitzosric, still in¬ spired by revenge, could not rest till he had executed his horrid designs on the unhappy Lady Jane. Pity touched the heart of the man he fixed on to assist him, and he saved her. To him I am indebted for the blessing of the present moment! at leisure, I shall more minutely explain every thing; but at present, I wish to know how you think it will be best to act. Mercy is undoubtedly due in some instances, but the murderer ought not to escape; it is wronging justice to pass lightly over such enormities." Lord Raby. as being more advanced
in years,, first offered bis opinion. Ho* assured Edric, that unless the Baron. was brought to justice, and received the reward of his crimes, he would bo g;uijfj of violating the mo&t sacred Jaws,, for suffering a person guilty of such enormities, as he perceived the Baron was, ta go un punished. It would be; giving authority to the most atrocious acts, a,nd enable him to com¬ mit fresh crimes - y as Edric might be certain, he who could* kill the father,. who was bis friend—design to destroy the son through avarice-—murder his, wife because she was acquainted with his infamy, was a person never to bo nelied.on* For if there was a possibi¬ lity of. pardoning him, his private. malice, after being compelled to restore bis illrgptten possessions—ihe re-ap¬ pearance of Lady Jane—-the restora¬ tion of Edric—the exposure of his villanous character—he would &eek.
an opportunity of revenging himself on the innocent causes of his disgrace* and they could not rest in safety. Such also was the opinion of Lord Rosenberg, Sir Bernard Melbourne, and his friends ; observing, that, the in* jurer seldom forgives the injured, and never thanked him for his lenity; but on the contrary, embrace every op-» portunity of wounding the peaqe and happiness, of those whom they have wronged. " Let the officers of justice be sent for," said Sir Bernard Mel¬ bourne, "and deliver him over to be acquitted or condemned by the laws of his country." Immediately a party was despatched to Shrewsbury prison, to order some of the officers to attend, and take him into custody. Edric said he did not wish ta triumph over the feelings of a fallen eneaiy—though the Baron had, nao^
insultingly and unmanly treated him, when brought into his presence by the miscreants tbftt were hired to assas¬ sinate him; but he thought it would be necessary to let him know, that Ellen and Elgiva were restored to their friends. Ethelwald was now introduced to the company as the person who had formerly saved the life of Edric, when the Baron meditated to destroy him in his eiildhood; as also that he ex¬ plained to Lady Jane whp was the murderer of Lord Wallingford—and the more immediate preserver and pro¬ tector of herself for so many years, as she had been indebted to him for his care and secrecy. Ethelwald received the thanks of aM parties, and then repeated the par¬ ticulars of what has been before re¬ lated. He was desired to remain with
the party present, as they all esteemed him a friend. It was near seven o'clock when the carriage and officers arrived from Shrewsbury, They were conducted to the place where the Baron was con¬ fined ; where, having secured his per¬ son, they led him to the drawing room, where the first people who met his eyes, were Ellen and Elgiva. He started at the sight! for he could not imagine how it was possible for Ellen to make her escape from the place wherein he had confined her.' Next Lady Jane, the afflicted long-suffering aud much-wronged wife: he looked on her, while sentiments of a tender na¬ ture swelled his heart; for once ixll his hopes of ambition and love were sum¬ med up in the idea of obtaining her; and he mentally thought how he could have been capable of wronging such excellence. Lords Raby and: Rosen-*
berg he had some knowledge of, and Was astonished to, find, that Ellen vt v as the wife of the latter. But when he saw Ethelwald, he began to think he was betrayed by him*; mfcfe especially that to him he owcld his present mis¬ fortunes; and when he called to mind that Edrie, when an infant, was left to his care. He now found himself de¬ ceived, in supposing the heir of Wal- Kngford was dead; and the most bitter revenge swelled his breast, and had he the* power* he would have reeked his vengeance on Ethelwald, for daring to gfc against his drcters; To him also th£ ftfneral of Lady -Jane was com* mitted ; and although* he had beew an eye witness to Hhe f interment and helped to elesfe the gravse* he found he h&i been again deceived^* ^Bdl& forbore ^ tnettttetl any thing to *give birn offence, 6f make hihtttn- ertsys lie ccfuld only thank Heavcfo fc*
Restoring L^dy Jane and all he held dear. But the Baron, as he was g*oin^ to be led from the drawing Toom, re¬ quested to speak a few words with Ethelwald* He advanced to meet him, and Fitzosric, snatching a fcword from the side of Ldrd Raby, attempted to plunge it into the bosom of Ethel¬ wald, exclaiming, "Die! thou dis* sembling traitor—take the reward of thy villanous services from the hand of thy employer i" The sword pierced Ethelwalds arm; and the Baron was more strongly secured, before he could be guilty of further mischief. He was hurried to the carriage, while every one was busily employed in giving every assistance to Ethelwald his case required. The wmmd was trifling; l but they wleri afl greatly alarmed atUhe Vindictive spirit ! of the BaroA. *- '»■ , ^ > *,: , •? *, : Edric ntow 1 bcolfoct^d l d^w|, aiVd
had him also escorted to Shrewsbury, desiring he might be kept apart from the Ba,ron, as it was njecessary to have his evidence on the day of trial; and Edric believed him to be too danger¬ ous a character to suffer him to remain / in the C^tle, or put any confidence in a wretch who could be purchased by money to execute the most atrocious deeds. Lucius and his other accom¬ plices were no where to be found ; but it was generally supposed they were on the search after Ellen and Elgiva. They were conveyed to Shrewsbury, and safely lodged in the Castle. Tranquillity being again restored, (for they were all extremely confused at Ejhelwild's accident,) Edric en¬ treated Lord Raby, with I-ord and Lady Rosenberg and their dear daugh¬ ter, to make the Castle their home, till he was established in tlie full pos¬ session of his rights. He also begged
they would no longer delay his happi" ness; but grant him the hand of his Elgiva, whose heart he flattered him¬ self he had long enjoyed, as he could assure them she most fully possessed his. And as now he had a place to call his own, he should know no greater felicity than to make his dear Elgiva mistress of it. A nd as she had been the companion of his humble for* tune, so also he trusted she would share his prosperity ; as he was in¬ debted to her for the mysterious dis- covery of his amiable mother, and the good fortune that awaited him. Lord Raby said he thought he had a right to have some share in the dis¬ posal of his grand-daughter; and he should bestow on her a very ample fortune, to make her a suitable alliance to the man of her heart. Elgiva thanked him p:;ofus«iy; but voi,. in. i
as she seemed to hesitate, Edric said, " My beloved Elgiva, I hope you do *iot repent of your promise ?" " Never, my Edric," she replied ; " I thought you knew my heart too well to harbour such a doubt." " Well then," said Edric, « let us fix this day week, while we are hap¬ pily surrounded by our friends. Will that be time enough for preparation ? For I mean to make it a day of joy to all my tenants and domestics—to ce¬ lebrate not only our marriage, but my being restored to my paternal domain, and the comforts that surround me." All parties seemed happy at the proposal; and Elgiva said she had not a wish in opposition. Lady Jane pressed the amiable girl to her heart with the most lively transports,^alling her her dear danghfer. f
A few days passed over, making the necessary preparations for the ap¬ proaching festival; during which time Lady Jane and Edric, with their friends, went round to see their dif¬ ferent tenants, and to present the Earl of Wallingford as their present Lord. Great was the satisfaction of every one, to behold once more Lady Jane, who had been supposed dead so many years; and in Edric they imagined they be* held their late Lord—so much he re¬ sembled him. They testify their joy at this unlooked*for restoration^ and the removal of the tyrannous Fitzosric with most lively joy. Bon¬ fires illumined the adjacent villages, where his tenants resided ; and mirth and dancing exhilarated the spirits of all Old Siward was still alive. He was amazed to behold Lady Jane Fitzosric ; yet, anxious to learn the real i2
froth of Ms Birtha's unhappy fate, begged m few moments' private con* versatkm with itibat lady. Having been informed that Birtha had been buried within the last week at Shrewsbury, he thought she had imi just died, and, in his own heart, had execrated.her cruelly unkmd conduct, in keeping her¬ self so long secret {mm him, and living in an iafawnis connexion with a mar¬ ried man, for the isake of his riches. Lady Jane was sorry to *»nd Siward entertained such an ill opinion of his daughters filial duty; and, to clear lier from the imputation, was com¬ pelled to recite the whole of that sin¬ gular affair; though, in vindicating Birtha's conduct, .she was compelled to increase the unhappy Siward's grief, when she assured him that Birtha was unfortunately Wiled, endeavouring to MWP IMy £&» e {tom * threatened ij^tfe w *e w day if was given out that the latter 4ied.
weeping oH Sivvar^, clasping hit hands, "my child has suffered; but she was not,.. *.. .. her conduct was not abandoned—she lost no^ the native innocence and virtue of her mind, which was my pride, though a poor man. Spirit of my dea* girl, hover to hear me moufn thy untimely >:fkt& 9 and s forgive Ihe many unkind thoughts I have entertained of you during this lapse of tvme; when I considered you were living m a state of infamy, wrong- ing in the keenest sense tile feelings of an abused wife, and forgetful of every sacred tie^ and your poor father^—and with your gay seducer triumphing in wickedness^ when, aks! poor unfep- tunate! you were numbered with* tlte dead, and undeserving my reproaches. I thauk you* worthy Lady; you hctve eased my mind by relating the twtfr; 1 shall now die contented. The Baron, 1 hear, is likely to* suffer for strange ■t-3. '.''■
crimes ; one of the greatest is his con¬ duct to you—the heinous sin of ruining your happiness, by bringing another woman to live under your roof, and insult your feelings by the loss of a husband's love, the keenest affliction and insult that a virtuous wife can feel. But my Bktha never intentionally wronged you; she did not submit to the Baron from choice, but was com¬ pelled to resign herself to his power. However, your wrongs are redressed; the Almighty has avenged them. I return you roy sincere thanks, dear Lady, and to your excellent son, for your attention to the remains of my hapless girl; and if I live till to¬ morrow, I will go to Shrewsbury, and enjoy the heartfelt though mournful satisfaction of weeping over the tomb your humanity has raised to her memory." He then turned aside> unable to
suppress the effusion of grief that was ready to burst his aching heart. Lady Jane requested he would call on her at St. Egberts Castle, as it was her wish to make the remainder of his life as comfortable as was in her power; though neither herself nor Siward could be supposed to forget the mis¬ fortunes under which they had la¬ boured. Siward profusely thanked her, and she returned to her party, who soon after repaired to the Castle. In the evening, when they were all seated iu social conversation, Lady Jane said, " You have heard of the haunted chamber, and in fact know something of its mysteries, by its being the place that afforded me a safe retreat when every other was denied, I have now to explain it more fully, in order that so valuable and beautiful i 4
a part of St Egbert's Castle is no lon¬ ger under the dominion of that stupid superstition, that has so long prevented rne from having any communication with any one in the Castle except Ethelwald. " In the reign of Alfred the Great, the yea* 877, a Danish nobleman of great rank was taken prisoner, and brought to the Castle of St. Egbert, where he was confined for some time, though treated with great hospitality by my ancestor Lord Sefrid. He had such an esteem for the Dane, that under favour of the night he suffered the stranger to escape, but yet perse¬ vered in the assertion that he was still imprisoned in the north chambers, and would not suffer any one to attend him but himself. ** After a supposed confinement of several vears, and Edward the Elder
^oming^tothe^ throne, it was rumoured" that the Danes had concerted apian to invade England. Incensed at their proceedings, Edward* ordered all the Danish prisoners to be destroyed, and Lord Sefrid, finding it impossible any* longer to seem to protect his friend 1 (whom he had long before suffered* tor return home), took upon himself the king's order for the Dane to be killed. This was the cause that gave rise to* the murder of the Danish* Lord; the papers of which account have never yet fell into Fitzosric's hands, but have been studiously concealed, to preserve the mystery of the haunted chamber, u To deceive Edward the more effectually, who was much inclined to superstition, yet apprehensive of being deceived, Lord Sefrid declared, that since the death of the noble Dane, the chambers wherein he was confined, and the galery leading to them, were i 5
continually haunted by his restless spirit. " Edward was determined to know the truth of it, and sent a nobleman on whom he could depend to examine and more particularly inquire into the affair* On this occasion Lord Sefrid was obliged to dress up a trusty ser¬ vant, in a Danish habit, such as the prisoner used to wear, to walk about the Castle, personating the Dane as if he haunted it:—and this, according to my paper, seems to be the origin of the mystery of the haunted chamber. " After Lord Sefrid's death, his son Arnulph,for particular reasons, thought it necessary to keep up the delusion. 1 have often, in company with my dear departed Wallingford, read the cause of the mystery of the north chambers. But we have lost ourselves in conjec¬ turing why, after that time, St. Eg-
bert's Castle was reported to be haunted, and was amazed at the su¬ perstition of his ancestors, who could so foolishly resign the best part of the Castle with its valuable effects, in sup¬ port of such a credulous idea; but as the clergy had ordered it to be shut up, we submitted to it. " Years have passed away, and the mystery of this affair has not been elu¬ cidated, till I was made an inhabitant of that place by the care of Ethelwald, knowing that no one would think of seeking me there ; and for the sake of preserving my life, had ventured to examine these forbidden apartments, unmindful of the prohibition, in order to obtain a place of safety, for which I sincerely thank him, " When first he told me that I was in the north chambers, I could scaroe credit my senses; for I was astonished . i 6
to know, htw he eould have entered them, as I myself did not know where the l£f*ys were deposited. He inquired if I had rested in safety during my stay, as the room I slept in, and the bed whereon I lay, was that where the Danish Lord was supposed to be mur¬ dered. *' I assured him that I had never rested in more perfect quiet, and that I did not believe a word of the idea that credulous persons imbibed of those chambers being haunted, and was sorry that such a beautiful part of the Castle should have been so long ne¬ glected ; but was happy to find it so, as'my very life depended on the super¬ stitious belief. I remembered the paper, which since the death of Lord Wallingford I had always kept in my pocket-book, I knew not for why, any more than as the Baron Fitzosric had behaved so ill to me, and finding him
inclining to the belief, resolved ta let it remain so, that in possessing the estates of Lord Wallingford, his happi¬ ness, and, as I sometimes fancied, his ambitious designs, might not be com¬ plete. " Ethelwald informed me, that after having received orders from the* Baron to give me poison, and declare my death, his mind underwent suchs extreme uneasiness,, and he was an hundred times about to relinquish the cruel command;. but, fearing some. one less scrupulous might be engaged. by the Barcn, he thought it best to ua*^ dertake it, with the hopes of saving me; for Fitzosric's crimes had excited, his abhorrence. " For this reason he made the at¬ tempt to open the north chambers, and in so doing, a small door opened on the side % a spring, which admitted
his entrance into a noble suite of rooms: firsrminntely examining how the door opened, and being satisfied therein, he went to explore the chambers that had always occasioned such alarm to* the inhabitants of the Castle. Ethel¬ wald, in his private thoughts, had never yielded to the superstitious re¬ port of the Danish spectre. Yet, anxious to preserve my life, and kuow- ing no place so securely to conceal me, he had ventured to examine that place in the short interval, and endeavoured to prepare every thing ready for my reception, for which I am highly in¬ debted to him." Lady Jane had been an inhabitant of the north chambers about eight months, and in some measure resigned to her fate, when, for amusement, she one day looked over the contents of a handsome cabinet, and, to her surprise,, found the following paper, supposed ta be written by Ethelfrida:—
" MANUSCRIPT. " The mystery of the haunted chambers was only known to Lord Sefrid, the Noble Bane, Lord Arnulph, and myself, at the time when I took up my residence in that part of St. Egbert's Castle. " The writer's name is Ethelfrida, sister to King Edward, I entertained the most un¬ bounded affection for Lord Arnulph, and as he was a nobleman of great worth, I flattered myself that my brother would behold him with the favourable eyes I did, and consent to our union. I had a mortifying denial to my request, and a command never to think of or mention his name again. " I found it impossible to forget Lord Arnulph, though I fortunately made the King imagine that I had conquered what he fan¬ cied an ill-placed affection, and widiin the course of a few months he affianced me to a foreign prince. My heart revolted at the mere imagination of leaving my beloved Arnulph, the idol of my heart. But I was- compelled to be the wife of a stranger, and bitterly I lamented the separation. M Lord Arnulph suffered as much dis¬ tress as I had done, in being obliged to quit my native land, and he determined to prevent it if there was a possibility. Upon inquiry, he
found that the captain of the vessel in which* I was to embark with a fawurite attendant, was a particular friend of his. fhe captain had » desire to serve him, bat disdained the thought of any reward, and proposed for Arnulph to go to a place whei* he appointed,. and take a boat a* if by accident, where he would endeavour to run the s&ip aground, so that in the confusion I and my attendant might fee missing, and no one know but that we were lost. ft Lord Arnulph attended at the place he had appointed, with * large boat: but as I inew nothing of the plan I embarked with my attendant, Christiana,, and with a heavy hearfc and weeping eyes bade adieu to Eng¬ land, and, as I thought, all I held dear. The weather was Yery unfavourable, for the wind blew a heavy gale, and in a few hours in* creased to ft storm; I clung to Christiana with unusual terror*—the sea ran, what the sailors termed, mountains high; and indeed the aspect of the angry waves almost overcame me with terser, and we were in great distress; more especially as the Captain strove all in his power to make to a particular spot. At that moment, & wave threw us upon a- sand-hank, and there we lay beating fell the ship was m
danger of going to pieces. The captain was st-Wible of the danger, and, looking round, observed a boat making towards us. With the nope of being saved, he advised me to jump overboard, and trust to the mercy of the waves to save me. I hesitated, but he whispered, that Lord Arnulph was in the boat which he saw at a short distance, coming to save me, I gazed at the captain with wild astonishment, and scarce crediting my hear¬ ing—looked round, and plainly discovered Arnulph in a boat, making towards us, with four rowers. I communicated the captain's intelligence and my observation to Christiana, and entreated her to venture with me. She looked at the boat the captain pointed out, and with joy beheld Lord Arnulph. The storm increased...we no longer hesi¬ tated ; for the captain told us, to risque the waves, was the only way to save our lives; for if we remained with the vessel, it would soon go to pieces. I remembered to whom I was going...more hateful than death itself; and rather than be torn from Arnulph, to be another's, I would prefer to combat the tur¬ bulent waves; therefore, casting a smile of thanks on the captain, and taking Christiana's hand we resolutely leaped overboard...and*
with the mercy of Heaven, were picked up in safety by Lord Aruuiph, and happily con¬ veyed to the shore. " The vessel soon after cleared itself of the sand (as.I was informed by Arnulph &ome time after our preservation) with very trifling damage, and my loss and Christiana's were con¬ sidered to have been washed overboard, as wo could not bti prevailed on to leave the deck. " Wrapped up in the disguise of pilgrims, we proceeded the way Lord Arnulph directed lu St. Egbert's Castle, as he lei't us to pre¬ pare a reception, as well as to avoid suspicion. He fixed my residence in that suite of apart¬ ments where the Danish Lord was supposed tu be murdered by the command of my brother Edward ; at the same time assuring me I had nothing to apprehend. As soon as we reached St. Egbert's Castle, 1 was conveyed with my faithful Christiana, where a priest waited and United me to Lord Arnulph. " I iiad as many attendants as T could wish for, in that part of the Castle, which had. every convenience, as it were for a s( parate family, who had no communication with the other part, except Lord Arnulph, who was the only person who ever entered the north gallery.
^ The idea of the murder of the Danish Lord, so powerfully possessed the minds of all the domestics, that Arnulph found it a diffi¬ culty to appease their apprehensions. And to preserve my retreat a secret from his own jwople, as well a& my brother, he gave way to their idle fears, and allowed them to yield to llie superstitious idea, that the Castle was haunted. •« Here I was brought to bed of a daugh¬ ter, named Haroidina. She was nursed with the tenderest care till iifteen months old, when she was taken from the Castle, to be restored to it as a foundling, that her father might be able to bring her up in a manner suitable to her rank, as likewise that she should have air and exercise, which could not be so conveni¬ ently given her, in my retired situation. And now it was that Arnulph, hearing the servants continually complain of the north chambers and gallery being haunted, suffered himself to be prevailed on to have the supposed spirit of the Dane laid ; in the north chambers the ceremony passed; tlie door was accordingly secured, and the keys put out of the way. "In this manner I have lived eighteen years. Haroidina is married to Lord WaU ffaford. My brother Edward ib IuhuH ex*
pected to leave this world. I have several times seen Haroidina, but at present she is unacquainted that I am her mother, or that Lord Arnulph is her father, I have been extremely happy during my marriage, and shall soon have the pleasure of visiting Haroi¬ dina, and letting her know the reason of this mysterious concealment, " I have two motives for writing this nar¬ rative—the first to do away with every super¬ stitious idea, respecting the supposed spectre of the Dane, and to elucidate the history of the haunted chamber, if any one should ven¬ ture to develope it; for it is a pity so noble a part of the Ca»tle should be the victim of superstition—secondly, to let the reader know that Lady Haroidina Wallingford is nobly born, the daughter of Ethelfrida (sister to King Edward) and Lord Arnulph, sole heiress of this Castle and estate, so that no person need doubt the legality of her claim and birth. " And may the person who enters this place, either by a wish to discover the mystery of it, or through misfortune compelled to seek an asylum here...may they find that the ru¬ mour of the chambers 1 being haunted is all a faV.e to delude the credulous—and may the -
find that happiness while here, which I have experienced so many years I " Ethelfrida " Thus was the mystery of the haunted chamber unexpectedly revealed* to the great satisfaction of all present; and the north gal¬ lery was in a short time no longer the dreadful place which many had imagined it to be; and Edric Lord Wallingford found that he was descended from the sister of King Edward the Elder. In a few days the marriage between Edric and Elgiva took place, and was celebrated with that magnificence which was the custom of ancient times, Joy was in every face, and every one of his tenants strove to vie with each other in expressing their affection and grati¬ tude to the rightful Lord, in whose family the estate had been many years, till wrested from him by the treacherous conduct of Fitzosric. Fitzosric, while in prison, bribed one of the keepers to let him know how affairs were going on at the Castle of St Egbert; finding by the report that Edric was married to Elgiva, and Ellen restored to her husband, as also that
every body allowed the justness of EdricV claim. He also knew that every body was acquainted with his own base conduct, and dreaded the event of tlie trial in a court of justice; for Ethelwald was a powerful witness against him, as he knew almost all his secrets; and if there was a possibility of escaping from prison, he could never shew his face. To put an end to these tormenting thoughts, lie deter¬ mined to take the poison he formerly in¬ tended, happy to find he had it yet in hk power to avoid, what he judged would await him, an ignominious death. Tired with the weight of guilt which bur¬ dened his soul, he took the earliest opportu¬ nity of drinking an oblivion to all his cares. No sooner had he swallowed it, but it pleased God to touch his heart, and lie sin¬ cerely repented of all his crimes. He wrote a most affecting letter to Lady Jane, in which he implored her forgiveness of the many wrongs he had been guilty of to her, and be¬ queathed her all his estates, which were very Considerable. He confessed that all which had transpired was strictly true, and that Ethei'- wald's word might be relied on. After having concluded his letter, he felt death approaching, and passed the few re-
maiuing minutes of his existence in praj'ers to Heaven, imploring mercy for his sins, and died a true penitent:—and though his sins "were great and many, let us hope he was for¬ given.* His untimely end cast a gloom over St. Egbert's Castle for a sliort time; for whatever might have been his own feelings, there was no one in the Castle but from the first moment of knowing any thing of him, had found him an obdurate, unprincipled tyrant, truly despo¬ tic m every action of his life, of which the reader may be able to judge Tfom his conduct to all the parties concerned in this history. They united their prayers to Heaven, that as he had expiated his faults witli his life, he might obtain pardon in the world to come. Happiness was soon restored to the Castle. Lady Jaue chose to reside with her son and daughter, and iutrcated to be indulged uith the north chambers while she remained with them. The estates of the Baron Tit/osric were al&o used in common between them. Lord Rosenberg purchased a noble seat near St. Egbert's Castle, to which a few years after he retired, as soon as the King could fix on a person to his choice to supply his place; for Lord Itosenberg did not like the busy scenes
of life, having always been used to retirement and his beloved Ellen. His removal to Lon¬ don had caused him much unhappiness, in bebg separated from her. Lord Kaby also came to reside near them, and lived to a great age iu the loved company of those so dear to him. Lady Rosenberg soon after had a son, who was named Edgar, after his father, and lived to be a person highly honoured. Elgiva had a numerous family, the de¬ light of their parents, and joy of the country round. Lady Jane found in the society of her long absent friend Ellen, and that of her daughter, as much felicity as could fall to the share of a reasonable being, which helped in a measure to chase away a retrospection of the calamities of her earlier years; and their friendship and happiness continued till the end of their existence. Edric, Earl of Wallingford, amply re¬ warded Ethelwald for his past kindnesses, and they lived in the strictest friendship, for to him Edric considered himself indebted, not only for life, but fortune, and every com¬ fort he now enjoyed. FINM. JPrint&by P»,& SU&RY ( Mtrwick Street, Soho, L<mdon>
