Eleanor: or, The spectre of St. Michael's: a romantic tale
o+t*.Tr+rrkr*-++++*t+r**t
CHAPTER I.
u Can falsehood lurk beneath so Fair u countenance r"
" Deceit and woman are the same, 'Tis said j but suie they are to blame To speak with such temerity; Ye fairest flowerets of the earth, To modesty the next in worth Is feminine sincerity." ON retiring from lord Arthur, Eleanor found herself so extremely agitated, that, she repaired to her own room, in order to compose herself before she appeared in the presence of lady Glendinning, who, she knew, was expecting her again in the vol. ir. b
drawing-room. As it was her ladyship who had informed her of lord Arthur's wish to see her, she lamented that her ladyship should happen to be at home on this eventful evening—a circumstance which hardly ever occurred. As she was aware she must be surprised at the strange conduct of lord Arthur, she dreaded to meet her penetrating gaze; yet it was unavoidable, and the lateness of the hour reminded her that she must join her. She adjusted her hair in the glass, which had strayed in waving curls down her cheeks in sweet disorder, occasioned by the pearly gems which had diffused their moisture over her face; and pressing her hand to her heart, she forced a smile into her countenance, and then with secret dread she entered the drawing-room, where sat lady Glendinning and her daughter. •" Well, Eleanor," cried the latter, "what lias my father had to say to you so long ? Mamma and I thought you were certainly retired for the night." " I could not have been guilty of such
ELEANOR. 3 rudeness as that," replied Eleanor, " par¬ ticularly as I knew lady Glendinning ex¬ pected my return to this room." " I must confess, Eleanor," said her ladyship, " that I began to think it some¬ what strange, though the conduct of lord Arthur is always mysterious, and nothing from him should excite my surprise; but I should hope, Eleanor, that no particular circumstance has occurred to disturb your peace. Your eyes evidently betray that you have been weeping. Wherefore then is the cause of this grief? Tell me can¬ didly, can I relieve it? Believe me, Eleanor, I feel for the unpleasant situa¬ tion in which you are plunged in this family, which is partly owing to the folly of lord Arthur, who, while he professes himself to be your friend, is the greatest cause of all your uneasiness " " Your ladyship surprises me," replied Eleanor. " To what can you allude in the conduct of lord Arthur, who has ever treated me with the greatest kindness?" R 2
« My meaning is this," replied lady Glendinning. K From the first moment of your unfortunate mother committing yo,u to my care^ I was touched with com¬ passion for your helpless state; and al¬ though I was torn with contending pas¬ sions, ye*t I resolved to protect you, to i:eav you with my own offspring, and to permit you to share in every advantage * with them. How well 1 have fulfilled the trust reposed in me, your own heart will tell you; but when I undertake a charge, I will scrupulously perform it; and had I been permitted to use my own discretion, all might have been well; but here, began tbe folly of lord Arthur, to which, I allude. He stepped in be¬ tween my privileges with you. For you, Eleanor, I have been neglected. You have been the sole object of his delight, while I am scorned and despised," > * Oh, .madam;' replied Eleanor* <c how does your just accusation wound, me! Yet, Heaven k my witness* that I am innocent of the cause of your complaint."
« I do not mean it as complaint," inter¬ rupted her ladyship. " You ought to know me better. I am above complaint; that is a weakness only to be found in those unblessed with fortitude or resigna¬ tion. Let fools weep, sigh, and lament in vain. I know a nobler method than complaint, and which I have adopted. True misery never vents her feelings, but in silence mourns her fate. It was not for the poor gratification of complaint that I made those observations to you; but re¬ verting to my first subject, it was to shew you, that the interest wliich I should take in your welfare is greatly allayed by the interposition of lord Arthur, who, by paying no regard to my feelings, prevents my bestowing on you that notice which I otherwise should. Yet, in the present instance, when I see you so evidently agi¬ tated, and lord Arthur in the same situa¬ tion, I think it but my duty to inquire the cause; and now, Eleanor, 1 leave it to your own heart to judge how far you ought to put confidence in me."
Eleanor was affected. There was a kindness in her ladyship's voice which won upon her. She was evidently agi¬ tated herself, though lady Glendinning always endeavoured to conceal her feelings under the mask of pride. " I will unfold all to your ladyship," cried Eleanor. " Your unexampled kind¬ ness to a poor unknown being like myself, -demands every thing at my hands. But before I proceed, suffer me to repeat my unfeigned gratitude for your unbounded generosity to me. Oh, lady Glendinning, suffer me to love you! The coldness with which you sometimes receive me is but an assumption—your natural feelings are disguised. Oh, you are wronged by many who deem you proud and repelling. Forgive this bold sentence," she added, fearing she had said too much; " but my heart is bursting with affection." " Forbear," cried lady Glendinning, in a voice of agitation; " do not talk in such a strain as this. I own myself possessed of a spirit proud and tenacious of my own
rights, nor do I wish myself to be thought otherwise by the misjudging multitude, who are incapable of rightly appreciating my conduct; and now wave this subject, and give me what information you think proper." Eleanor replied, by informing lady Glen¬ dinning, that lord Arthur had sent for her to converse on the subject of Robert, who, she was sorry to add, had cherished senti¬ ments injurious to his peace, and the dis¬ approbation of lord Arthur, who had drawn from her a promise never to listen to the addresses of Robert. In making this com¬ munication Eleanor thought she was jus¬ tified, as her ladyship must necessarily be much surprised at the behaviour of lord Arthur, and she wished, if possible, to avoid all appearances of secret communica¬ tions with him. X»ady Glendinning seemed pleased with her candid avowal, which she assured her should be sacred to her own bosom.—" I wonder," she cried, " where Robert is all this time. 'Tis a pity he should thus ex-
pose himself to the night air, after his ill¬ ness." " And pray, Eleanor," inquired Geor¬ gina, " where have you been all the evening ? I never knew you stay out so late. Lord Arthur was quite distracted about you." Eleanor again looked confused.—" I wont to the village," she replied, " and staid talking at my school-house with the governess of my little flock." The blushes which arose in her face did not escape the eye of lady Glendinning, though she made no comments on it; and in a short time after, Robert entered the room; his countenance still betrayed in¬ ward agitation; he cast a look of deep regret on Eleanor, who was also struggling with emotion. Neither of them spoke, when lady Glendinning, with much con¬ cern, expressed her fears at his staying oat in the night air. He made her a short reply, and ringing for lights, begged her ladyship to excuse him, and retired for the night.
Eleanor felt her situation peculiarly dis¬ tressing, as she was conscious she was the cause of his sufferings. Lady Glendinning continued to behave to her that night with great kindness, and she was grateful to her for this unlooked- for condescension, and she flattered herself that she might henceforth find a friend in her ladyship. Fate had,, however, ordained that, at the very moment of lady Glendinning having suffered herself to give way to the' natural feelings of her heart,, in compas¬ sionating Eleanor, that a circumstance arose to crush the good opinion she enter¬ tained of her integrity, and placed her conduct in so doubtful a light, as to cre¬ ate the most painful suspicions in her mind. The ladies retired early to rest that night;- and Eleanor, in the privacy of her own chamber, again gave vent -to her grief. Her mind was wholly absorbed ill painful retrospection, and it was in vain. she courted the blessing of repose. b 3
- Nor did this balmy sweetener of life be¬ stow its influence on the frame of Robert. He likewise passed the night in wretched¬ ness. The conversation with his father still vibrated on his ear. What could be the dreadful reasons he had to forbid his uniting himself to Eleanor, he could not define. He only knew that he had so¬ lemnly promised to give up all thoughts of her; and however dear it might cost him, he resolved to make the sacrifice, for tiie sake of his father; and in so doing he doubted not he should obtain the assist¬ ance of Heaven, who would sanction an act of duty, and assist a son in his endea¬ vours to please a parent. After a night of restlessness and un¬ easy sensations, he arose, and determined to convince his father of his wish to obey his commands, by assuming an air of com¬ posure, though very foreign to his heart- As it was late before he entered the breakfast-parlour, he found all the family at the table. Lord Arthur cast a look^of scrutiny on
him, while he endeavoured to pay the compliments of the morning; but when he addressed Eleanor, his voice failed him, and an expression of sorrow passed over his features. Eleanor was also visibly agitated, and lord Arthur beheld the starting tear in her eye. He could scarcely comprehend her conduct. She had unhesitatingly pro- .mised never to become the wife of Ro¬ bert, and yet she appeared embarrassed in his presence, and evidently was cherishing uneasy sensations. Her cheeks were pal¬ lid, her eyes had lost their usual lustre,. and dejection marked her countenance.. Lady Glendinning remarked, it, and in¬ quired if she were not well? She alleged a headache, occasioned by a night of bad repose. • " I fear you fatigued yourself last night," cried her ladyship, « with your walk." . " Were you out last night, Eleanor ?" inquired Robert. She replied in tlie affirmative. " I almost wonder I did not. see. you
then," he returned, " as I rambled to the village; and on my return I acci¬ dentally met with Mrs. M. the school¬ mistress, who inquired much after you, saying she wishes to see you on some of her" school business, and requested you would favour her by going down to the village. She says she has not seen you since the night of the rustic fete." While Robert was uttering this speech, all eyes were turned upon the unfortu¬ nate Eleanor, whose confusion was too pal¬ pable to escape notice. , Her colour came and fled. Her hands trembled with such violence, that she was under the necessity of returning her cup to the table. She' saw,-by the looks of all around, what she had to expect. She was convicted in a falsehood. The idea was agony to hei* soul, yet no way of excuse presented it¬ self. She felt her head swim; a sickness stole over her frame, and she leant back in her chair. Lord Arthur beheld her agitation with grief. That she should have deceived was
a source of great sorrow to him. He was now confirmed in his opinion, that she had been with lord Montalban on the pre¬ ceding evening. The same idea also arose in the mind of lady Glendinning, whose anger in¬ creased to rage, at Eleanor having thus deceived her, at a time too when she had felt inclined to behave friendly towards her. She now viewed her as an enemy to her daughter. In rivalling her with lord Montalban, the honour and dignity of her family were hurt, and on this sub¬ ject her ladyship was vulnerable to a fail¬ ing. She cast a look of scorn on poor Eleanor; while Georgina, catching up her brother's words, cried<—" So, Eleanor, you staid so long at the village last night, did you, and with Mrs. M. though my brother saw her after you were at home, ii seems! Oh, how bad an excuse you have made!" llobert looked at all with astonishment, as he was ignorant of the mischief which" he had made.
" Upon my word, Eleanor," said her ladyship, " you have reduced yourself to a fine situation, by this mean attempt to impose upon us all. Well may you shrink abashed at the voice of truth, which has thus accidentally sounded in your ears' Oh, how contemptible do you now ap¬ pear ! how are you lessened in my opinion, by thus having meanly stooped to assert a falsehood!" " Spare me," cried the affrighted Elea¬ nor. " If your ladyship knew my feel¬ ings, you would pity me while you con¬ demned." " What is the meaning of this ?" in¬ quired Robert. " What has my unfortu¬ nate speech brought upon Eleanor ?" " Lady Glendinning informed him, adding __" Twas a lucky chance which caused your meeting with Mrs, M. as it has taught me what confidence I can put in future in Eleanor, who has thus dared to impose upon me with a falsehood. But know, Miss Glendinning, I observed the blush of confusion which mantled on your
cheek last night, and which was alone sufficient to pronounce you guilty." " Be not too harsh, madam," exclaimed lord Arthur. " Eleanor is already pu¬ nished, I am convinced, by her own feel¬ ings. She will perhaps retrieve our good opinion by explaining her conduct, which at present certainly appears questionable." " I shall be very ready to hear it," re¬ plied her ladyship; " but I fancy it cannot be explained. - However, Eleanor, you heat- lord Arthur's wish, and we wait your reply. 5 " Eleanor appeared overwhelmed with grief and shame.— rt Oh, what will become of me?" she cried. " Could you but know the agony of my heart, it would in some measure allay your just resentment. I own myself guilty of the falsehood. I acknowledge it with pain, with shame. Think what I must suffer at this first de¬ viation from the sacred paths of truth, yet cruel necessity was the fatal cause." " No occasion can warrant a falsehood," interrupted lady Glendinning;. "but if
you value my future favour, reveal the truth. On that condition alone I may be tempted to pardon you." " Never," replied Eleanor, in a voice of firmness; "never; though it should de¬ prive me of all protection, I cannot re¬ veal the truth. I own all my fault in de¬ ceiving you, but I cannot explain the rea¬ sons. I am involved in a gulf of mise¬ ry. I see your resentment. I know you all despise me; yet I am innocent, Hea¬ ven is my witness, of any crime, save that of falsehood. Yet I cannot, will not ex¬ plain; even though you banish mefrom your favour for ever, though you spurn me as I thus kneel at your feet for mercy, yet, if you refuse it, I cannot reveal the truth." " This is downright contumaciousness," replied'her ladyship, with great anger, as she turned away from the prostrate Elea¬ nor. " This behaviour only further ex- Gites my resentment. Henceforth I will not listen to your vindication, even though yOu should wish to make it. I was not born to be trifled with by a base deceitful
girl, who, under the mask of innocence, is secretly undermining the peace of my family, by marring the interest of my daughter." This hint alarmed Georgina. Her bosom throbbed with anger, as she ex¬ claimed—" I think, Eleanor, you cannot expect much mercy; for you certainly do "not deserve it from the handti of mamma." Lord Arthur cast a look of displeasure on her.—" Barest thou decide where mercy shall be shewn ?" he cried. " Its soft re¬ freshing dews, seasoned with justice, should be distilled on every head; for oft beneath a saintly countenance a votary of sin may lay concealed, while he whorrt censure singles to brand with disgrace, or envy loads with blackening colours, may far otherwise appear, nay, turn out adorned with the stamp of good, if rightly scanned. Thus perhaps it is with Eleanor, who, however wrong her conduct is in deviat¬ ing from truth, is sufficiently punished, as her present distress evinces; and as one of your own sex, she claims your compas-
sion. Pity, Georgina, cannot be mis¬ applied ; 'tis so noble a feeling, that the bosom who acknowledges her divine in¬ spiration, never need be ashamed to own her impulse, although it even should be directed to an object deemed by a cold and unfeeling world as unworthy. You see before you a being, humbled by the consciousness of having committed a crime;, her feelings are already acute enough. Yours then should be the glori- . ous task of raising a sinking spirit, and by pouring the balm of kindness into her wounded heart, effect that which severity will never attain. To you, lady .Glendin¬ ning," he added, " this part of my address is applicable, as you also, by this violence, lose all hopes of confidence." '* I own, my lord," replied her ladyship, " your sentiments are just, were they ap¬ plied in a better cause; but, in admonish¬ ing Georgina, you seem to forget the unequalled conduct of Eleanor, to whose guilt it is we owe this dissension. But .encourage her, my lord, as usual—con-
demn my daughter, and excuse all faults in her; nay, even say, she is right in pur¬ suing the paths of falsehood." " No, madam," he returned, " far from it. Truth is a deity I must ever prize; 'tis the sister of wisdom, whose paths lead to everlasting brightness, purity, and joy. So far from encouraging Eleanor, I thus openly avow my displeasure at her con¬ duct ; but I trust she will never again re¬ peat it. Eleanor," he added, addressing her, at the same time raising her prostrate form, " never again quit the divine inspi¬ ration of truth; you see to what a con¬ temptible situation it has reduced you. Oh, never deviate from the voice of that first of virtues on no account whatever; it cannot be countenanced, however it may be excused." "And yet, my lord," she replied, "there are circumstances which sometimes arise to drown her heavenly voice. Perhaps your lordship has never known, by sad experience, the pangs attendant on a de~ cciver, who, violating all laws of truth*
stands forth armed with double power to crush the wretch within his grasp, who, listening to the tongue of falsehood and dissimulation, sinks beneath the blow." Lord Arthur looked on Eleanor with surprise mingled with confusion.—" What do you mean by this strange appeal ?" he cried. " Merely, my lord" she replied, " to coincide with you in the horrors attendant on falsehood. I forcibly feel its pangs, yet I cannot retract. I am its victim at present, and I can only repeat, that though I am banished from the favour of lady Glendinning, yet I can with truth assert, that however appearances may conspire against me, I am innocent of crimes. Yes, here in the face- of Heaven, who looks down indignant on all who depart from right, I solemnly avow, that my conduct and proceedings are such as Heaven would sanction. . A time may come when you shall all acknowledge it. Till that period arrives, I must appear as guilty; but oh, in mercy mitigate my punishment! Oh,
lady Glendinning, I once more sue to you for pardon. Oh, lord Arthur, pity me, plead for me, and likewise bestow on me your forgiveness!" " I know not how to reply to you," he returned. " You claim my compassion, even in the midst of my anger. You have deceived me, Eleanor, but I forgive you. Your own heart can best judge your mo¬ tives for so doing; and to that I leave you." Eleanor caught his hand.—" My lord,'* she cried, " I know not how to thank you. Would I could hut obtain the cle¬ mency of lady Glendinning, I should in¬ deed be most grateful." She timidly approached her ladyship, who, however, turned haughtily from her. -^-"* My forgiveness," she replied, " cannot be of any consequence. Lord Arthur has pronounced his, and that is quite suffi¬ cient, while you are sanctioned by him; but I unfortunately have too much re¬ gard for truths to overlook the* least dere¬ liction. Rut be under no apprehension,
X shall not condescend to question you any farther on the subject; and it is my command also to you, Georgina, that you make no more comments on this very ex¬ traordinary affair." "-Indeed, mamma," she returned, " I shall not^ of course, trouble myself any farther about it." Eleanor curtseyed in silence to lady Glen¬ dinning, and glad was she when her lady¬ ship, rising from the breakfast-table, gave her the liberty of retiring to her own room, where, throwing herself on a chair, she burst into a violent flood of tears.— " Sure fate has shed her worst influence on my devoted head," she cried. "Oh, why was * I born to be thus involved in misery and mystery ? Better had I perished in my infancy, and escaped the many ills to which I see I am exposed. Yet, wretch that I am, to murmur at the wise decrees of Providence, who alone can direct all things ' f for like the rushing deep, adver¬ sity pours all its billows on the defenceless head. Yet, hushed be all complaints;
ELEANOR. 23 , God, even in the storm, presides equally as in the calm; even our present woes may be connected, with bur future bliss. Then dare I, a mere creature of an hour, murmur at the wise purposes of Heaven ? Oh, no, rather let me bless the chastening hand that lends her stroke of adversity for our finite good, and in placing a full reliance on the wisdom of a Supreme Being, bear with fortitude all the ills at¬ tendant on this transitory state, and in the consciousness of virtue and integrity, look with confidence to that Almighty Power who knows, and will, in all due season, set forth my innocence."
CHAPTER IL 4-+rr+r*+ ****** Of all affliction taught a lover yet, 'Tis sure the hardest science to forget. • Unequal task a passion to resign, ■ For hearts so touch'd, so picrc'd, so lost, as mine. Pope. These lines fully convey the feelings of Robert under the present trial, for though he had resolved to banish the idea of Eleanor from his bosom, yet the task was so difficult he could scarcely sustain it.' The incident of the morning had given rise to strange sensations within his mind. He heard lady Glendinning and his sister repeat their suspicions that Eleanor had been with lord Montalban on the preced¬ ing evening; and this assertion he also believed to be true. This idea caused him fresh sorrow; for to think that Eleanor really loved another was distraction, al¬ though he had no hopes himself. This,
he thought, accounted for the coldness of Eleanor towards him, and he looked upon lord Montalban as his rival. These, thoughts he however soon banished from his mind, and gave place to more generous ones. Eleanor could never be his, and lord Montalban was every way deserving of her. Yet he feared she was plunged in a gulf of misery, as he was aware that the friends of both parties would be averse to their union. He trembled for the hap* piness of his still dear Eleanor, and he resolved to watch over her with unremit¬ ting zeal; and he at length almost brought himself to think he could see her united to so worthy an object as lord Montalban. His sister Georgina must be the sacrifice, it was true; yet, as far as he could judge, he did not think it would affect her, save in the instance of wounded pride and dis¬ appointed vanity. In these conjectures he was perfectly right Georgina felt no preference for lord Montalban, but she had willingly re- VOL. II. c
ceived the proposals made for him, under the idea of pomp and ambition, to which principles she was a willing votary, hav¬ ing had it inculcated from her earliest youth by lady Lenox, that she must keep up the ancient dignity of her house. She had therefore already looked upon lord Montalban as her intended husband, and it was with sentiments of disdain and re¬ sentment that she now looked upon Elea¬ nor ; and with her mother she continued to vent the most bitter invectives against the duplicity of Eleanor. Lord Arthur heard them in silence. He felt he could not exculpate her, though he had endeavoured to vindicate her con¬ duct ; and he was himself seriously dis¬ tressed at her having endeavoured to de¬ ceive all parties. Lady Glendinning, at a very early hour, ordered her carriage, and taking Georgina with her, paid a visit to lady Lenox, and in a short time the whole of the preced¬ ing scene was related, and the conduct of poor Eleanor finely imprecated.
Georgina, in the resentment of the moment, was the most violent in her in¬ vectives, adding her firm belief, that she was injuring her with lord JMontalban, ivith whom she, of course, must have been on the evening before. Though lady Lenox was highly en raged at this supposition, yet her malig¬ nant heart rejoiced at this event having happened, as there was now proof suffi¬ cient to work upon in the conviction of the falsehood of Eleanor, upon whom she now vented the most bitter invectives; and by her artful observations succeeded in gaining lady Glendinning over to her opinion, who, already wounded by the conduct of Eleanor, soon yielded to the arguments of lady Lenox, who at length declared, that the girl must be effectually removed from the sight of lord Montal¬ ban, who would otherwise, perhaps, have the folly to disgrace himself, and ruin his family, by marrying her—" And sooner," continued her haughty ladyship, " than c 2
she should have such a triumph as that over my granddaughter, I would assist in any steps to effect her removal." " That is not possible," replied lady Glendinning; " you know lord Arthur will not suffer her to leave the castle without his own or my protection, or she might else have accompanied Mrs. Conway to London." " True,'" returned lady Lenox; " and Mrs. Conway shall still be made the in¬ strument in this business. A journey to London can easily be effected; and under your protection Eleanor must be safe, and lord Arthur to this can make no objec¬ tion. Mrs. Conway will be eager enough to have her on a visit. We can return again to Scotland; and no doubt, when she is there, out of the sight of lord Mont¬ alban, he will soon come to his proper senses; and all will then be well." Georgina, who wished for some re¬ venge on Eleanor, immediately second¬ ed this proposal, to which lady Glendin¬ ning replied—" She had no objection, as
it did not appear in any ways to the in¬ jury of Eleanor, whom," she added, " she did not wish to wrong, although she had deceived her," Lady Lenox chided her daughter mi¬ ner weak clemency against a base designing girl, " who," she added, " would be the means of ruining the whole family, if not removed, as if she failed in her arts with lord Montalban, she would succeed with Robert, who was also mad enough to be in love with her; but I am determined," she added, " to find out whether she was with lord Montalban last night; and if she was, I will expose her finely to lord Arthur, and he dare not vindicate her for telling a falsehood, to the injury of Ms own daughter" Lady Glendinning sighed as she shook her head incredulously, while Georgina related the full particulars of his having reprimanded her for her severity to Elea¬ nor. Lady Lenox sympathized with her on
his sad behaviour, and again declared the London scheme should be effected. Charles Lenox now entered the room, and was made acquainted with the busi¬ ness of Eleanor, which, though it greatly surprised him, he tried to extenuate, by supposing it merely a trifling incident, which his favourite did not wish known. Lady Lenox was highly enraged with him, but consoled herself with the idea of accomplishing the plan which she had in l iU} -idea, and in arranging circumstances to promote it. It was agreed between the ladies to keep their intentions entirely secret,, until they saw an opportunity to effect it; and on lady Glendinning and Georgina quit¬ ting lady Lenox, she ordered her carriage to B------ House. Her bosom friend, lady Cecilia, .was at home, and received her alone in the draw¬ ing-room, where, almost with her first breath, lady Lenox informed her of the shameful conduct of Eleanor; and as no
tale ever lost in the repetition of an artful woman, so was it highly exaggerated in the present case, and Eleanor was laid out as the most worthless of her sex. She concluded her detail by affirming her be¬ lief that she had been with lord Montal¬ ban, at the same time inquiring whether he w T as from home at the time. Lady Cecilia replied that he was, hav¬ ing asserted that he was * engaged with some male companions; " but," she added, " it is now clear that he was with Elea¬ nor." And her rage knew no bounds at this idea; she vowed, that if he did not immediately consent to have affairs put en train for his union with Georgina, she would for ever banish him from her fa¬ vour, and leave his father and him to their fate. This well-disposed lady now rung ! for a servant, and desired the presence of lord Montalban, who was in the library read¬ ing ; and it was agreed that lady Lenox should repeat the story before him, when
they should judge by his countenance how far their suspicions were right, and if they should have been mistaken, it would be an excellent opportunity of displaying the guilt of Eleanor to him. In a short time his ltfrdship entered the room, and bowing gracefully to lady Le¬ nox, paid her the compliments of the morning, and then politely inquired after the health of the ladies at St. Michael's Castle. This was a right subject for lady Le¬ nox to take advantage of, and she replied by saying-*--" that lady Glendinning and Georgina were well in health, but greatly disturbed in mind, by the base conduct of the worthless Eleanor, who had that morn¬ ing been convicted in a falsehood, as gross as it was glaring." At the name of Eleanor lord Montal¬ ban crimsoned, and hearing her spoken of in such a 'manner, his emotion became too visible to escape observation, and confirm¬ ed the pair before him in their suspicions.
He inquired into the nature of the com¬ plaint against Eleanor, which was duly repeated to him, with the addition of hints thrown out respecting her having been with some favoured -lover. This allusion was not understood by his lordship, who, in ignorance of their real meaning, heard this account with agony; and his confusion was so apparent, that lady Cecilia could hardly conceal her rage, as she was convinced that lord Montalban had been with Eleanor; while his lordship was all anxiety to know mere respectmg her. The present scene he would patient¬ ly have borne, ! had he indeed had the hap¬ piness of being with Eleanor the preced¬ ing evening; but this was not the case, and the thought of her having been with another lover was distraction to his soul. Lady Lenox continued in her abuse against Eleanor, till lord Montalban at length exclaimed—" I am perfectly asto¬ nished at all this, and can scarcely believe it, although spoken by your ladyship; for c3
I had considered the lovely Eleanor to he a pattern of virtue and integrity. Nor can 1 think otherwise, though appearances are against her." " Oh, to be sure," cried lady Cecilia, " you doubtless think her conduct very right; but however, my lord, I insist, from this moment, you banish all ideas of her from your mind, or you know my power, which I will immediately exert towards your father and yourself." Lord Montalban inwardly despised the mean allusion of his imperious aunt, but, for the sake of the marquis, he forbore to resent it. He therefore replied—" I know not why, madam, you should direct this discourse to me. I have already promised to comply with your wishes, in respect to visiting at the Castle of St. Michael's; and I trust the time will arrive when all things shall take a happy conclusion." Lord Montalban sighed as he spoke. His aunt was pacified with this an¬ swer, though she had little reason, if she had understood his real meaning.
Lady Lenox now addressed him, by inquiring when he meant to visit the cas¬ tle, saying, she thought him rather remiss in his attendance; for which he excused himself, by alleging, that so many old friends had engaged him since his return to Scotland, that his time had been taken up in returning visits, but promised to make up for the deficiency. He indeed wished to frequent the cas¬ tle, in order that he might behold Elea¬ nor, whose lovely form still reigned in his bosom; but situated as he was, he was under the painful necessity of using dissimulation with his imperious aunt, while he inwardly hoped something might transpire to favour his wishes with Elea¬ nor, if he could succeed in gaining an in¬ terest in her heart; but how was he shock¬ ed at the intelligence communicated by lady Lenox, respecting her having been out the evening previous with some sus* pected lover! He was determined, if pos¬ sible, to ascertain the truth, and if he really found it was so, he would endeavour
to banish her from his heart, and, in com¬ pliance with his friends wishes, v/ed Geor- rgina, as in that case he should be indiffer- sent*as to his future fate. During the stay of lady Lenox he re¬ mained so melancholy and abstracted, that it was imputed by the ladies to a con¬ sciousness of ihis own duplicity with re¬ gard to Eleanor.; and lady Lenox took the opportunity of'communicating to her dear friend, lady Cecilia, the scheme she -had in contemplation to rid them all of Eleanor. Lady Cecilia highly approved of it, and added—" She would do any thing in her power to promote it, if ^occasion required;" and after some further conversation, lady Lenox took her leave. Meantime the innocent victim of their machinations was passing her hours in solitude and grief. Lord Arthur, on the departure of lady Glendinning and Georgina, had sum¬ moned Jthe trembling Eleanor to his pre¬ sence, where, after seriously addressing
her on the subject of the morning, he begged her to .reveal to him the truth, assuring her of his forgiveness. Eleanor, with great agitation, heard him out, and only replied by saying— " That she fully acknowledged her crime.; but however guilty she might appear, she could not reveal the cause; that a most sacred promise had passed her lips for silence, which she was resolved to main¬ tain ;" and lord Arthur, though inwardly displeased, was obliged to give up the point Eleanor's situation in the castle was now very unpleasant. Looked upon by all as a deceiver, and treated with haughti¬ ness by lady Glendinning, as soon as the shades of evening drew in, she left the castle, alleging her delight in a solitary ramble. This did not pass unnoticed by all the family, and likewise by lord JMontalban, who, -pursuant to -his promise, made his visits more frequent, in the hopes of,gain¬ ing an interview with Eleanor in private:
but this he found impossible; and he wit¬ nessed, with silent distraction, the nightly rambles of Eleanor from the castle, while it had a very different effect on the ladies, who beheld that lord Montalban could not be with her, while he was paying his compliments to them within the walls of St. Michael's. This conviction caused them the greatest satisfaction, and accord¬ ingly they looked upon his lordship with more complacency; and lady Cecilia again smiled upon her darling nephew. Georgina tried all her powers to cap¬ tivate him, and began to construe his lord¬ ship's natural politene?s into warmer senti¬ ments; while his whole thoughts were directed to Eleanor. If he found himself in her presence, his eyes were involuntarily fixed upon her, with such a tenderness of expression, that could not fail of being understood by our susceptible heroine, whose blushing cheek indicated a senti¬ ment of feeling equal to his own ; but all explanation was impossible. He never saw her but in the presence of others; and
of an evening she always withdrew for the purpose of walking. Lord Montalban had more than once endeavoured to meet with her, but could never succeed, and he remained in the most tormenting state, between hope and fear, despair and doubt. In a very short time a packet was de¬ livered to lord Arthur from Mr. Conway, which contained a letter from sir Henry, thanking him for his friendly interference towards his nephew—*' To whom," he add¬ ed, " he was with pleasure reconciled, upon his promise of amendment; and that he hoped he would make a proper return for the generosity of Mrs. Conway, whom," he added, " he had received as a part of his family." There was also a letter from Mrs. Con¬ way to Eleanor, in which she informed her, that her father was easily reconciled to her on her return, particularly as he found that such genteel people had inte¬ rested themselves in her welfare, and that she was now happily settled with her dear
Mr. Conway, in her sweet cottage at Camberwell; and concluded by again pressing Eleanor to visit her, if possible. This communication was heard with pleasure by lady Lenox, who resolved that "the invitation should be accepted as soon as possible. Accordingly lady Glendinning began by throwing out vague hints, that she should shortly visit London, and treat her family with a sight of the metropolis; and lady Lenox also declared she would accompany her. Lord Arthur heard it with silence, as he was not as yet aware of their full in¬ tention; and with the actions of lady Glendinning he had long since ceased to concern himself. It was in a few days after this period, that lady Cecilia Gray, with lord Montal¬ ban, called for a morning visit Eleanor was present in the drawing-room, and lord Montalban, after bowing to the other ladies, addressed her in terms of the ut¬ most cordiality. His heart was in his
mouth, but restrained by the presence of others, he could only look unutterable language. Eleanor blushed " celestial rosy red," and heaving an unconscious sigh, with¬ drew her eyes in soft confusion. Lord Montalban beheld with rapture this tender emotion, and flattered himself that he was not viewed by her with indif¬ ference. The idea exhilarated his spirits, and he conversed with the greatest cheer¬ fulness. He was soon however checked in his gaiety by his aunt, who, on taking her leave, gave a pressing invitation for the whole family to dine at B------House in a few days, and invited lord Arthur so very much, that he could not consistently re¬ fuse; and for the first time since his illness he promised to attend a party out. Lord Montalban heard lady Cecilia se¬ parately name every one, except Eleanor, whom she pointedly left out. His feel¬ ings were risen to agony at this fresh in¬ sult, but he dared not interfere; and on
taking his leave, he heard, with mortifica¬ tion, the promise repeated, of the family diring on the appointed day at B------ House.
CHAPTER III. " 'Tis t>he far off, through flames of fire." " Then turn to me, my own love, turn, Or else «kh thee I'll fade and burn. Ah ! she falls! she sinks! as dies the lamp In charnel airs or cavern damp. 1 ' " Had some kind angel op'd the book, And let me read my fate, my heart had bun>f When it beheld the ills, which, one hy one, , I have endured." Eleanor, though inwardly hurt at re¬ ceiving such a slight from lady Cecilia, was glad that she was not to be of the party, as it was a painful task to her to be in the presence of lord Montalban; to as¬ sume an indifference foreign to her heart, to treat him with coldness and reserve,
when every softer feeling of her soul was his, were pangs which she could scarcely sustain, and she could no longer deny to herself the impression he had made on her. She was indeed at this period an object of commiseration; torn by contending pas¬ sions, and exposed to the various machi¬ nations of her enemies, she was no longer the gay, the blooming Eleanor; the rose forsook her cheek; her eyes lost their vi¬ vacity, and gave place to a pensive soft¬ ness which thrilled through the soul. Lord Montalban beheld the change with the quick eyes of love, and sometimes flattered himself that he was the cause of her dejection; yet he would reflect on the adventure of the fatal evening, when the falsehood of Eleanor had been so openly avowed; and he tormented himself with the idea of the favoured lover, with whom she was suspected to have been. He would have given worlds to have obtained a conversation with her, but found it im¬ possible, as she avoided him when he visited the castle, and to see her alone was
impracticable; for if the family were out of an evening, and he inquired for Elea¬ nor, he also learnt from the servants that she was gone out for a walk, and alone. - This confirmed his lordship, that she must have some private engagement or other, which was a bar to his hopes; and one moment he resolved to banish her from his heart, and wed Georgina imme¬ diately, as his aunt and father continually persecuted him on the subject, and his home was rendered a seat of misery to him; and he considered it useless to 'dis¬ oblige his relatives, if he could not gain the regard of Eleanor. Yet still love pre¬ vailed over every other consideration, and he therefore for a while remained passive, neither promoting nor rejecting the ar¬ rangements by his aunt, who was continu¬ ally bestowing on him her advice; and on the day arriving at which the Glendin¬ ning family were to dine with them, she favoured him with a long lecture, as to his behaviour towards Miss Glendinning, whom she kindly insisted he should love.
Lord Montalban inwardly wished the day over, as to him it was only a visit of ceremony; for Eleanor, alas! was not to be present, and, what was still worse, she might possibly take the advantage of their absence to be with his supposed rival. At a late hour the whole party from St. Michael's arrived. With lord and lady Lenox, earl Campbell had also joined the party, in compliment to his son, lord Ar¬ thur, who, with painful compulsion, had once more accompanied his lady out. It was the first time he had left the do¬ mains of the castle since his indisposition, and he received the congratulations of the company ; but it was evident he felt them not; his whole soul was wrapt, as usual, iii melancholy, and his conversation was ab¬ stracted, and his mind evidently ill at ease. Lady Glendinning frequently east a look of scrutiny on him, and a rising 1 sigh stole from her breast, as she gazed on the sad remains of the once lively and elegant lord Arthur. With lord Montalban he appeared the most friendly, and to him
addressed almost the whole of his conver¬ sation, which was not lost upon the other company. Lady Lenox, -with her usual malignity, whispered to the ear of her daughter his visible neglect towards her, and vowed she would revenge her wrongs through Eleanor, who, once removed from his sight, she knew would be a source of un¬ easiness to him. Notwithstanding all disadvantages, the party did not break up until a late hour, when their respective carriages being or¬ dered, they took leave. Earl Campbell begged lady Glendin¬ ning. and Georgina to enter his carriage. Lord and lady Lenox departed -in theirs, and lord Arthur, with his son Robert, were proceeding to enter liis chariot, when their attention was caught by an alarm¬ ing light in the sky, and clouds of smoke were seen to curl in the air. Lord Arthur instantly inquired the cause, and was informed by the servants, that a most dreadful fire was raging in
the village through which they must pass in their way home. The ladies were much alarmed, as the gentlemen declared their intention of aid¬ ing the sufferers, if possible; and, lord Montalban, ever active in the cause of benevolence, stepped into lord Arthur's carriage, alleging his determination to proceed to the place of distress. Earl Campbell, too infirm to assist in such a scene, ordered his coachman to drive on as quick as possible to the castle, whither he would protect the ladies. His command was obeyed, but as they ar¬ rived at the spot of destruction, they found it almost impossible to pass. The flames were dreadful, and cottage after cottage was consumed by the rapidi¬ ty of the fire. Screams and piercing cries broke upon their ear, and lady Glendin¬ ning, almost fainting with terror and con- cern for the unfortunate sufferers, felt some degree of relief when she at length found herself past tho conflagration. Meantime the gentlemen leaving their
carriage, approached close to the scene of fiorror, and offered their assistance. One house which stood rather higher than the rest, was nearly enveloped in flames, the lower part being all on fire. " Lord Arthur inquired if the families were safely out, and was answered, one only female remained in, who had re¬ turned in great anxiety to save her pro¬ perty ; but all the people were now struck with horror at beholding her danger, as the flames had increased with such vio¬ lence that they feared she must perish. This account greatly shocked the gen¬ tlemen.—" Let us try some means for her escape!" cried lord Montalban : " the top apartment is yet accessible, if ladders can be procured." At this instant a female form was seen at the window—her whole appearance evinced symptoms of the greatest distress —her hands were clasped in agony, and her features were cast towards Heaven, as if in devotion—a shriek burst from her lips as the flames began to approach her—she
appeared like an immortal form ascending from a pillar of fire. All evinced their distress at her situation, when lord Ar¬ thur, stedfastly fixing his eyes on her, exclaimed—" Merciful Heaven! what do I behold? that form ! that face! 'tis she! Oh! save her! save her from her dreadful fate! / will save her or perish with her." He rushed towards the door, when Ro¬ bert caught his arm.-*--" Hold, my father! your destruction is certain, if you enter those walls." " Release me!" he cried, furiously. " I will die with her. You know not what I feel. My brain swims. Oh God! I sink —I fall!" He staggered a few paces, and dropped into the arms of his son, whose whole care was now for his father, whom he conveyed to the carriage; and lord Arthur, still continuing in a strong fit, Robert ordered the coachman to drive as fast as possible to St. Michael's. Meantime lord Montalban, on hearing VOL. II. D
the frantic expressions of lord Arthur, re¬ solved to isave the unfortunate female. He saw a ladder advancing. He hastily seized and placing it before the burning ruins, ascended it, and with the utmost intrepidity, and at the hazard of his life, reached the window. He caught the wretched female by the hand, and suc¬ ceeded in bearing her in safety down the ladder. The poor villagers beheld this heroic act with admiration, and received him with shouts of joy. Lord Montalban was, however, wholly intent upon his fair burden, who, in at¬ tempting to express her thanks to her preserver, fell into a state of insensibility. He supported her in his arms with the utmost tenderness, and at length bore her to a cottage at a small distance, which re¬ ceived her fainting form. No one ap¬ peared to know her: some asserted that she was the lady who lived so very re¬ tired in the village, unknown to any one.
Lord Montalban beheld that she had been lovely, even to perfection: ,her fea¬ tures were regularly beautiful, and when at length she opened her soft blue eyes, she appeared irresistibly fascinating. By degrees she recollected her true situation^ and poured out her gratitude to lord Montalban.—" Oh, God!" she cried, "to what farther ills am I to be exposed? Yet thy hand has again been stretched over my head. Merciful Heaven! just are thy ways, and grant that these thy wise dispensations may be impressed on my mind with true piety and resignation. To you, sir," she cried, turning to lord Montalban, " I know not what to say: I cannot express my gratitude; my tears must be my apology, for words are denied me." " Forbear, madam," he replied; " you are not in a state to talk; I have done no more than the duty of every man, who must indeed be base and degenerate, if he «ould behold woman, lovely woman, B2
in danger, without saving her, at ,the ha¬ zard of his heart's dearest blood." " You overwhelm me, sir," she cried; " but though you will not permit me to express my thanks, let me at least have the satisfaction of knovving the name of my brave preserver." " Frederick Montalban," he replied; " and be assured, madam, tliat any assist¬ ance which can be rendered yon will be most cheerfully granted, either by myself or the marquis of B------my father, who will truly feel for the calamity which has this night befallen his tenantry." " Is it possible," exclaimed the un¬ known female, " that I behoki lord Mont¬ alban ? Merciful Heaven ! how wonder¬ ful are thy ways!" His lordship looked on her with some surprise, and inquired if she had known him previous to that night, as he had not the happiness of being acquainted with her. " Only by name, my lord," she replied; " that has already reached my ears; for
what tongue in this village does not re¬ sound in the praise of lord Montalban! and oh! how gratefully shall I now join in blessing the name of my preserver!" Lord Montalban modestly shrunk from her encomiums, and proceeded to inform her, that another had also warmly inte¬ rested himself in her fate, and who had declared his intention of saving her, but, being seized with sudden indisposition, was prevented that happiness; " and " added his lordship, " this was lord Arthur Glendinning." He paused as the suffering female, in a voice of extreme agitation, repeated the name; and catching his arm, she cried— " Oh, tell me truly, did lord Arthur really behold me?" Her whole form was agitated ; her cheek assumed a deadly paleness, while lord Montalban replied in the affirmative; '*' but," he continued, alarmed at her situ¬ ation, " you are ill; you must not con¬ verse any more. Pray retire, and be as - sured, I will see you again in the morn-
ing, when I trust you will be more com posed, aud in the mean, time, say if I can inform any friend of your situation., Is there any one whose presence would be a source of comfort to you ?" " Alas !" she replied—" I have no fnends. I am a wretched outcast, isolat¬ ed from the world; therefore trouble yourself no farther about me. I am in¬ deed ill—I will retire; and rest assured, the remembrance of your lordship's kind¬ ness will ever dwell in my remembrance." She could say no more, her whole frame trembled, and the kind woman belonging to the cottage led her away to seek re¬ pose. Lord Montalban left his purse, in order for every necessary to be procured her, and then left the house. He returned to the fire, which was now abating, and he beheld all the sufferers safe from its de¬ vouring flames. He now thought of lord Arthur, and determined, late as it was, to go to the castle, and inquire concern¬ ing him. On arriving there, he found the
family in confusion. Lord Arthur was still in a state of insensibility, and lady Glendinning attending on him with the greatest anxiety. She was listening Lo the account given her by Robert, of the cause and strange expressions thrown oiat by his lordship for the unknown sufferer. She heard him in silence; a deep sigh only escaped her lips; but on seeing lord Montalban, she inquired if the lady had escaped. His lordship gave her the particulars, and added, he had left her in safety at a cottage. Her ladyship replied by saying she would visit her in the morning, and pro¬ cure her every possible comfort, Finding lord Arthur still continuing in his fit, lady Glendinning sent for medical assistance, and lord Montalban retired, adding, that he would attend early in the morning, to inquire after his lordship's health. Soon after his departure, lord Arthur began to shew symptoms of returning ani¬ mation, but on opening his eyes he fixed
them wildly on lady Glendinning, and then gazing round the room, exclaimed—- "Where have I been? Did I not be¬ hold her, or have my senses been disor¬ dered ? Ah. no! I recollect all now.* He added—" Oh ! tell me where she is? where is Eleanor ?" " Compose yourself, my lord," replied Jady Glendinning; " Eleanor is safely re¬ tired to rest, where she remains uncon¬ scious of your lordship's indisposition, as I thought it useless to alarm her." Lord Arthur put his hand to his head, as if to recollect himself.—" True, true," he cried ; " my head wanders sadly; but I would ask, if the wretched female was saved from the flames; oh, tell me has she perished ?" He evidently struggled to appear com¬ posed, but his agitation did not escape her ladyship.—" Make yourself easy," she replied; " she is safe; lord Montalban he¬ roically finished the work you began, by rescuing her at the hazard of his own life."
" Noble youth!" exclaimed lord Ar¬ thur; ."exalted Montalban! thou shalt find a reward for this generous action." He clasped his hands together—an ani¬ mated expression stole over his pallid face, when, as if suddenly recollecting himself, he turned to lady Glendinning—-" I fear," he added, " I have caused you much alarm and surprise by my conduct; but your ladyship will, I am convinced, enter into my feelings at the sight of a defence¬ less woman in such .an extreme danger, who, though a stranger to me, warmly interested me as a man; and I trust your ladyship will make allowances for the weakness wliich overpowered me, owing, I suppose, to my previous ill state of health." Lady Glendinning looked at him with mild dignity.—" Do not apologize to me. my lord," she replied, " for exerting your¬ self in the cause of humanity. I hope, throughout the ,whole of your lordship's life, you have ever been the staunch pro- d8
tector of a female when in distress, for, to desert a woman basely in the hour of dan¬ ger, suits not with the honour and charac¬ ter of a gentleman." . Lord Arthur dropped his eyes, and shrunk from her gaze. Her ladyship looked at him with such an expression, that it reached his soul. She sighed deep¬ ly, but recovering herself, she begged that he would retire to bed, and endea¬ vour to gain some repose. To this he as¬ sented, and wishing her ladyship ** Good night," he retired to rest. Georgina remarked to her mother that she thought his lordship's conduct very strange, to which lady Glendinning only replied, that it was the effect of alarm, she supposed, occasioned by the dreadful fire. She then took leave for the night, and entering her own room, gave way to her thoughts. That she had her own private reflections, the reader is already aware, as likewise that she never suffered any of those reflections to pass her lips. Meantime Eleanor, unconscious of what
was passing, was enjoying the balmy blessing of repose. She heard a bustle in the castle, but concluded it only to be oc¬ casioned by the return of the party; she therefore lay until her usual hour in the morning, and on entering the breakfast- parlour, awaited, until lady Glendinning and Georgina entered the room, when the latter began by inquiring if she had heard about the fire. Eleanor, ever alive to the woe of others, instantly inquired the particulars; but no sooner did Georgina repeat them, than the colour fled her cheeks; and with a falter¬ ing voice, she demanded the exact situa¬ tion of the fire; but, on hearing the ac¬ count of the unknown female, she clasped her hands in an agony of grief.—" Mer¬ ciful God!" she exclaimed, "and who saved her from her dreadful fate ?" As she spoke the door opened, and to their great surprise, lord Arthur entered: all had thought him too ill to rise, and lady Glendinning expressed her surprise at so unexpected a circumstance. He re-
plied by saying that he had risen early, in order to repair to the village, to see what could be done respecting the poor suffer¬ ers; while Eleanor, who was .evidently near fainting, repeated her question of who saved the lady from her dreadful fate? " Oh, a great favourite of yours," cried Georgina. " Lord Montalban it was who rescued her." " Lord Montalban !" repeated Eleanor; " merciful Heaven, receive my thanks /" She could say no more; her eyes closed, and she sunk senseless on a chair. Her emotion was of course attributed by all parties to her concern on lord Montalban's account, and the ladies were not well pleased at the conviction; particularly Georgina, who viewed the innocent Elea¬ nor as her rival, and in that character she of course h ated her. Restoratives were ap¬ plied to her, and in a short time she reco¬ vered her senses; but on opening her eyes, the first object she beheld was lord Mont¬ alban, who had just made.his appearance. On seeing the situation of his beloved
Eleanor, he hastened to her side, and in¬ quired the cause of her indisposition. Georgina rather spitefujly replied, that her feelings were so extremely fine, that she had fainted at the recital of the Are, occasioned, she supposed, by the danger to which his lordship had been exposed. Pleasure sparkled in lord Montalban's eyes at this assertion.—" Indeed!" he re¬ plied ; " 1 should feel much honoured could I believe that I excited so much in¬ terest in her bosom." He paused, as recollecting himself, he feared he had said too much; and at that instant Eleanor opening her eyes, he took her hand, and tenderly inquired how she found herself. On seeing him, Eleanor involuntarily uttered his name, and casting a look of in¬ effable delight on him, she pressed his hand, with a warmth that gratified the delighted Montalban; but suddenly recol¬ lecting herself, she became embarrassed : the colour revisited her cheeks, and her eyes dropt in soft confusion.
Lord Montalban read the feelings of her soul, and was of course gratified; though he was rather astonished at her behaviour, as she had of late kept up a continual reserve towards him. He knew not the sensations which agitated her bo¬ som at that moment. Pure as the moun¬ tain snow were the feelings of her heart, though enveloped in the cloud of mys¬ tery ; but Eleanor was the child of doubt and suspicion, and lord Montalban, with the warmth of a lover, only delighted in the conviction of her regard for him. Lord Arthur was also in a state of the greatest anxiety; agitation was depicted on his countenance, as turning to lord Montalban he took his hand, and bestow¬ ing on him the warmest applause for his brave exertions, he inquired to what place he had conducted the lady whom he had so fortunately rescued from the fire ? Lord Montalban replied by informing him of the cottage; " but," added he, " I have strange news concerning her, for, on going this morning to inquire as to her
health, to my great astonishment I found she had already quitted it." " Gone!" interrupted lord Arthur, in a tone of disappointment, while Eleanor, with quivering lips, in a faint voice, de¬ manded whither she was flown to ? " Of that 1 am in ignorance," replied lord Montalban, " and I must confess it is that part of her conduct which astonishes me. All I can learn from the people of the cottage is, that after taking about an hour's repose, she arose, though evidently in a weak and languid state, and thank¬ ing them for their kindness to her, said she must instantly depart. " It was in vain," added lord Montalban, " they pressed her stay; and at length ventured to ask her where she was going. She re¬ plied, that particular circumstances oblig¬ ed her to keep her retreat secret; and forcing on them a small reward, she begged, as the only favour they could do her, to tell lord Montalban, should he again visit her, that the remembrance of his bravery and kindness should ever
dwell in her heart—* Tell him,* she cried, ' not to deem me as ungrateful in thus flying from his presence; my sor¬ rows impel me to fly this spot, but in se¬ cret will I bless his name and pray for his happiness. Tell him my heart is burst¬ ing with the sense of obligation I owe him; bnt, alas ! I am not allowed the sa¬ tisfaction of personally thanking him.' This was all they could obtain from her, and before daybreak she quitted the cot¬ tage, and they remain in ignorance of her destination." " Good Heaven!" cried Eleanor, " where can she then have bent her steps ?" Lord Arthur looked on her with some degree of surprise. The power of speech seemed denied him, and he paced the room in silence; while lady Glendinning exclaimed—" You appear very interested, Eleanor, in this unknown person's fate. Rest yourself assured that she has her reasons for this strange conduct, and, per haps, it is better for all parties that she has thus withdrawn herself. Whoever
she is, she appears unfortunate, and Hea¬ ven, I trust, will bestow on her its firm support to guide her on her way." " I own myself greatly interested in her fate," said lord Montalban, " and I am confident she is not what she seems: her person was elegant, and though she was absorbed in terror, yet, in the transient view 1 had of her, 1 saw she was lovely in the extreme; and when the rose of health had adorned her cheek, I am con¬ vinced her countenance was beautiful." " Your lordship seems quite entranced with this unknown lady," interrupted Georgina ; " I suppose wc shall have you turn knight-errant, and wander about till you discover the enchanted castle to which your dulcinea has flown." Lord Montalban looked very displeased. —" No, Miss Glendinning," he replied, " I shall not attempt to intrude myself in her presence, nor endeavour to seek her out: as she has chosen to withdraw herself from our observation, I do not conceive myself authorised to seek her out. The senti-
ments she excited in my bosom were those of humanity, of which I trust I shall never be devoid, and when I see a woman in distress. I own myself susceptible in the extreme. That sex ever claims the warmest attention on our part, on account of the many ills to which, as the most delicate part of the creation, they are ex¬ posed ; and let no man style himself as such who would not risk every hazard to protect a defenceless female in the hour of danger. It was my fate to be the for¬ tunate instrument in saving the life of this lady, and I feel more than I can ex¬ press in the conviction of having at least in one instance done my duty." " And for which," interrupted Eleanor, "your lordship will meet your reward: the heroic action will be recorded in the book of heaven, and that Power who reigns there will smile on the exalted deed, and shed its choicest blessings on your head." Ail fixed their eyes on Eleanor, as in a firm tone she pronounced this speech.
They were astonished at Lei* warmth. She saw their surprise, and the courage which had lent her its support for a few minutes again left her, and she bent her eyes in soft confusion beneath the enrap¬ tured glance of lord Montalban.
CHAPTER IV.,
" What means then shall we try ? where hope to find A friendly harbour foi the restless mind ? Are these our great pursuits ? Is it thus to li\e ? These all the hopes this inuch-lov'd world can give ? How much more worthy envy is their fate Who search for happiness in a future state I" During the above scene, lord Arthur had remained a silent spectator, but it was evident not an unmoved one. He had continued pacing the room, until Eleanor addressed lord Montalban in so animated a tone. He then stopped suddenly, and fixed his eyes upon her. Varying sus¬ picions crossed his mind respecting her conduct, but the one most predominating in his bosom was the conviction of Elea¬ nor's regard for lord Montalban. He saw the impression was mutual, and from that
moment he resolved to befriend them as much as lay in his power. Lady Glendinning perceived the emo¬ tion under which all evidently laboured, and endeavouring to collect herself, she took her seat at the breakfast-table. Lord Arthur was, if possible, more me¬ lancholy and abstracted than ever : deep- dm\n sighs stole from his bosom, and just partaking of a small refreshment, he has¬ tily withdrew. Lord Montalban remained in conversa¬ tion with the ladies, but as soon as possi¬ ble Eleanor left the table, and, to the great disappointment of his lordship, she quickly letired from the room. Ever ac¬ tive iu the cause of disticss, Eleanor has¬ tened to the village, in order to view the scene of destruction; but how was hei gentle heart shocked at the scene which presented itself many a family, who a few houis since had had the fiiendly roof to shelter them, were now wandering about in a state of agony ; many who, through the bounty of Eleanor, had gained
a comfortable subsistence, were now re¬ duced to want, and without the means of procuring the comforts necessary to their existence. The benevolent Eleanor dis- tributed the contents of her purse amongst them, and farther promised to implore the liberality of lady Glendinning for their relief To her great satisfaction* she found her school-house had escaped the fire, and sustained no injury whatever. Eleanor also had another object of solicitude; the unknown female whom lord Montalban had saved caused her much anxiety; from what motive we will not define, but cer¬ tain it was, she inquired at the cottage, and at eveiy other place concerning her, but could gain no farther intelligence than that which lord Montalban had brought; and, with a heavy heaTt -and disappointed hopes, she returned to the castle. Lord Montalban had left it, and in ig¬ norance of her destination, he had re¬ turned to his own residence. Eleanor immediately addressed lady Glendinning in behalf of the poor 'sufferers, and im-
plored her compassion* and likewise that of Georgina. Lady Glendinning, though still keeping up a resentment against her, instantly drew her purse, and presented Eleanor with a small sum for their relief; and Georgina, in a very ungracious manner, gave a trifling donation, while Robert, with native, generosity, added -3. larger sum. Delighted with this success, Eleanor determined to return to the village, which benevolent purpose she accomplished, and soon had the satisfaction of bestowing re¬ lief on the poor unfortunate outcasts, who had thus been deprived of house and home. Still, however, she^found the sum inadequate to supply all their wants, and she promised them to tiy farther for their permanent relief. Whether it was the great anxiety that she took for the -suf¬ ferers, or whether it was owing to. the fa¬ tigue of her exertions, we will not say, but on making her appearance at- the din-
ner-table, she appeared so extremely fa¬ tigued and agitated, that it was observable to every one;, ?nd it seemed as if her emotion' was caught from lord-Arthur, who was in a state bordering, on distrac¬ tion. On the servanu being withdrawn, Eleanor again ventured to prefer her pe¬ tition for more assistance. Gedrgina rather sneeringly remarked, that she was indeed very indefatigable in her exertions, but that she thought enough had already been done. Eleanor forbore to reply, but turned to lady Glendinning, and cast a supplicating look on her. " I do not wish to prevent or discou¬ rage your charitable intentions," replied her ladyship, ■* but you may save your¬ self the trouble of applying to me any farther, as I have cdrcady bestowed all I think proper, and desire pot to be impor¬ tuned'any farther on the subject." Eleanor, though greatly disappointed, curtsied in silence, while lord Arthur,
starting from his chair, gazed sternly at his lady, and in an angry tone exclaimed —",1s your heart callous to the calls of charity? can you withstand the pleadings of this lovely snpplicator, who, though your inferior in years, sets you a pattern worthy the imitation of a prince? But, madam, withhold your paltry dross; ex¬ pend thousands in vain amusements; lavish extravagant sums for your own gratification, feast the rich, and withhold the saving hand from the poor and wretch¬ ed ; and amidst the gaieties into which you will no doubt soon plunge, lay your hand to your heart, and search for the self-ap¬ plauding conviction of having rescued a fellow-creature from misery. In vain will you seek for such an exquisite sensation as this; in vain will you find that unex¬ ampled, that sweet delight of charity." Lady Glendinning patiently bore his invective.—" It is well, my lord," she re¬ plied ; " since you so well know how to describe the self-approving dictates of con- VOL. II. E
scious rectitude, I hope you will endeavour to act so as to deserve them; while I only affirm, that my heart is at this moment perfectly calm, and yet I positively de¬ c-hire, I shall contribute no farther than I have already done." " It is well," returned lord Arthur. " Your ladyship shall no longer be impor¬ tuned on the subject of charity, which so ill accords with your disposition." " Have a care, my lord," interrupted lady Glendinning; " the time may come, when you will own you have wronged me by this severity; but I am content," she added, " Your lordship certainly must judge me in what light you think proper.". A tear dimmed the lustre of her eye, which she instantly endeavoured to con¬ ceal, by passing her hand across lier face; while lord Arthur, highly displeased with her, took the hand of Eleanor, and ex¬ claimed—" Come, my Eleanor, we will together repair to the village, and I will
see that every thing that is necessary shall be clone for the sufferers." Though greatly vexed, Eleanor was obliged to comply; yet she feared the in¬ dignation of lady Glendinning, as she had been, though innocently, the cause of this dissension. It was likewise so unusual a thing for lord Arthur to leave the castle, that she feared the remarks that would be made on it. Lord Arthur appeared buried in thought, and passing the arm of Eleanor within his own, they proceeded to the village, with¬ out scarcely speaking; but on arriving at the eventful spot, both involuntarily stop¬ ped before the remains of the house from which the unknown female had been res¬ cued. The window at which she had been seen yet remained standing, and lord Arthur cast a look of agony to¬ wards it. He felt the arm of Eleanor tremble. He cast a glance of inquiry on her, and beheld a deathly paleness on her countenance. E 2
The tears stole from her eyes as she ex¬ claimed—" What a dreadful scene!" " It is indeed, my Eleanor," he replied; " yet had you seen it when I did, sur¬ rounded by all its horrors, you would have been affected. Had you witnessed the distress of that lovely female, as she stood at yon burning window, your gentle heart would have shrunk with horror; for oh, it even shook my fortitude!" His voice faltered as^ he spoke. He paused, and looked mournfully on Elea¬ nor. Both were agitated to the highest de¬ gree, and they each appeared desirous of concealing their feelings.—" I do not won¬ der, my lord," replied Eleanor, " at the effect it took on you. Her appearance in such a way must have been agonizing to the extreme. Alas! what a fate is hers! Ah, where can she have withdrawn her¬ self? Would I could see her!" " Oh, would you could!" returned lord Arthur; " would we could both at this
instant behold her! At such a moment as this, I would------" He made a deep pause, as if wishing to leave the sentence unfinished; while Eleanor, with a voice of strong emotion, exclaimed—" You would what, my lord ?" " Stretch out a hand to protect her," he replied. " She is evidently drooping be¬ neath the weight of affliction; and I would of course glory in rescuing her, if possible, from further misery. Yes," he added, with much warmth, and sudden anima¬ tion, " if she can be found, I will protect her. We will together, Eleanor, search every cottage to find her; and, if possible, you shall behold her." With trembling steps Eleanor proceeded along. Hope danced in her eyes as they made fresh inquiries; but all were fruit¬ less ; nor could any intelligence be gained concerning the unknown stranger, no far¬ ther than had been repeated by lord Mont¬ alban. The spirits of lord Arthur evidently sunk at this fresh disappointment, and he
expressed his wish to return home.— " Yet," he cried, " let us not be unmind¬ ful of the other sufferers, for whose sake we have interested ourselves. Here is a purse," he added. " Do you, Eleanor, dispose of its contents, as best suits your own ideas of benevolence." Eleanor took his liberal donation.— " Will not your lordship bestow it your¬ self," she cried, " and receive the grati¬ tude of these poor creatures, whose hearts will beat with joy at the sight of their noble benefactor ?" " No, Eleanor," he replied, " my mind is not at present attuned to their honest effusions; nor do I merit their praise; it is what I would wish to avoid. I will therefore walk slowly on towards the castle, when, after bestowing your bounty, you can overtake me." Eleanor curtsied, and left him, in order to obey his wishes. She knew it was in vain to draw him into society, particularly in the present instance, where his presence would have excited general acclamations
of applause, in the event of his bounty. From this she knew his noble soul would shrink, and as she left him, she cast a sigh of regret on his care-worn countenance. She viewed him as a true picture of hu¬ man mortality, formed by nature, noble, generous, and sincere; but having, by one fatal act, departed from the steps of the last quality, he had degenerated into the gloomy and restless misanthrope, discon¬ tented with himself, and all the world; a stranger to repose or peace, and in tor¬ menting himself with painful retrospec¬ tion, was foregoing all the present bless¬ ings which surrounded him. —" Alasl" sighed Eleanor, " unfortunate, yet culp¬ able as thou art, who shall speak peace to thy troubled mind ? what event can restore thy lost happiness ? Ah! would I dare whisper comfort to thy ear! but that sweet delight is forbidden me, else thou shouldst know there is one who pities thy mental sufferings; and though I abhor thy errors, yet should a whole world combine against thee, Eleanor must not.
She would supplicate the Almighty Dis¬ poser of all events to pardon thy crime, and pour the balm of peace into thy sor¬ rowing heart." Eleanor wiped away the tears which flowed down her cheeks at this mental ejaculation/and entered a cottage where most of the sufferers were assembled, and anxious to dispense her assistance, she hastily presented them with the purse of lord Arthur, desiring them to share its contents according to their wants. It was received by all with the utmost demonstrations of joy, and professions of gratitude. " Sure," cried a venerable old man, who had been a sufferer in the highest degree, " the hand of Heaven has been stretched for our relief. Let no one say Charity no longer exists, for she has dispensed her blessings on our heads with the utmost liberality. Noble lord Arthur," he con¬ tinued, " we have the pleasure of being able to bless thy name, whilp our other benefactress we can only thank in idea,
and invoke blessings on our unknown preserver." -. "To whom do you allude?" inquired Eleanor. The old man replied—" That since she had last visited them, a lady, closely at¬ tired, and deeply veiled, had entered their dwelling; that she inquirecl much respect¬ ing the strange lady whom lord Montal¬ ban rescued, and appeared very anxious concerning her; but no one being able to answer her inquiries, she questioned the rest as to their losses, and with the great¬ est benevolence she distributed the sum of one hundred pounds for their relief. It was in vain," he continued, " that we becked to know to whom we were so highly indebted. She insisted upon our remaining in ignorance; and on our ex¬ pressing our thanks for her unbounded' generosity, she withdrew, and shrunk from our praises with such expressions of humbleness, that it appeared as if she were the person obliged, instead of ,the exalted benefactor."' e 3
" And have you no idea who she is?" cried Eleanor, much surprised at this ac¬ count. " No, madam," replied the sire; " my daughter here says she caught a glance of her features once, by her veil blowing aside, and thinks she should know her again, as she was a lady of great beauty and affability of manners; but whoever she is, she possesses a heart formed of the noblest materials, and Heaven will reward her for her generous actions." The old man now besought Eleanor to express their gratitude to lord Arthur for his kindness, and likewise poured forth their thanks to her for her own benevo¬ lence. She also heard them speak with admi¬ ration on another name, in which her heart took the greatest interest — they were loud in their applause of lord Mont¬ alban. Eleanor heard them in silence. She could not speak. What passion actuated her hosom t that while all. tongues were
loud in his applause, she remained alone silent; whilst others described his heroic bravery, she was mute, not because she felt it not; on the contrary, she found the praises sink deep into her heart. She could not express her approbation in mere words. It was true her lips remained unclosed, but had an observer read the language of her eyes, they would have beheld the rapture which beamed in them. So true it is,, that the passion of love is more eloquent in silence than in all the* mere flimsy expressions of speech. Eleanor had paused to hear his praises, but recollecting lord Arthur was waiting for her, she hastily left the cottage, and soon joined him, as he was impatiently expecting her. Eleanor began by informing him of the benevolent stranger, who had so liber¬ ally assisted the cottagers. Lord Arthur listened attentively to her- narrative.—" Such a woman as that," he exclaimed,, " is worthy the admiration of all. Oh, how different to lady Gtendin-
ning I Why was it my lot to marry an object so the reverse ? I ever knew her to be proud, and of an aspiring spirit; but till this day I had flattered myself she possessed humanity of heart; but her cold "and decided refusal to you convinced me she is not blest with one softer feeling of charity and compassion." . Eleanor endeavoured to excuse her lady¬ ship, by alledging that, on her first ap¬ plication, she had immediately bestowed a donation, antl probably did not choose to give more; and then trying to turn the subject, she continued—" I wish, my lord, I could have prevailed on you to have personally received their honest effusions. Your heart would have experienced the greatest satisfaction in witnessing tlieir joy, occasioned by your own hand; but through my humble tongue your lordship must receive their thanks." " None arc due to me, Eleanor," inter¬ rupted lord Arthur. " I have only given them a little paltry dross, of which I was not in want myself. What merit lies in
that? and why should I listen to praises which I deserve not ? You well know I hate the flimsy effusions of the babbling multitude, which comprise the world, from which I have withdrawn myself, nor ever wish again to enter it. And would you have me now force myself into the pre¬ sence of these poor people, merely to com¬ pel them to annoy me with thanks, wliich are neither my due, nor do I wish to hear them? 'No, Eleanor, I deserve not the applause of man, for I have lost my own approbation; and what avails the mere flattery directed to me by a misjudging race, who, because they benefit by that which I want not, would convert me into a god, and offend my ear by their ill-timed expressions ? No, Eleanor, never will I listen to sounds like these. Tell me of that being who will stand forth, and open¬ ly upbraid me with my many crimes, and I will listen with an attentive ear; and in weeping over my guilt, wash away the remembrance of my past life." " Forbear, my lord," cried. Eleanor,
greatly shocked at his evident agitation, " forbear such a strain as this, which suit's not with the mind and disposition of lord Arthur, who, resigning himself to the gloomy ideas of a tortured fancy, throws away the blessings by which he is sur¬ rounded. Forgive me, my lord," she con¬ tinued, " speaking in such a strain as this; but when I see you resigning yourself to an unavailing grief, it is but my duty to rouse you from it, and at least endeavour to point out tho roses as well as thorns that attend your steps." " That is a task beyond thy powers," he replied. " No, Eleanor, not one rose is strewed in my path. My fate is dark; and weary am I of this pilgrimage, this earthly career." " Talk not so/ cried Eleanor; " you have many happier years in store, I trust, yet. Believe me, I am not insensible to your sorrows. Would they could be ame¬ liorated ! but, my lord, that Power who can wound will also heal, when He sees fit. It is not for me to point out the,*
blessings of religion, which alone can sup¬ port us in the hour of trial. Look with hope to those realms above; repose in safety on the mercy of him who receives the penitence of his creatures; and be as¬ sured, my lord, you will experience the blessing of a self-approving conscience." " Alas, Eleanor!" he replied, " could I but once regain that, all might be well. There was a time, when posssessed of a heart light and at ease, I was the gayest of human beings; but my hopes were early blighted. To please a father, I sacri¬ ficed my happiness. I married a woman opposite to my taste; and our union, as you well know, Eleanor, has proved a source of misery." \" And yet, my lord," replied Eleanor, " lady Glendinning- possesses many noble*, nay, amiable qualities; and ungrateful 1 must I be, the child of her bounty, if X- did not acknowledge her kindness and benevolence, in sheltering a poor orphan like myself, when forced upon her bounty by my unfortunate mother."
"Unfortunate mother!" re-echoed lord Arthur. " Oh, well may you say so! she is indeed most unfortunate." " I sincerely believe so, my lord," re¬ plied Eleanor, fixing her eyes on him; " and it has often excited my wonder, that my father should have never stepped forth and acknowledged his child. My heart pants to receive a father's blessing, and to be clasped in a paternal embrace." Lord Arthur caught her hand.—" Hold," he cried, "or you will unman-me! In me, Eleanor, behold one who will prove a father to you; and be assured I feel as such for you; and I am convinced the time will, nay, it must arrive, when* your father will proudly acknowledge his child. Oh, Eleanor," he added, " forbear a reply. You know not the emotions you excite in this harassed bosom—the agony I en¬ dure is torture to. the extreme. I know you think my conduct strange and incom¬ prehensible, but my tongue must not ex¬ plain. It is, alas! the poor prerogative of greatness to sigh in silence, and unpitied."
He pressed her hand fervently, as they had now reached the castle, and entering in, he hastily rushed towards his own room, while Eleanor mentally uttered a prayer to that Power who alone could calm his distracted mind.
CHAPTER V.
" Her beauteous formj that first to love his heart iiiclin'd, Still wanders in his warm, his ardent mind; He saw her as the new-blown blossoms fair, Sprightly ns light, more soft than summer's air. Bright as their beams, her eyes a mind disclose, Whilst on her lips gay blush'd the fragrant rose; Wit, youth, and love, in each dear feature shone: - Prest on by fate, he gaz'd, and was undone." On entering the drawing-room, Eleanor beheld lord Montalban, who immediately arose to meet her, and taking her hand, inquired, with the greatest solicitude, if she had recovered from the effects of her indisposition ? A pensive smile stole over her lovely features, as she assured him of her conva¬ lescence. Her pallid cheek and agitated counten¬ ance contradicted her assertion. Pier voice trembled with emotion as she ad-
dressed him, whilst his lordship continued to gaze on her with looks of rapture. From her behaviour to him in the morn¬ ing he augured the most pleasing auspices, and he resolved, in spite of every difficul¬ ty, to gain her for his own; and for this purpose he determined to seek some op¬ portunity of revealing his sentiments to lier in private, when, if he could gain an acknowledgment in his favour from her own lips, he would further implore her to wait until some more favourable oppor¬ tunity should offer of openly avowing his love for her to his family. Lady Glendinning and her daughter both remained at home that evening. Lady Lenox also added her company, and with her usual malignity watched the actions of lord JMontalban. She saw his whole attention was directed towards Eleanor, and she whispered to lady Glen¬ dinning, that the London scheme must instantly be put into execution, or serious consequences would arise. Lady Glendinning, who wished much
to visit London once more, independent of Eleanor, assented; and lady Lenox re¬ solved that their journey should take place as quick as possible. Eleanor observed the scrutiny of lady Lenox, and taking the first moment in her power, she again withdrew. Lord Montalban involuntarily arose on her departure, and stationed himself at the window, and in a few minutes he be¬ held the object of his solicitude crossing the lawn. A sigh escaped his lips as she disappeared from his sight. He would have given worlds, had he possessed them, to have been able to follow her steps, antl to breathe in her ear the soft wishes of his soul, but he dared not quit the com¬ pany of the ladies in which he now was; and with a heavy heart he endeavoured to enter into conversation. Georgina seated herself at the piano, and lord Montalban, ever a lover of mu¬ sic, joined in a soft strain, in order to be¬ guile the passing hour, until tho return of Eleanor,
Lord Aithur had shut himself in his own room, and had given orders not. to be disturbed, as he was indisposed; and all knew his habitual gloom too well to dis¬ obey his commands. Lady Lenox threw out some bitter al¬ lusions respecting him, which lady Glen¬ dinning heard in silence. As the time began to draw on with leaden wings, at least to lord Montalban, he drew out his watch, and impatiently named the hour, till at length Eleanor made her appearance; but how much was he distressed at the symptoms of grief and sorrow visible in her countenance ! De¬ jection sat upon her face; and with a fal¬ tering voice she begged permission to re¬ tire for the night, as she found herself very indisposed. Lady Glendinning bowed her assent; and Eleanor curtseying to all, left the room for the night. " Miss Glendinning appears very ill," exclaimed lord Montalban, in a voice of
the utmost solicitude. " Had she not better have advice?" " Oh, to be sure," replied lady Lenox, in a spiteful tone. " The whole college of physicians had better be summoned to her aid. But I am fearful all their skill combined will not cure her of her ridicu¬ lous whims and airs, which she is for ever giving herself" " Eleanor certainly looks very ill." said lady Glendinning, without noticing her mother's illiberal speech; " and her coun- tenance betrays a mind ill at ease, or I am much mistaken; but whatever may be the cause, as she does not choose to reveal, I shall not seek to know. Her conduct has certainly of late appeared very mys¬ terious." " Say, rather, very reprehensible," in¬ terrupted lady Lenox; " and any one* but you would insist on an explanation from herself." " No," replied lady Glendinning, " I will not be the cause of her again telling
a falsehood; and it is evident she does not wish I should know the truth." During this short conversation lord Montalban was distracted; to hear her thus spoken of, without being allowed the poor privilege of defending her, was agony to the extreme; and it was also an additional torture to his soul, in the conviction that the conduct of Eleanor was mysterious, and until he could in some measure have it explained, he remained miserable. As early as possible he withdrew from the castle, leaving lady Lenox to make her comments on his conduct, which she did in so violent a strain, that lady Glen¬ dinning almost became a convert to her opinion, and agreed as to the propriety of removing Eleanor from the presence of lord Montalban. Lady Lenox soon after ordered her carriage and returned home, and on her pillow she reflected on the most advisable plan to adopt, in order to remove Eleanor to London, without its seeming a preme¬ ditated plot to lord Arthur, who, she was
well aware, would use his authority to -\prevent it. To lady Cecilia Gray she was resolved to apply for assistance, as she well knew she was a woman who, to promote her own designs, would make use of any steps which her vindictive imagination couid invent. Early the next morning, therefore, she repaired to B------ House, and quickly communicated the cause of her visit to lady Cecilia, who, with a smile of appro¬ bation, replied—" That fortune favoured their designs, as she had received letters from her agent in London, requesting her immediate presence, to settle her affairs; and it would appeavbut as a natural event to make a party to accompany her to that place of gaiety." And she proposed to pay a vkit to lady Glendinning, on pur¬ pose to invite her openly to accompany her, with her family. " It was true," she added, " that lord Montalban must also be of the party; but that they must put up with his being in the society of Elea¬ nor during their journey, as, on their ar-
riving jn London, it was determined <she should be fixed with Mrs. Conway." Lady Lenox was quite overjoyed at this plan, and in a short time accompani¬ ed lady, Cecilia to St. f Michael's,, and, made .known her intentions to lady Glen¬ dinning, who immediately expressed, her determination to accompany her,-with her family, to London; and it was agreed that, in a week from that day, they should commence their journey. • Lady Lenox was now quite elated with the idea of removing the innocent object of her hatred from the sight of lord Mont¬ alban, and her grandson Robert, of whom she likewise entertained the greatest fears, respecting his partiality for her. She knew not the heroic resolutions he had formed, and to which lie was strictly ad¬ hering ; and though it had cost him a severe struggle, he had partly conquered his un¬ fortunate attachment for Eleanor, whom he now regarded as a dear sister; and it was with much concern he beheld her VOL. II. l«*
visible dejection, which he placed to the account of her love for lord Montalban. Lord Arthur had kept a close prisoner to his own room, during the time since his visit to the village with Eleanor; nor did he quit it until the hour of dinner. When he made his appearance at the table, lady Glendinning immediately in¬ quired as to his health, as his look indicat¬ ed extreme debility. He replied, that he was very ill, and scarcely able to do the honours of his table, btit that he had exerted himself for that "purpose. Her ladyship replied, she was particu¬ larly obliged, as she much wished to see Mm, to acquaint him with her intention Of accompanying lady Cecilia Gray to London. Lord Arthur replied, that she was cer¬ tainly at liberty to make what arrange¬ ments she thought proper, and inquired wheti she meant to commence her jour- *iey? She informed him of their hasty de-
parture, adding-r^ I know, my lord, it would be a mere compliment to invite you to accompany us, as X suppose your health would not permit it." " Neither my health nor spirits would allow of it," replied lord Arthur. " I liave no inclination to quit the solitude of $t- Michael's; but as I cannot expect ypu tp confine yourself, I shall make no .opposjr tion to your leaving it." " Your lordship is very obliging," cried lady Glendinning, " and I certainly shall avail myself of your kindness." She then turned to Eleanor, and desired that she would prepare herself for the journey. Eleanor turned pale at this command, as in a tremulous voice she inquired, if she was to accompany her ladyship ? " Certainly," replied lady .Glen&nniag. " I have always as yet given you the same advantages as my own children; and in this instance I shall not deprive you of the benefit of a trip to London, where you E-2
will witness the ease and elegance of tha scene of fashion and splendour." " But perhaps Eleanor may have nc inclination to visit that gay resort," criec 1 lord Arthur; " and I should think it mosl advisable for lier to remain on her native shore; and indeed it is my wish that sht should stay with me, if it would not prove irksome to her." " Oh no, my lord," quickly returned Eleanor. " On the contrary, I should prefer it, if lady Glendinning would ex¬ cuse my attendance. I ha ye indeed no inclination for scenes of gaiety." ^ The colour of lady Glendinning mount¬ ed in her face, as lord Arthur expressed his wishes respecting Eleanor. He had readi¬ ly agreed for her to quit Scotland, but Eleanor he was anxious should remain with him. Her-- proud spirit again arose at this pointed preference, and in a haugh¬ ty tone she replied — " However your lordship - may influence the actions' oi Eleanor, I shall, in this instance, remain decided. If I am capable of protecting
my own daughter, whom your lord¬ ship makes no objection to my taking, I can also receive the charge of Eleanor; and I positively assert, I shall not quit the castle without her. It is therefore my command, Eleanor, that you prepare to attend me, as I shall admit of no ex¬ cuse whatever." Eleanor replied, that she would certain¬ ly obey her; but it was evident that the command gave her the most serious con¬ cern. Lord Arthur remained silent on the subject. He had his own private reasons for wishing the departure of lady Glen¬ dinning for a time, and that of the prying lady Lenox, whom he had ever cordially disliked, and he therefore did not wish to oppose lady Glendinning in her plan; but on her first mentioning it, he had no idea that she would have taken Eleanor with her, and he had anticipated the de¬ light he should feel in her society; and he still resolved, if possible, to keep her with
him, though lie thought it most prudent not to pursue the subject farther at pre- teftt Lady Glendinning, highly offended with him, left the table as early as pos¬ sible ; and lord Arthur, after taking a few glasses of wine with his son, retired to his own room. Earl Campbell had of late been nearly confined to his chamber; old age and in¬ firmities were fast wearing him away, added to which his mind was ill at ease. Conscience, that never-failing torment to a tortured breast, whispered in his ear, that he had heen the instrumental cause of both his children's misery. Lady Fran-' ces, by his severity, was lost to her family, and Heaven only knew 1 her fate; while in his son, lord Arthur, he daily beheld the visible effects of his having sacrificed his happiness to his commands, in uniting himself to lady Glendinning; and he shud¬ dered as he recollected the words of lord Arthur, previous to his union, wherein he
asserted, " that of whatever misery his union was productive, the earl alone was the cause." t This reflection haunted his imagination, and he would have given all liis wealth to have recalled the hour when he sacrificed both his children to ambition; and in solir tude he passed the hours in agonizing re¬ flections. Lady Glendinning still fte^y to, scenes of gaiety, leaving the two noble masters of St. Michael's buried in their pwn gloo¬ my, ideas; and while her own, heart car¬ ried a rankling thorn^, she forced the smile of gaiety into her countenance, and under the mask of pride, she concealed her real feelings from the misjudging muj> titude. - ,- iu. . , On retiring on this day from the dinnerr table, she ordered her, carriage, and, with Georgina,' repaired to fulfil, an engager ment, and leaving word they should mt be home until a. late-hour, left the..castle. < Some time after their departure, ISJeanpr,
who had been sitting alone, descended to the drawing-room, and' pensively seating herself at the window, reflected *on the commands of lady Glendinning to attend her" to London. Never had any com¬ mands proved so unwelcome as 1 these; for there ivere reasons which at this present time rendered ! the ! task agonizing to Elea¬ nor ; yet she saw no way to avoid it; and the tears flowed fast froni her eyes at 'the idea. ( v She had sat some little time, when she beheld lord Montalban coming towards the castle. Her heart beat, and she scarce¬ ly knew how to receive him, as she had endeavoured to avoid being alone' with him; yet it would now appear so pointed to leave the room, that she thought it best to stay. k ! f On arriving at the castle.' lord Montal¬ ban was informed both lady Glendinning and her daughter were absent; but who can conceive his joy, on -inquiring * for Eleanor, to find she was at hoin6 and
alone! ^Vyith the wings of love he al¬ most flew to the drawing-room, where she sat, and taking her hand, he inquired, with a voice of ineffable tenderness, if she had recovered her late indisposition ? She trembled as she replied in the affir¬ mative; but her pallid cheek caught the attention of lord Montalban; he saw the tears which, like the dewy star of even¬ ing, still shone in her eye. This was an opportunity not to be lost —a moment for which he had so long sighed; and he resolved to know his fate — -<? You assert, your recovery," he cried, " and-yet your countenance indicates far otherwise. Oh, why are those precious tears still trembling in your eyes? and why does that lovely face carry such evi¬ dent marks of dejection, so different to when I iu;st beheld you, on that never to- be-forgotten ; night? Oh, Eleanor, reveal the cruel cause to him who would sacri¬ fice all to procure you happiness!" . "My lord," cried Eleanor, "you mis- V B
take. The effects of tny late indisposition have not worn off. No 'Other cause exists that I aan reveal." " %>h, Eleanor," replied his lordship, " would I could induce you to place full confidence in me! Your happiness *s in¬ deed dear to tny hea-rt; it is connected with m) own; nor can I ever know peace until I obtain ah acknowledgment from you that I am not indifferent to you. Oh, my Eleanor, (permit me to cah* you so) you cannot be in ignorance of my sentiments towards yourself, and must pity the unfortunate situation into wliich, by'the folly of my relations, I am plunged; but though 'circumstances impel me 1 to carry on a trifling deception, 1 positively declare I never will sacrifice myself to their wishes. My heart, {Eleanor, is yours. Then give tne some hopes that *my F, pttS- skrfi is reciprocal, and I will 'yet hrave-alt to gain my EleanOr." Is ( " Hold, my lord," -she t-eplied. " This is a language to which ^1 'must -not listen. Your engagement to Georgina ought to
be a sufficient reason to impose a silence on ^our lips, however your inclinations may turn to the contrary; nor can I hold myself as just in listening a momenjb to such U strain. You are j-ecejved Jn this house as the acknowledged lover of }i& heiress, and such I must consider you." ( "Cruel girl!" cried lord Montalban, "can you talk fcjms coldly ? Alas! J had flattered .myself that my idea was not in¬ different to you. The interest which I .imagined you jtook in my late yesterday .morning, gave me the liveliest pleasure; but your present behaviour { plunges ,me into misery, as I fear I love without frppe. Oh, Eleanor! you cannot be inse^s^le to the sentiments which I have -enter,t#in- edfcr you since our first meejbing; #nd, forgive my presumption .when J say, I cherished them under the ide# ,pjf tlieir being congepial to your own; nor would I relinquish tl?em for worlds, as they,alone support me under,my present misfortune,. Oh, Eleanor! beloved Eleanor!;ca^i you h$ar ,tp see me the victim to a .hopeless
passion, when, by one sweet' smile, you could make me happy." j ' He paused, and gazed earnestly in her face.' 'What a moment was this for Eleanor! She feltunable to assume coldness foreign to her'heart; yet, under all circumstances, she could not encourage his addresses— *' c "My ford," she replied, in a voice of ex¬ treme agitation,'" I am not insensible to your Writs,' nor ungrateful for your good opinion; aiid were I situated otherwise, I will be 1 candid in saying, I would, with pleasure, 1 'constitute your'lordship's happi¬ ness . but 1 as it is, you will see the pro¬ priety bf waving this subject, which can only tetid to make us both unhappy; and 1 sinceiely hope your lordship will find every felicity in the marriage state"- '• "* "'Never,'' interrupted lord Montalban; "never, my Eleanor, unless you-are-the lovely being who will constitute it. ( You have'revived all my hopes, and hear my firm declaration^ that I never will' unite mysfelf to Georgina. Only give me one
sweet acknowledgment, and; I 'will wait patiently for that time when I can openly avow my love for my Eleanor^ who .will hot then refuse my vows." :/; r ;; He pressed her hand fervently. Adeep blush suffused itself over her face. ? ■ ^The truth /spread itself in sweet confusion in her lovely countenance; and lord Mont¬ alban passionately pressed his cause, with such irresistible ardour, that Eleanor could scarcely? assume a reserve. A reciprocal acknowledgment trembled on Her lips; but; virgin modesty forbad the sentence, andf it died away in soft confusion. LordHMontalban 'was enraptured;^ he read the language of her heart in her eyes, and he proceeded to; say, that ^ he. would, with her permission,: speak to lord Arthur on the subject, who, he flattered himself, would* not withhold his* consent, and 'that, if only assured of her love, he would rest eonterited ; until some favourable ^oppor¬ tunity' should; occur to make his swishes known to his family." ;.-fnm^w.\ ^ f That you hvould have lord Arthur's
..ELEANOR. sanction," replied Eleanor, " I am certain. He appreciates your many noble qualities; hut, my lord, though you have partly drawn from me a confession which I .would for ever conceal, I cannot consent to such steps being taken. There are many reasons to forbid it, and I tmuet de¬ cline all such proceedings; and if you re¬ gard both my happiness and yoiu' own, bury this unhappy passion for sever in oblivion. There are many reasons why I can oiever become yours." " You distress me beyond measure," cried lord Montalban, " by this avowal. What -are Iho'.e cruel reasons ? Surely, if I remove theobstacle on my part, no other cause «an exist. Oh, say 1 have not a il •val an your affections '" Lord 'MontaUlban looked anxiously in her face. iHe remembered ithe accusation wMch had been made against her, respect ing her meeting with some favoured.-loMer, and he waited between -hope and fear for her answer. i > ■ Before she could make him a reply, the
door opened, and a servant entered the room, and bowing to Eleanor, presented her with a letter, which he said had just been brought, and no answer required. Eleanor seized the ietter with avidity, and casting her eyes on the superscription, involuntarily pressed it to her lips, while lord Montalban stood motionless ' with surprise—jealousy seized his soul, as,«re¬ gardless of his presence, she broke 1 the seal, and perused its contents. Joy -evidently danced in her eyes, as, raising her clasped hands to heaven, she appeared ito, utter a mental ejaculation; and then hastily closing her letter, she placed it in her bosom, and casting a look of confusion on lord Mont¬ alban, appeared, for the first time, to be sensible of his presence. i '' " f
' .* ' i- > CHAPTER VI. ■i * * ' Soon as thy letters trembling T unclose, , That well-known name awakens all my woes. Oh, name, for ever sad ! for ever dear ! Still breath'd in sighs, still nsher'd with ateai 'Dear fatal nnmV! rest ever unreveal'd, N<jr pass these lips in holy silence scal'd. Heaven fust taught letters, foi some wretch's aid, , Some bnmsh'd lo\er, or some captive maid; They H\e, they speak, they broil he what line inspires, Warm from the soul, and faithful to its fires.. > Pocf, i ' Oh, wilt thou leave me thus unsatisfied? ^HAkr'SpFAIU By the scrutinizing glance of lord Mont¬ alban, Eleanor was aware that her con¬ duct had surprised and disconcerted him, and in consequence she became more em¬ barrassed, as she knew she coidd not ex¬ plain to him the cause of her emotion; and both for a few minutes remained si¬ lent, till at length lord Montalban, look-
ing anxiously at her, exclaimed—" Were I not to notice the visible agitation excited in you by the receipt of this letter, it would appear as if the professions I have just been making were * insincere. You must be aware, Eleanor, of the tender interest I take in your welfare, and what my feelings must at this moment be, lest that epistle, so wekomely received, should have been written by a rival. You will therefore, I am sure, both excuse and re¬ lieve my fears, by informing me what correspondent it is, whose writing is so evidently dear to your heart. Oh, Elea¬ nor ! instantly remove my torturing sus¬ picions, and say from whom that letter comes." " Impossible, my lord," replied Eleanor, in a faltering tone; " I cannot comply with your lordship's request," " Cannot I" he re-echoed. " Cannot, Eleanor! / Rather say you will not! Cruel fate is mine, thus to have the cup of hap¬ piness ' for ever dashed from my lips; a few minutes since, and I flattered myself
that I' had gained an interest in your bo¬ som, and that you would have sweetly confirmed my happiness, by consenting to have become mine; but now those pleasing prospects vanish. I see the rea¬ sons which you asserted prevented your uniting yourself to me. My worst fears are confirmed-1 see I have a favoured rival." " My lord," interrupted Eleanor, " you wrong me. However appearances are against me, I am innocent of your charge." •" Then reveal this mystery," cried lord Montalban. " Can you say that your feelings are not warmly excited for this secret correspondent ? Your conduct be¬ trayed not only solicitude, but the ten- derest affection. Can you say otherwise ?" " No, my lord," replied Eleanor, " I will not deny that sacred truth; and how¬ ever I may be the sufferer in your lord¬ ship's good opinion, I own there is not that being in existence for whose welfare I am so tenderly anxious, but whose name
cannot escape these lips. I know, my lord, your feelings, and am sorry for them; believe me, I would not willingly be guilty of cruelty to your lordship, and though I value your friendship, your es¬ teem, yet 1 feel I must lose them for ever. You will deem m? mysterious, and perhaps criminal; but it ij my fate, and I must obey its imperious commands, which now oblige me instantly to leave you." " To leave me!" he cried. " Oh, Elea¬ nor, what has this avowal not cost me! And would you then leave me in a state like this ? For pity's sake stay, and give me some explanation!" " My lord, I cannot. Particular reasons call me this instant from the castle." " 'Tis well," exclaimed lord Montalb?.^, turning angrily from her. " Go then, and meet this happy favoured rival, and for¬ get in his embraces the wretched Mont¬ alban, whom your cruelty has rendered for ever miserable. Yes," he continued, in a hasty tone, " my hopes are for ever
blighted. My friends may now dispose of me as they please^ for to every thing I am now indifferent—fbfby Eleanor I am rejected." - i - The agitation of Eleano. was so exces¬ sive, that she leaned for a moment against the door for support.—" My lord," she cried, " you wrong me. Heaven knows Lwould willingly relieve you, but------" She paused. He approached her, and took her trembling hand—" Oh, what a task is mine!" she continued. " The strug¬ gle is great, but duty gains the victory. Faiewell, my lord!" saying which she hastily broke from him, and rushed from the room. Lord Montalban sunk on a chair, in a state of absolute dejection, and remained for some time without the power of mov¬ ing, when suddenly recollecting himself, he started up, in order to return home, as if any of the family entered the room, he should not be in spirits to converse. On going towards the door, he beheld
lying on the carpet the very letter which had thus distressed him, evidently dropped by Eleanor in her agitation and haste to leave him. With an involuntary eager¬ ness he picked up the fatal paper, and half unclosed it. He paused. Reflection represented to him, was he at liberty to do so, would it be right to possess himself of the know¬ ledge of that which Eleanor had so scrupu¬ lously concealed from him ? Yet he con¬ sidered it was not an idle curiosity promp¬ ted him to read it—it was a motive found¬ ed upon his future happiness or misery, and he resolved, let what would be the consequences, to peruse it; he therefore hastily opened it, and with indescribable emotion read as follows:—
" Oh, my Eleanor! my beloved girl! what have 1 not suffered since our last meeting! I know your affectionate heart will ache at the fatal cause of my affliction. Ah! little did I suppose, wheu
we parted, such a dreadful occurrence would intervene to prevent our usual in¬ terview. Think, my dearest Eleanor, what must have been my sufferings, at being deprived also of my only earthly happiness, that of seeing you and folding you to my tortured heart; but I could not find means to convey any intelligence to you until the present moment, in con¬ sequence of the secrecy which must be observed in our communications. I fear lest the late occurrence should have proved too much for your tender bosom; but hear up, my beloved girl, for my sake, and be cautious you do not betray me to lord Arthur. I have much to unfold to you; but my senses are quite disoraored __I cannot write. Meet me then at the usual spot this evening, and at the usual hour, and I will then pour out all my sorrows to the bosom of her who is my only comforter, and whom I know takes the tenderest interest in my fate. Oh, my Eleanor, let. me <onee more dasp you in my ardent embrace, and 1 shall ibe are*
compensed for all my sufferings. Do not fail to meet me. Farewel'! " Your affectionate, " E." The feelings of lord Montalban can be better imagined than described during the perusal of the above letter. He eager¬ ly examined the writing. It was a bold and masterly hand, and his tortured fancy instantly pronounced it to be written by one of his own sex; the language also convinced him it must be so, and tlie con¬ viction drove him almost to agony. Elea¬ nor was then lost to him for ever; for was not this fatal scrawl proof sufficient," strong as holy writ," of the reciprocity of affection which subsisted between her and *this fa¬ voured rival ? She was likewise, beyond doubt, gone to meet him, according to his request; and lord Montalban tortured himself with the idea of her being with another, in whose society she would of course forget him. He had flattered him-
self that he had excited some interest in her heart; but he pictured to himself that she wa^ previously engaged in some secret amour, which prevented her receiving his addresses, which she might otherwise have accepted. Yet the idea of her carrying on such a clandestine correspondence low¬ ered her in his opinion, and he resolved to mike the effort of banishing her from his heart. So absorbed was he in his own reflec¬ tions, that he noticed not the opening of the door, until he beheld the form of Eleanor before him. He started on her unexpected appearance, and gazing on her, he saw her countenance was pale, and exhibited signs of affright. She glanced her eyes on the carpet, and then.on lord Montalban.—"I beg your lordship's pardon," she cried, " but I have lost. ------" She paused, as he cast on her so pene¬ trating a glance that she appeared unable to proceed. " What,can Miss Glendinning have
lost," he replied, " to cause her this emotion? Had you sustained the loss I have, you might have cause for regret; for, alas! my peace of mind is gone for ever." " Pray, my lord, add not to my present distress," she cried. " I have lost a paper which is of the greatest consequence to me, aiid which causes me the utmost con¬ cern." ** Be under no apprehension, madam," returned lord Montalban, " your letter is safe," at the same time presenting it to her, " and happy am I," he continued, " to have it in my power thus to ease your fears; for though my happiness is for ever gone by this dreaded conviction to my doubts, yet your welfare must ever be dear to my heart; and oh, may you be happy with lum who is in possession of your affections!" Eleanor averted her eyes as she took the letter.—" Alas, my lord I" she cried, " that wish, I fear, is vain. I am not VOL. II. &
destined to taste the cup of happiness; but," she continued, endeavouring to as¬ sume a tone of fortitude, " there is an¬ other favour I would ask at your lordship's hands, and which will add to the large debt I already owe you" " What is there I would not do to pro¬ mote the peace of Eleanor?" interrupted lord Montalban, again thrown off his u-uard by her looks of tenderness; "and to what debt can you allude ? I have not as yet had the happiness of serving you." " Oh, yes, you have," quickly returned Eleanor. " You know not how much so; yet, though my heart is bursting with gratitude, still must I be silent." " You surprise me," interrupted lord Montalban. " What means this mysteri¬ ous language? Reveal your conduct, I implore you." " I cannot, my lord; I am a child of mystery. The time may come when you will perhaps think less severely of me than you do at present; and believe me,
you would pity me if you knew my pre¬ sent feelings." " Let me share them then," cried lord Montalban; " only explain the meaning of this fatal letter, and you will relieve me of a weight of woe." " Impossible, my lord," replied Eleanor. " I am convinced your'lordship is master of its contents, and the favour I have to ask at your hands is, that you will never reveal it to any mortal in existence. The result would be dreadful if known; I there¬ fore implore your pity and your secrecy." Lord Montalban was affected at her visible agitation. She looked more irre¬ sistibly beautiful than ever; and his lord¬ ship would have given the wealth of worlds to have pressed her to his heart, and called her his own for ever.—" Grant me then your confidence," he cried; " teach me all I have to know, and I will forego my own hopes to ensure your peace." " Generous Montalban!" involuntarily ejaculated Eleanor, " were I alone con- 62
cerncd, every secret of my soul should be laid open to you; but I dare not—an¬ other's happiness rests on my secrecy—a beloved being, for whose sake I must and will be silent." This avowal again inflamed the jealousy of lord Montalban. His supposed rival again crossed his imagination, as turning from her, he cried—" Make yourself easy, Miss Glendinning; I promise you eternal silence on the transactions of this night." " I thank you, my lord," replied Elea¬ nor, " and now once more take my leave." " Stay," cried lord Montalban; " do not again leave me in this uncertainty; I cannot endure it. Only grant me some explanation of your present conduct, re¬ pose confidence in me, and rest assured I will never betray it." " My lord," she replied, " it grieves me to be thus compelled to refuse a request of yours, but I cannot reveal the cause of my silence. That there is a cause,' it would be useless in me to' attempt to deny. There is, I own, a fatal secret ex-
isting in my bosom, and were I only con¬ cerned in it, I would divulge it ,to you ; but as it is, should I unfortunately appear as criminal in your eyes, yet I positively assert, I cannot, will not reveal it" " Only say then," cried lord JMontalban, again taking her hand, " that you are not going to meet my rival; assure me of this, and I will be satisfied. Convince me you are not now hastening to the writer of this letter, and I will endeavour to bear the rest of my torture till you shall please to repose a willing confidence in mc." He looked anxiously in her face; he beheld the deepest blushes diffuse them¬ selves over her checks, as he pronounced the latter part of his speech. " My lord," she cried, " forbear that question; my soul revolts at falsehood, and the truth I dare not say." " 'Tis well," replied lord Montalban, in a tone of anger. " 'Tis well. Fool that I am, thus to importune you, and to de¬ tain you from your appointment with your lover. Farewell, Miss Glendinning!
may every happiness be yours! I wish you so, though I am for ever wretched; but believe me, I will never more disturb your peace with my complaints; for con- . viction stares me in the face, and I must be mad indeed to persecute you when I so plainly see the state of your affections" He relinquished her hand, and turned from her, while Eleanor, greatly agitated, exclaimed—" My affections are, I fear, indeed unfortunately fixed----- -" She stopped, unable to proceed, and casting on him a look of varying emotion, she curtseyed, and once more left the room. On her departure, lord Montalban walk¬ ed, with agitated steps, to the windovy, and soon beheld hei- going across the lawn. He looked at her with sensations bordering on agony; he felt how much lie loved her, but he resolved to tear her image from his heart. She was unworthy of his regard, for she was engaged in clan¬ destine correspondence with some favoured lover, who was doubtless endeavouring to steal her from her family, and what'was
still worse, sanctioned by herself, as her conduct and the contents of the letter plainly shewed.—" How fortunate," eja¬ culated lord Montalban, "that I should have gained sight of this fatal scrawl, which has at once convinced me of the fallacy of encouraging sentiments of love for this too-fascinating girl! Oh, Eleanor," he continued, " how shall I banish thy lovely image from my bosom ! Yet it must be done. She loves another; and could I wish to obtain a divided heart ? Ah ! no, the object of Montalban's choice must be she whose whole affections are free, until they fix upon him unrestrained, and become wholly his—such must be the woman of my choice. Yet why do I talk thus ? I rave—I have no choice —I act in compuhion —I shall be forced into a marriage at which my soul revolts—I shall wed Georgina, and dote still on Eleanor, whom I feel I cannot hate, though she is cold to me. What then remains but a compliance, on my part, Vrith the wishes of my cruel aunt? by
that means I shall save a father from mill. That thought shall support me in my trying task. Once wedded to Georgina, it will become a duty to forget Eleanor; and in the conviction of fulfilling the path? of rectitude, I shall feel the self-approving dictates of conscience, which will enable me to sustain the cruel task. Yes," he cried, " lady Cecilia shall triumph; her heart shall rejoice; my father shall be saved; and the wretched Frederick shall be the sacrifice, for Eleanor never can be mine. Oh, love, how hard is thy conflict! Assist me, all ye powers of Heaven, and grant me fortitude to support the resolu¬ tion I have made!" Lord Montalban turned from the win¬ dow, and leaving the castle, returned as quickly os possible to his own home. If his lordship possessed a fault, which could be denominated as such, it was that of too' great an impetuosity of temper. He was now convinced, as he imagined, of the falsehood of Eleanor; he had re¬ solved to wed Georgina, and in the warmth
of his feelings he was hurried on to reveal his present determination to lady Cecilia Gray, who, on his arriving at home, im¬ mediately inquired why he was not with Georgina, in not the most gentle tone imaginable. lie replied, that she was out, and in consequence he could not see her. Lady Cecilia now prepared to open a long harangue, as to his neglectful con¬ duct of her, alledging that, on the terms on which he stood in the family, he ought to be continually at her side, and that all parties at which she visited, should like¬ wise extend their invitations to him,— " But," she continued, in a spiteful tone, " I see plain enough how it is. Miss Glendinning is suffered by you to go about unattended, and almost unheeded, while that little artful girl, that Eleanor, engrosses the whole of your thoughts; but he aware how you encourage a hope¬ less passion for her; for hero 1 solemnly declare, in the presence of your father, she- G 3
never shall be yours while I live. You know my will is law, and that my dispo¬ sition is as great as my means, which will accomplish any thing I choose to prevent the disappointment of my hopes " Her eyes flashed with fury as she spoke*. Lord Montalban looked with horror on his vindictive aunt, as he replied—" Your ladyship need not remind me of the prac¬ ticability of all your intentions. Already have we had one mysterious and fatal in¬ stance of the accomplishment of your designs." " Have a care, sir," replied lady Cecilia, " how you revert to past affairs. If you believe in the instance to which you al¬ lude, tremble then at my power, which shall be extended in its fullest force to¬ wards Eleanor, should you dare to think of uniting yourself to her." Though lord Montalban trembled at the principles of his imperious aunt, yet, situated as he now was, he thought it best to reconcile himself to her. He there¬ fore replied, that so far from wishing now
to unite himself to Eleanor, he had the strongest objections to such an union, and that, to convince her of the truth of his assertion, be was ready to wed Georgina as soon as affairs could be ready. On hearing this declaration, the coun¬ tenance of lady Cecilia became composed. The marquis of B------was delighted. He bestowed the warmest praises on his son's obedience; and lady Cecilia now be¬ came all complaisance to her darling ne¬ phew, as, when in good humour, she styled lord Montalban.
CHAPTER VII.
Oil, beware, my Iortl r of jealousy J It is a grecn-cy'd monster, vvliich duth mock The meat it feed* on. Tor, oh I v*.lint dmnii'd miutites tctls lie o'er, Who dotes, yet donl-tsj susjiccu, yet strongly lores I SllAKtSlT.AUE. Upon cool reflection, in the privacy of his pillow, lord Montalban condemned himself for having acted so precipitately, in promising lady Cecilia that he would marry Georgina so soon; for though he consid--rrd Eleanor as lost to him, yet his soul revolted at the idea of marrying a woman for whom he felt not the slight¬ est affection, so necessary to render the married state happy; and he now blamed his hasty temper, which had thus prompt¬ ed him to act. Lady Cecilia quickly communicated the news of her nephew's sudden obedi-
ence to lady Lenox, who accordingly conveyed it to her daughter. Lady Glendinning was somewhat sur¬ prised. She was herself a close observer of human nature, and had beSield the visi¬ ble attention of lord Montalban to Elea¬ nor, which made her put no faith in this hasty determination of his; and she far¬ ther considered, that if he actually became the husband of Georgina, it was absolutely necessary that Eleanor should be removed from his sight, as she was convinced, that lord Montalban would continue to encou¬ rage sentiments injurious to the peace of her own child: nor can we blame her la¬ dyship for these considerations; as a mo- ther, she naturally felt for the welfare of her daughter. These ideas were strength¬ ened by the observations which she drew on the succeeding conduct of lord Mont¬ alban, who, on paying his next, visit to St. Michael's, exhibited a countenance of such uneasiness as could not/ail of attract¬ ing the notice of all. Eleanor was present on his lordship's
entrance: her feelings were acute as slie met his glance: it was the first inter¬ view since the fatal circumstance of the letter, and she felt humiliated as the idea of having been obliged to beg his secrecy crossed her imagination r * a blush over¬ spread her face, which lord Montalban be 1 * held with varying ideas. The first mo¬ ment he was enraptured with her modest and bewitching demeanour, but he re^ collected the scene of the preceding even¬ ing, and the modest blush of virtue- and innocence was converted by him as a feeling arising from conscious guilt. He bowed politely to her, and addressed him¬ self to lady Glendinning .and Georgina, who, delighted with her supposed' tri¬ umph, laughed and talked with great vi¬ vacity. ' Poor Eleanor felt the cause too. Surely she knew the real meaning of lord Mont¬ alban's behaviour, and, as soon as possible; she withdrew from a scene so painful to her feelings. During her absence, lord Montalban.
was a prey to all the pangs of jealousy r one moment he believed Eleanor to be alt baseness and falsehood, and the next he endeavoured to persuade ■ himself, that, though appearances' were against her, she might be innocent. In this state, bet veen doubt and hope, he continued during the few days of the family remaining at the castle. Lady Glendinning continued positive in her orders for Eleanor to attend her to London. Lord Arthur had kept himself close con¬ fined to his own room. A prey to de* spair and melancholy, the evening pre-* vious to the day on which the journey was to commence, he requested to speak to lady Glendinning,. and again informed her, that it was his wish for Eleanor to remain in Scotland during her absence^ and therefore begged she would dispense with her attendance; Lady Glendinning,, seriously hurt at his,again importuning her. on the subject so gainful.to her feelings> replied, in tones
of anger; .positively ideclaring, that she should insist on using her own prerogative in this instance; arid that, if Eleanor,did not; .accompany ■ her, she would break her engagement with. lady Cecilia, ; and in¬ form all' parties of her reason for so doing; and expose his treatment .of her, ,and his preference to Eleanor, to the world.. This threat was not very agreeable to lord;Arthur, who knew he should meet the censure of all around.' We have also hinted that he privately wished for the departure of lady Glendinning, and he feared lest he should prevent it, by persist¬ ing in his, request for Eleanor; and though it was a source of real grief to sec her quit the castle, yet,, in the present instance, he could not contend with propriety. This ,contcst however proved a serious one, and eventually attended with great danger'to-lord Arthur and'his lady,.,who, highly displeased with him, threw» out many.bitterinvectives against his conduct towardslSlcanor; and at length,' after vio¬ lent altercation' on both sides, Jady Glen-
diniiing left his ^presence, more seriously offended than ever she had yet been with him. The seeds of discord seemed effec¬ tually sown in her bosom, and to take a deep and lasting root. She hastened to her own room. She flung herself on a chair: a few drops of burning anguish ran down her cheek, which, wiping away as wounded pride arose to her assistance, she mentally exclaimed—" 'Tis over I the struggle is great, but henceforth this wronged—this wounded bosom shall seek its own revenge-! Down, rebel Love! thy reign is .over, antl in thy place Resentment shall take her station." She continued weeping for a consider¬ able time, and in the privacy of her own room gave way to those softer feelings of her soul, of which she in reality possessed a considerable share, though generally concealed beneath the mask of pride. This evening proved an eventful v one to most of the .parties, at St. Michael's. AH were labouring under the most acute sensations, arising ,from the real and ima-
ginary'evils which they were suffering; All countenances exhibited a melancholy aspect, save those of Georgina, lady Le¬ nox, and lady Cecilia, who, delighted with the near completion of their project, were quite in spirits. Eleanor was pensive, sad, and abstract¬ ed ; and it was evident, that, as their de¬ parture drew near, h?r dejection increased. This was observed by the two elder ladies, who were somewhat surprised, as they had imagined she would have been de¬ lighted with the journey, knowing lord Montalban was to be of the party. They did not however trouble themselves long in conjecturing the cause of her sadness; they only exulted in the prospect of soon eventually separating her from him for ever. . Lord Montalban was at this time per¬ haps the greatest object of pity: a prey to contending passions, one moment re¬ solving to forget Eleanor, and the next doting more on her than ever, he con¬ tinued a prey to that dreadful torment
jealousy. It was with the most distract¬ ing doubt that he passed night after night, a constant witness to the evening rambles of Eleanor, the mystery of which no one could fathom. On this eventful night, lord Montalban strolled to the castle, in order to ascertain if the ladies would be in readiness to attend lady Cecilia on the following day. He was informed lady Glendinning was in her own room, and Georgina was the only one visible. In vain he looked for Eleanor; she was, as usual, absent; and after staying a very short time with Georgina, he made an ex¬ cuse for retiring early. Deeply fixed in thought, he pursued his way, and took the turning from the castle which led' to the sea. Eleanor alone occupied his thoughts, and the idea of the journey to London gave him a ray of pleasure. In the thought of her being also to accompany them, he should still have the happiness of being with her, and of witnessing her conduct; and what was
a still greater source of delight, she would be removed from the sight of her secret correspondent, who was doubtless a for¬ midable rival. He pleased himself with the idea of still gaining her affections, and in the anticipation of the future, began to forget the past; and from kophig that Eleanor would be able to clear herself from all suspicion, he at last persuaded himself that it actually was so. , In deep reflections of this nature, he continued walking until he found himself by thp side of those stupendous rocks by the sea. He paused. The scene was congenial to his feelings: a calmness al¬ most bordering on solemnity reigned around—the waves were peculiarly still, «nd the foaming billows hushed to si¬ lence. Wilih an instinctive melancholy, he climbed a craggy point of the rock, and seated himself, and fixing his eyes on the heavens, gave way to his thoughts. A deep sigh at length aroused him from his.reveije. He started and gazed around.
The shades of night were fast encircling the earth, and rendered objects but par¬ tially discernible. Lord Montalban, in some surprise, lis¬ tened attentively, and distinctly heard the low murmuring of voices. He looked around, and at length caught a sentence which engrossed his whole attention,— " Oh! my Eleanor!" exclaimed a voice, in the tenderest accents, " must we theii part? Alas! what will support nie dur¬ ing the cruel time of our separation. Oh! would you could have prevented this fatal journey!" " Alas!" replied a voice which lord Montalban too well knew to be that of Eleanor, " I dare not disobey the com¬ mands of lady Glendinning, although they are to me distressing. Oh! think what I must suffer in thus leaving you ! Believe me, your Eleanor's grief is equal to your own. Oh! my beloved—■—" A sudden gust of wind, which arose upon the waves, prevented lord'Montal¬ ban hearing the conclusion of the •speech.
His disappointment was excessive, as he had expected to have heard the name of his rival, which Eleanor was doubtless about to pronounce. His feelings were aroused almost to agony—he gazed wildly around, but could not discern any object. Determined, if possible, to gain a sight of his rival, he turned to where he still thought he heard the voices. He stood on a craggy part of the rock which jutted out so as to prevent his seeing the next chasm, where he fancied he heard the voices. Almost at the hazard of his life, he climbed to the top of the projection c-n which he stood, and looking over, be¬ held, to his great surprise, a large opening in this work of nature, which formed a rude apartment; but who shall describe his distraction, his horror, and his jealou¬ sy, on beholding Eleanor seated by the side of a figure, who was fervently clasp¬ ing her in his embrace! He was clad in the costume of their country, with a plaid gracefully thrown over his shoulders. His appearance was
evidently prepossessing, but lord Montal¬ ban could not gain a sight of his face, as he threw himself on the shoulder of Elea¬ nor, who, with the utmost affection, was returning his caresses.—" Oh! be comfort¬ ed," she criec, " we shall meet again in happiness and love." Lord Montalban, in a state of distrac¬ tion, was just on the point of leaping down, and sacrificing his rival to his fury, but a moment's consideration pointed out to him the fallacy of such a proceeding. His own life might fall the sacrifice to such an attempt, as the height was great; besides, his pride whispered him Eleanor was unworthy his concern; her falsehood was apparent, and he would not give her the triumph of seeing how much she had distressed him. He was now in posses¬ sion of the knowledge of her having a se¬ cret favoured lover, and with the incon¬ sistency of thought which pervades us in the moment of painful conviction, he fan¬ cied he should now be easy. He there¬ fore softly crept down the rock, and re-
treated unobserved. With a sort of apa¬ thy he left the place, and walked quickly along, hardly conscious of what he was doing; nor was he scarcely aware of his arrival at his own home, until he heard the voice of lady Cecilia sounding in his ears, and he then found that he was actually in his own drawing-room. He seated himself on a chair without replying to his aunt, who now looking on him, exclaimed __« Why, Frederick, what is the matter with you ? are you not well ?" " Well, madam!" he repeated, staling wildly ; " yes, I am quite well. I thank you, I never felt better in all my life." " Has any thing occurred to vex you ?" inquired lady Cecilia: " you look the pic¬ ture of misery personified." " You are under a mistake, madam," replied lord Montalban, forcing a smile into his face, and walking gaily about the room. " I am particidarly happy. I was never more fully satisfied than I am at this moment." " You have an odd way of shewing
your happiness then," returned lady Ce¬ cilia. " I was just then lost in my own ab¬ struse reflections." " Abstruse indeed," re-echoed her lady¬ ship, " for you appeared absolutely ab¬ sorbed in your own thoughts. May I ask of what nature they were ?" " I was just then considering, madam," cried lord Montalban, " what circum¬ stance could possibly afford me the great¬ est pleasure upon earth." " A very pleasant consideration in¬ deed," replied lady Cecilia ; " and pray, my lord, have you decided this very diffi¬ cult point ?" " I have," returned his lordship: " I think the greatest pleasure I can now know will be that of wedding Georgina immediately. Yes," continued he, " that, will be a glorious revenge indeed." He pausetl, and unheedful of the pre¬ sence of his aunt, fell again into deep thought vol. ii. H
" Really, Frederick," cried lady Cecilia, in an angry tone, " I do not know how to comprehend you. Is revenge the only motive you have to induce you to unite yourself to Miss Glendinning?" " Prpy pardon my inconsistency," in¬ terrupted his lordship, " and impute not my present behaviour to a want of respect towards yourself; on the contrary, I once more repeat my wishes of being enabled to please yon, and be assured I am now willing to unite myself to Georgina as soon as possible; in doing which I shall have the heartfelt satisfaction of saving a father from ruin. Yes," he added, with increased energy, " that thought will sup¬ port me through all." " Be satisfied as to that," dear Frede¬ rick," cried the delighted lady Cecilia; " your obedience to my wishes shall not go unrewarded: you know my vast wealth will in that case devolve upon your father and yourself, and the heiress of St. Michael and my nephew shall be the wealthiest pair in Scotland."
She then entered into a long detail of their mutual high descent, a subject very unsuitable to the present disposition of lord Montalban, who was in a state of mind to hate himself and ail the world; yet, inconsistent as his conduct may ap¬ pear to the reader, he spoke his real senti¬ ments at the moment, in declaring his wish to unite himself to Georgina; for so convinced was he now of the baseness of Eleanor, that he felt ashamed and morti¬ fied at the idea of having so openly de¬ clared his love to her, as no doubt she was .exulting in the idea of leading him in her chains. His hasty and impetuous temper caught the alarm, and like all who are acting under the unworthy passion of re¬ venge, he forgot, in fulfilling its dictates, that he should be the greater sufferer than her on whom he meant to inflict the punishment: he thought only on reveng¬ ing himself on Eleanor, without reflecting that, in uniting himself to Georgina, he should most probably seal his own misery h2 -
for ever, as she was the last woman upon eavth who would have constituted his hap- ness. Thus, while he was arranging the most serious and important affair of his life, he was dictated in its formation by his disappointed hopes with Eleanor-, and so very importunate was he with his aunt, respecting a speedy alliance with Miss Glendinning, that lady Cecilia was convinced some particular motive induced him to this unexpected obedience. She was a woman who well knew by her own experience, that the passions are incapable of control or reason, when un¬ der the influence of disappointed love; yet she cared not under what principles lord Montalban united himself to Georgi¬ na as long as her wish was fulfilled; and finding her nephew in such a complying mood, she now arranged all affairs relative to the intended union. At length, lord Montalban, wearied of a subject which he soon found gave him pain, notwithstanding his boasted resolu¬ tion, retired abruptly from her presence,
and repairing to his own room, reflected on the cruel disappointment given to his hopes by the falsehood and baseness of Eleanor.
CHAPTER VIII.
IlaJsi thou been true, Thrre's not a charm, a power, which earth doth own, Should have estrang'd my love. I would have scrv'd th<:«> Iu bonrls or death, with absolute devotion. Friends, kindred, father, brother,, native place,. Had been-as nothing: thou fo me hadst been Father, and brother, and'dear relative, And friend, and native place. I had trusted thee, With an unbounded sway o'ar my warm heart. RlClIAKDS. Though lord Montalban had exerted his; powers of resolution in the presence of his aunt, yet, on finding himself alone, the natural feelings of his heart gave way, and though " unused to the melting mood," he actually shed the tears of bitter disap¬ pointment. From the commencement of his acquaintance with Eleanor, he had fondly fancied her an object worthy of his utmost regard and admiration: he had
yielded his heart to her without restraint, and to withdraw it was a greater difficulty than he could combat; yet the only way that presented itself to his distracted fancy was that of uniting himself to Georgina: he felt his own hopes of happiness were for ever blighted, and he was indifferent to the future. In deep melancholy he remained in his chamber, while lady Ce¬ cilia sought her friend, lady Lenox, and acquainted her with her nephew's willing¬ ness to obey their wishes. This news was quickly communicated at St. Michael's Castle, and Eleanor heard with anguish at heart the arrangements made for the intended union, which lady Lenox declared should take place on their return to Scotland. If Eleanor was really hurt at these ex¬ pressions, purposely thrown out before lier, what were her feelings, when on the following morning, lord Montalban paid a visit, to see if the ladies were ready for their journey, and to take his farewell of lord Arthur ? On entering the drawing-
.room, and seeing Eleanor, he bowed to her slightly, and advanced towards Geor¬ gina, and taking her hand, inquired as to her health, and if she was ready, with the rest of the ladies, to honour him with their company to London. Georgina, delighted with this unex¬ pected preference, answered him in the utmost good humour, and continued talk¬ ing with him in a strain far from inele¬ gant, which she could command, if she chose, that lie began to think he should not be so very unhappy in being united to her, while the idea of his attention so pleased the giddy Georgina that she be¬ came all sweetness and complaisance. Poor Eleanor was a silent spectator of this scene, and attributed his lordship's behaviour as arising from the circumstance of the unfortunate letter which he had perused.—" He is lost then to me for ever," she mentally exelaimed, " and he thinks me guilty and culpable. Oh, cruel fate! what more canst thou have in store for me ? I could have borne all this, but
to be thus lessened in the eyes of him who of all beings on earth I most value, is painful in the extreme. Oh, how shall I support this trying conflict!" Thus sighed Eleanor, but had she been aware of the scene to which lord Montal¬ ban had been witness, she would not have wondered at his present conduct. He was indeed as unhappy as herself, but she knew not the workings of \m soul; she saw plainly that he was purposely wound¬ ing her feelings, and supposing it to be entirely through the mysterious letter, she considered that he was acting too se¬ vere. He was of course now lost to her, as she dared not reveal the error under which he lay. Pensive and silent she re¬ mained in her chair, when casting her eyes upwards, she beheld those of lord Montalban fixed on her, with an expres¬ sion of soilness mixed with resentment His features gradually relaxed into a ten¬ der smile as he gazed on her, but it was.
but a momentary emotion; he recollected her duplicity, and turned from her. This action, though trifling, was too much for Eleanor to bear; tlie tears trem¬ bled in her eyes, and fearful lest she should betray her weakness, she immediately arose and left the room. Lord Montalban marked her hasty de¬ parture, and construed it into a conscious¬ ness of her own guilt, which could not bear his scrutiny. He sighed at the con¬ viction, and feeling himself unable to command his spirits sufficiently to con¬ verse with Georgina, he also arose, and reminding them the time was drawing near for their departure, he expressed his wish to take his leave of Iced Arthur, if he would admit him to his presence. " His lordship is closely confined to his own chamber," cried lady Glendinning. " I have not seen him since yesterday, but I dare say he will be very glad of a visit from your lordship. I will send to inform him," she continued, at the same time
ringing the bell. She desired the servant to say°to his master, that lord Montalban wished for an interview. The man left the room, and returned' immediately with lord Arthur's compli¬ ments, and that he should be glad to see lord Montalban in the library directly. " I thought you would be a welcome visitor, my lord," said lady Glendinning; " I know you have ever been a great fa¬ vourite with his lordship. If you please," she added, " you will say to him that the time of our departure is near, if he wishes to take leave of his family." Lord Montalban bowed and withdrew to the library, where, dejected and ill at ease, sat lord Arthur. He arose on the entrance of lord Montalban, and taking him by the hand, exclaimed—" I am par¬ ticularly obliged to you, my lord, for this visit. I had flattered myself that you would not quit Scotland witl.cut bidding me farewell, and you have not disappoint¬ ed my wishes; for though circum&t tnces have occurred to consign me to the sibom
and solitude of my own chamber, yet, be¬ lieve me,' my heart is still open to the feelings of friendship, and I know no one on whom I would so soon bestow it as yourself." ** Your lordship does me much honour," returned lord Montalban, " and I trust I shall ever continue deserving of your good opinion. The friendship of lord Arthur must be of value, as he is not apt to be¬ stow it indiscriminately on any one; and it affords me the highest satisfaction also in the pleasing hope, that wh.cn allied by the closest tics to his family, he will still honour me with his esteem and approba¬ tion." " Of that be assured," replied lord Ar¬ thur; " few events can afford me so oreat a pleasure as that of seeing you allied to me, and by the way most congenial to your feelings. Believe me, I would wish to promote your real happiness, and rest assured of my full approbation and con¬ sent to your utmost wishes." Lord Arthur paused, and looked on
lord Montalban. He firmly believed his affections were fixed on Eleanor, to whom he really wished to see him united; and he doubted not but lord Montalban would joyfully have seized this present opportu¬ nity of opening his heart to him, so warm- l3 r encouraged. Lord Montalban felt confused; he could not but understand the allusion of lord Arthur, and had it been some time pre¬ vious, he would joyfully have declared the true situation of his heart, and have implored his consent and interference for his union with Eleanor. Under the pre¬ sent circumstances, however, it was im¬ possible : he therefore feigned not to un¬ derstand lord Arthur as alluding to Geor¬ gina, and replied—" I must again repeat my thanks for your lordship's kindness, and I shall, with the greatest pleasure, obey the wishes of my friends, and fulfil the dictates of my own heart, in receiving the hand of the lovely Georgina, which prize is awarded to me on our return from London."
Lord Arthur looked on him with sur¬ prise. He had expected that he would have acknowledged his love for Eleanor;; but how disappointed was he at this de¬ claration ! he doubted his veracity, but after such an avowal as he had now made,. in favour too of his own daughter,, he* could not urge the subject any forther. He therefore reverted to the inJ^Kded journey.—" I did not wish to prevent lady Glendinning from accompanying lady Cecilia to London," he exclaimed, " as she appeared to have so great an inclina¬ tion to it herself; but I must own to you, lord ,Monlalban, that I am not pleased at the junior part of my family being also of the party: not that I have any fears for my son Robert; he is a youth, I am confident, of strict integrity and unsullied principles, and will doubtless view the riotous scenes of that gay resort of fashion with abhorrence; while with Georgina I think it will have no other effect than that of perhaps increasing the gaiety of disposition which is her natural temper.
She is formed to mix With the gay world, and to enter into all its scenes of mirth; Her spirits are, I am confident, equal to the task of supporting the fatigues, atten¬ dant on a lady of fashion, whose whole life is a continual waste of time, hurried from one scene to another, without being able to taste the real pleasures of social society; such a life as this would, I think* not be displeasing to Georgina; but there is another for whose peace I tremble, r.nd who I would have wished not to have been of the party; but in this instance I find even my commands prove abortive." "To whom does your lordship allude?" cried lord Montalban, in a confused voice, as his own heart whispered the name which lord Arthur was about utter. " To the lovely, the pure, and unso¬ phisticated Eleanor,'' he exclaimed, in a tone of energy; " it is for her I fear; she is formed by nature sensible, tender, and susceptible of all those softer amiable weaknesses of her sex. Unpractised in the dangerous arts of the deceiving world,
she is the most likely to fall a victim to its temptations. I speak by sad experience, and that female who is most adorned with every perfection is the one chosen by man for his devoted prey: should my Eleanor fall a victim to a lawless libertine, or be¬ come the dupe of a villain, my cup of sor¬ row would be full. Oh, Montalban!" he continued, " be you her protector from such a fate as this! Watch over her, and guard her innocence from the cruel de- spoiler of virtue 1 It is perhaps a strange request for me to make to you, who are yourself so young a man ; but my confi¬ dence in you is unbounded, and to your care I commit my Eleanor." Lord Montalban was greatly affected at this address.—" Oh, how gladly would 1 become her protector for ever!" he men¬ tally uttered; but recollecting her sup¬ posed falsehood, he subdued the rising feelings of his heart, and thus replied— " My lord, I will indeed do my utmost to watch over the actions of Eleanor, for much she stands- in need of a protector.""
" You surpriCvG me by this answer," in¬ terrupted lord Arthur; " you speak as if you were aware of some part of her con¬ duct which requires an investigation." Lord Montalban coloured ; he was vex¬ ed with himself for his incautious answer, as he was determined never to betray Eleanor. She had begged his pity and his silence, and he resolved to adhere to the promise he had made her.—" Oh, no. my lord," he replied, " you mistake; I mean she does indeed require the most vigilant protection, owing to her youth and extreme beauty, for what man could gaze on her lovely countenance without feeling himself enslaved ? and when such a gem as this shall be exposed to the rude stare of a London libertine, I agree with you, my lord, that its result may be dan¬ gerous ; but as far as my humble counsel or protection can assist her, I solemnly promise your lordship I will extend to¬ wards the safety of your lovely Eleanor." " I thank you," returned lord Arthur, ** and will rest contented on your promise,
for I think you also feel an interest in her welfare." " Oh, who can feel so much ?'* interrupt* ed lord Montalban, again thrown off his guard; when, recollecting himself, he added, " I shall shortly have the honour of being related to her, and as a dear sister I hope I shall ever regard her." Lord Arthur again felt disappointed by this reply, and was determined to give lord Montalban no farther opportunities, as he saw he was averse to owning his love for Eleanor; and he felt rather angry with him for it. Lord Montalban now arose, as the time was pressing, and taking lord Arthur's hand, bade him an adieu.—" Farewell, my lord," he cried, " may health and hap¬ piness attend you until next^ we meet !■"' " That wish, in its fullest extent, I return to you," replied lord Arthur; " may you enjoy a course of uninterrupted tranquil¬ lity ! Whilst in the solitude and silence of my native home, I shall seek for that repose which the world cannot give me.*
He wrung the hand of lord Montalban, who, once more taking a friendly leave, retired from the room, and lord Arthur sunk much affected into his chair. Not¬ withstanding the many obstacles which arose to prevent an union between lord Montalban and Eleanor, he had cherished the idea of promoting such an event, which would have afforded him the high¬ est satisfaction, particularly as he had thought their affections were fixed on each other; but the present behaviour of lord Montalban completely astonished and dis¬ concerted him; he still believed that his heart was Eleanor's, but that through his peculiar situation he was endeavouring to force his inclinations tb meet the wishes of his friends; but be that as it would, lord Arthur felt that he could not inter* fere any more on the subject. He continued in a musing strain for a considerable length of time, until a ser¬ vant entered the room, and informed his lordship that lady Glendinning wished to know if he had any commmds, as her la?
dyship and family were ready to com¬ mence their journey. Lord Arthur started.—" Tell Miss Elea¬ nor Glendinning to come to me immedi¬ ately and alone," he cried. The servant withdrew, and lord Arthur paced the room in violent agitation.-— " She is also then going to leave me!" he exclaimed, " Oh, how shall I endure a .separation from her! yet I must fortify my resolution, or expose all my weakness to my family, who would in consequence spurn me from them with contempt." He paused as the door opened, and Efeanor stood before him. She was clad in a travelling habit, which gave a be¬ witching elegance to her graceful figure. Her countenance was pale and dejected, and the starting tears were visible in her eyes. Lord Arthur took her by the hand, and looked mournfully in her face.—" You are going to leave me, Eleanor," he cried, « and tb quit your peaceful native home for the gay resort of splendour and fashion^
May the journey prove more productive of pleasure to you than it does to me!'* '* Ah no, my lord," interrupted Elea¬ nor, " not one spark of satisfaction or pro¬ mised joy does it afford me. I go, 'tis true, but only, alas! in obedience to the commands of lady Glendinning, who wishes for my attendance; but believe me, my lord, I shall hail the moment of my return as the happiest of my life." " Have you then no inclination for scenes of gaiety," cried lord Arthur, " so natural to youth and inexperience like yours ?" " Ah, no, my lord, my mind is not at¬ tuned to such scenes as those. On the contrary, it gives me tlie greatest pain to quit my native plains." " And yet, Eleanor," interrupted lord Arthur, " you have nothing to regret; you will be accompanied by your friends, some part of whom, I know, deserve your regard. You cannot feel the separation from a de.ar-object;; yo.u will leave none beside myself, for whom you feel an inte-
rest. You will not experience the bitter pangs of a separation from all you hold most dear." " Oh yes, my lord, I shall," exclaimed the weeping Eleanor; "believe me I shall feel all those pangs you are describing in their fullest force, for when I quit Sco¬ tia's wide domains, I leave behind mc those who are the dearest to this aching heart, which can taste no peace or joy until I am restored to their arms." " Noble, affectionate Eleanor," cried lord Arthur, tenderly embracing her; " how this avowal delights me, since I am in¬ cluded in the regrets of my Eleanor, as no one else can claim your grief but my¬ self! I alone remain behind, as lord Montalban is to accompany you." " Lord Montalban!" repeated Eleanor, in great confusion ; " why does your lord¬ ship thus mention his name ? his presence cannot obliterate the anguish I feel at leaving my more than father. Oh, lord' Arthur, pity my sufferings, and teach me fortitude!" ".
" You ask me for that which I am- incapable of bestowing: I am bankrupt in it myself; I cannot express what I feel at parting from you, yet I would feign give you a few words before we separate, to warn you against the dangers with which you will shortly be surrounded. You are now going, my Eleanor, for the first time, to view that gay abode of virtue and of vice. Its appearance is fascinating, and its temptations numerous. You will doubtless be charmed by its glittering in¬ vitations to pleasure, but fly from its al¬ lurements, if you would avoid sorrow, re¬ gret, and shame: shun all amusements which your reason cannot approve: never suffer yourself to be a partaker in any of its fashionable follies or vices, merely be¬ cause of ' the world's dread laugh.' On the contrary, soar above such a contemp¬ tible weakness, which could at best only raise you in the estimation of those whose good opinion would prove of more harm to you than their disapprobation. Virtue and modesty like yours, my dear Eleanor,
is by far the safest, when it is afraid to obtrude itself on the great theatre of life; it shrinks from observation, and by that means escapes from the dangers of admira¬ tion. You will meet with various charac¬ ters and dispositions in London: mark them all: all are useful in their turn to the reflecting mind. If you converse with the man of honour and of reason, listen to his precepts and copy his virtues. On the other hand, should you meet with the vicious and depraved, let that also prove of service to you; for as you wit¬ ness their guilt and consequent misery, let it teach you to avoid their example. In short, from the most minute circum¬ stance, a good moral may be derived. But, my Eleanor, do not suffer the picture I have drawn to give you an abhorrence of London; on the contrary, I am a warm admirer of its many excellencies. Eng¬ land is a country which can boast of deeds sufficient to exalt it to that title which it so nobly deserves. Its bravery and cou¬ rage are almost unprecedented, and its
charities numerous^ and well-selected. It iscnot the^vrrtubusH part i of'i this highly- gifted j country 'with; whom :I fear of your .associating^^as from:;many^ofJits: exalted females you would learn those -real jgraces which constitute feminine..perfection. In early life, ■ Eleanor, I passed V 'short ti me on its-shores. •. It wasrthediappiest period of my existence;ibut ^circumstances now cause me to look back with regret. arid ihorror;> and\tlius,^by s sad jm rexperience, I •warnyou to ffy from all'lpurs« t nts which cannot tbe.'sanctioned jbyyqiir owm-coh- -science."''. ■...':fip.;;;r«'.^llj h-iau-'i-yj ;;.;,«-.■ y, ■■':./^Lord Arthur sighed deeply, and-gazing »tenderly on:Eleanor, ;'made-a-pause.-■ * ; ■f-'^. Your -kind- admohishings, mytlord," -she repliedi' " shall!be .firmly engraven oh myheart j'they^shall; he. myi constant com¬ panions iii ?my hohrs;ofRetirement; and in those ?of pleasure, if I ^should; kriow'any ■such^they shall act-as a protector during 'myiexile''from'him who has, f ;frbm myih- fahey/ acted-as^such;-and now, my.lord, VOL. ii. ,! -*^.*'>v; ^i^adi-fa Trr/-} 7.;*ji
the time reminds me I must utter a isad adieu. Lady Glendinning is, I know, impatiently awaiting my presence; and your lordship has not, I believe, taken your leave of her." > i " Lady Glendinning!" repeated lord Arthur. " True, I have not seen her since yesterday. She has forfeited my esteem for ever, in acting thus in opposi¬ tion to my wishes." , " Oh, say not* so, my lord," interrupted the weeping Eleanor. " Let not an un¬ fortunate object like myself be the cause of such continual dissensions. The time, I hope, my lord, will not be of long dura¬ tion ere I shall return to these peaceful walls, and to the affectionate arms of your lordship, who will, I trust, sometimes be¬ stow a thought on his absent Eleanor." Lord Arthur caught her in his embrace. __« Every thought, my dearest girl," he cried, " shall be directed for your, welfare. This separation moves me more than I can describe. Farewell, my JEleanor! may every blessing be yours!"
He fervently imprinted a kiss on ;her cheek, as the door opened, and lady Glen-, dinning made her appearance. , • , Eleanor felt herself confused, as she, withdrew from lord Arthur; while her^ ladyship, looking on both with scrutiny, exclaimed—" I should not thus have ob¬ truded myself on your lordship's privacy, j conscious as I am that it is unwished, but the carriages are waiting at the door, and ; in consequence of your detaining Eleanor- so, long, I was under the necessity of. re¬ questing her attendance." " I beg your ladyship's pardon," replied Eleanor, " but I am now ready to, attend you; and I trust your ladyship's own good heart will excuse my weakness, as I cannot, for the first time in my life, part from lord Arthur without shedding the, tear of regret." " Oh, no doubt," returned her ladyship.; " I expected the parting from you would be felt much by his lordship, so much so that I suppose he forgets he has two more' x.2 ,
chilclr'en, who wait for a father's em¬ brace '-* s J ' ; ' " No, madam, I am not deaf to the ybice'of -nature," cried loid Arthur. ' " I wish tlo' see my 'children, who, to gratify your whims,' are to be thus'torn from me. Let' me'see'-them, that I may take*my leave'of them.'*- J * IJ I-'will inform them," said Eleanor, who could scarcely support her feelings, " if-you 1 will give me leave to retire."' ■ Lady Glendinning assented, while lord Aithur once more caught her in his em- brSce* ! * J Shc l rushed from liim, and uttering a last adieu, left the room ; while lord Ar¬ thur, overcome by his emotions, sunk on a chair, and regardless of the presence of lfis s lady, hid his face in his hands. With feelings of a varying nature lady Glendinning remained for a short time bilent. The struggle in her heart was oreat She at length addressed him. A O cj short conversation ensued, the result of which did not prove favourable to her
,173 ladyship, who rushed from the room in violent agitation, as her sou and daughter entered the apartment. Lord Arthur bestowed on both a pa¬ ternal embrace, $nd\ was'pleased to find that Georgina really possessed a greater tenderness of disposition than he expected. She shei,, the., tear, of sensibility, ,while Robert betrayed great emotion at parting from his father ;'''and , on 1 their quitting his presence', lord Arthur, sunk into a state of despondency.—" Farewell!" he exclaim¬ ed; "a long' ; fare'well to all! Who shall whisper .comfort,to this aching Jieart now, for I have lost her whose presence only could chase away my sorrows? ' I may now indeed, doubly exclaim—,' Qh, .Elea¬ nor, where art Hum ?" • • ' '
CHAPTER IX.
t Thou canst not 'minister to a mind discns'd, Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrovv, llase ont the written troubles of the brain, And, with some sweet oblivious antidote, * Cleanse the foul bosom of that perilous stuff Winch weighs on the heart. * ' biiAKESPEARi.
," Go search the streets, when tumnlt wtikes the day, And evening lamps supply the solar rnv, Sec, mingled there, in one promiscuous crowd, The pooi, the i»th, the humble, nud the proud. See modest worth, untortunnte or pooi, Scarce deign'd admittance atn brother's door. See orphans cast unfnended ou the tonn, A mother's love, a huher's care unknown. < T he sons of greatness flaunt in golden pride, W hile thousands mourn oi perish hy then side." On retiring from lord Arthur, Eleanor immediately sought the privacy of her own chamber, and there gave way to the feelings of her heart. She was indeed much affected at the parting with lord
Arthur, and she wished, if possible, to calm her mind before she again appeared in the presence of lady Glendinning. She succeeded in banishing the marks of sorrow from her countenance, and fear¬ ing lest her ladyship should be waiting for her, she descended to the drawing- room. As she opened the door, she dis¬ tinctly heard a deep sigh, accompanied with a sob of agony, and beheld lady Glendinning leaning on a chair, weeping violently. Eleanor, somewhat astonished, hastened to her side.—" Has any thing particular occurred ?" cried Eleanor, in a voice of timidity and apprehension. '* Why is your ladyship thus agitated ?" Lady Glendinning raised her handker¬ chief to her eyes, evidently wishing to conceal her tears, and turning coldly to Eleanor, replied—" Nothing, or at least not any thing which you can relieve." " Permit me to assuage your grief, if possible,", returned Eleanor. ." Believe me, your ladyship's evident emotion af-
fects me much. You say I cannot relieve it; suffer me al least then to participate in il." " You -participate in it!" repeated her ladyship, in a tone of violence. " You, who are the------" She paused, and -then added—" Leave me instantly. I am! not in the habit of communicating my griefs to any one, much less to you" Eleanor, greatly hurt at this ungracious treatment, hesitated.—" I had no inten-> tion of offending your ladyship," she cried. " My inquiries were dictated from motives of concern, not impertinence. 1 saw you absorbed in grief, and I wished to soften, not inflame your sorrows." " If you really wish then to oblige me," replied her ladyship, " you will do so by instantly retiring. Is am not in a humour to converse with you.' In a short time I shall be ready to commence my journey, till which time I choose to be alone." ■ Eleanor, of course, could 1 no longer re; main. She curtseyed/and instantly with-
drew to l( the dining-parlourr where f slip found Georgina and Robert; waiting for lady GJendinning. r ■ u f« j l, thought mamma was ready," ex¬ claimed the former. " Dp you know wtyrp she is?" ^ > 'i?' % " Her Aadyship is alone in the drawing- room," replied Eleanor, " and will.,1 dare say, in a few minutes join you." * ir»» Charles Lenox, now entered the*,rooitf. and informed them that lady Lenox had repaired to B------House, where she was waiting their arrival. < r> \ Charles Lenox, .with that friendly re¬ gard which he had always, evinced-.for Eleanor, bid her a tender adieu/ The sight of her visibly affected him. > Tlie likeness which she bore to the lost lady Frances still acted'as a powerful stimulus in his heare. As he had gradually -ad¬ vanced in years, he had conquered the violence of that passion which had em¬ bittered his youthful .days; but his love for lady Frances had been too ardent ever 13
to permit him to make a second choice. It will not therefore be' wondered at, ! that the form of Eleanor kept alive'those Sen¬ sations in his bosom, which time and'ma- turer reason had subdued to' a! proper calmness. " ' After a short time had elapsed, lady Glendinning made her appearance. Elea¬ nor cast a timid glance towards her, and beheld, with some surprise, the change in her countenance, which now wore its usual aspect; all traces of that extreme agitation which Eleanor had witnessed were gone, and in a tone of assumed cheer¬ fulness she inquired if all were ready? "' What a wonderful command of her feelings does she possess!" mentally re¬ flected Eleanor, as her ladyship led the way to the door. " A short time since, and 'she appeared overwhelmed with sor¬ row. Who would think the pride and satisfaction sparkling in her piercing eyes were but a mask to conceal her real' feel¬ ings ; for much am I mistaken if this is not the real state of her ladyship."
Lady Glendinning was now taking leave of her brother, when he declared his intention of accompanying them to B ------ House, and mounting his horse, rode by the side of their carriage. As Eleanor entered, she cast her eyes on the castle, which she was going to quit. She looked towards the chamber of f lord Arthur, and beheld him standing at its window. He waved his hand to her. She returned it, and a fresh flood of tears,burst from her eyes. Robert and Georgina cast a last look upon him also; while lady Glendinning threw herself into a corner of the carriage, and hid herself from his view. " There is papa at his window," said Georgina, looking towards her ladyship. , " So ( I supposed" she coldly replied. The carriage drew on, and all remained in, silence. Eleanor looked on her with astonish¬ ment.—" Pan it be possible," she mentally ejaculated, " for a wife thus coldly to,quit hei- husband.—not so much as bestow one
last, one parting glance ? Oh, lord Ar¬ thur, unhappy and culpable as thou art, j r et thy affectionate heart merits a better return." i - As the carriage drew near J3- -----House, Eleanor felt much agitation. It was the first time she had ever approached it, and as she heard they were to enter it, she was extremely embarrassed. She leant her face towards the window of the car¬ riage, in order to conceal her agitation**; but after a few minutes she involuntarily claspe'd her hands together. A deep sigh stole from her lips, and bursting into tears, she sunk back on her seat. "Are you not well, Eleanor?" cried lady Glendinning, evidently much surprised at her conduct!. s " f Oh, yes," she replied, " I am quite well. I beg your ladyship's pardon ; it is the effects of weakness only. My spirits are uncommonly "depressed." Lady Glendinning shook her head, as in a mild tone she exclaimed—" You must endeavour to conquer this violence of feel-
ing. ii Learn fortitude* Eleanor, for that alone can support you in the hour of trial. When you know more of the world, 1 you will find, that if every one wore the stamp of their real feelings, we should scarce see one happy 1 or'cheerful countenance. In London* you will behold faces smiling', eyes sparkling with vivacity, whilst ming¬ ling with the gay votaries of pleas'ure^ while their hearts area prey to'sorrow, and carrying a thorn rankling with despair " " Is it possible," cried the artless Elea¬ nor, ** that human nature can possess such command of feelings as your ladyship de¬ scribes ?" ' - " 'Tis indeed very possible, and ve?y true" she replied, sighing very deeply. She was' proceeding, f but the carriage stopped at B------ House. Charles Lenox assisted in handing out the ladies, but as he took tlie hand of Eleanor) he felt it tremble so violently, that he 1 would not relinquish it, '"but pass¬ ing it through his own arm, supported hei* into the house. Though he had'hither-
to been a silent spectator on the conduct of lord Montalban and Eleanor, yet-he had .not been an uninterested one. Pie was convinced their affections were fixed upon>each other, and he only waited some favourable opportunity to hefriend his young favourite, and knowing the ungra¬ cious treatment she had received from his own mother and lady Cecilia, he resolved to protect her while in the house of the latter. Lord Montalban, equipped for travelling, met them on the stairs, and on approach¬ ing Eleanor, contending passions assailed him. Love and resentment both had al¬ ternate sway; yet Eleanor demanded his polite attention, as being his guest, and he welcomed her to the house of his father. Eleanor could not trust her speech, as bowing therefore only in return, she pro¬ ceeded, still leaning on the arm of Charles, into the drawing-room, where sat the mar¬ quis of B—r-* and ladies Cecilia,Gray and Lenox. , , All wer^ received with pleasure, except-
ing poor Eleanor, who was not noticed, until the marquis of B------, who knew her but' slightly, arose, and paid her the greatest respect.' "•• ■'■■■'■•"[ - Charles Lenox immediately presented her to liim.-^-^" I believe," he cried, "this is the first time my young friend has had the pleasure of entering your lordship's house. Permit me to introduce her to your notice." " That it is the first time," he replied, '* I can only regret; but I now hope that it "will not be the last. On your return to Scotland, I shall be happy to see so amiable a young lady constitute many of my family parties." Eleanor curtseyed. — "Your lordship does me much honour," she returned. *• I fully feel your kindness." She paused, as she saw the eyes of lady Cecilia turned on her brother with furious rage. She cast also so contemplative a glance on Eleanor, that, unable to bear it, she again burst into tears. She felt her situation particularly embarrassing. Lord
Montalban she, saw was observing lier, and with -a view of/concealing her semo- tioivshe turned towards the window, and, as the rest of the party were now ah\con- versing--together,'she gave vent to -her r tears. ,A book layjn the window-seat-- she took it up, as if intent on that^ but the tears which dimmed, her eyes prevent¬ ed her from seeing 4tscontents. At length she heard them affirm their readiness to depart. \ > . Charles advanced towards her. , She still .held the book as if reading.—" Eleanor," he-cried, " I-must* now say a.last adieu ! 'Tis a painful^sound; but it must be ut¬ tered." , She made no otherj-eply, than, by a fresh display of, grief—her,.tears prevented-her speech. ' < ,f * ' . ' r " Amiable sensibility !",he exclaimed aloud/ ,,"Your feelings, Eleanor, do credit to your hearts Think, not your emotion has been lost upon^me, or your wish to conceal it. This book," he-continued, taking it from her,hand, "has received
the precious drops from your eyes, -,igno¬ rant of the pearly/gein. .-. Mucjiias^you; ap-; peared to ; be intent" on its; subject, >I ; will venture. „to affirm, you / scarcely.-.knbwdfs title." ■■:"■-. ,: .^^.- Eleanor,» ; smiled through her.tears;'as lady Cecilia; angrily interrupted* them-,;■ by pronouncing they were .ready.:, 5 7 or: ?.~wrA , Charles i\yas resolved on giving; ja^: tri¬ umph to his favourite, and a mortificatiprt to her enemies, as-opening.-the.ihoojfcche exclaimed .■---" A ■ Badieloifs/dHewess! ljpqn,;my word,: Eleanor,-yo.u could.inot have; opened /a; book; mor0] applicable:.:/.o yourself;, for I here^ deelarej/iin, presence of all - your > friends, •; a ^baclielor'stheii'ess you is-jiqlli be; and I hope{ myrdeelaratioa will [not bedeemed. as ; aii/ostentatious] onej but-placed.to .the meritsiof imy;Eleanor, who deserves all,IjcanrbestQwiPh frer." '\iI < **■»Rddiculousi ;iCharles;" ^riediladyrLe-; nox,* in .'an; a.ngry;voic.e;. ,-,";,Your family are much obliged by youi^generous inteii- tions,"h6wever, 1 V. f ;ivh^> ! i:^'-.''/:r»v.\.( "{/■i^^l " My family; madam," he replied^ '^rnust
be sensible of the merit of my heiress, from whom, as I am now parting, and as life is uncertain, I think it but proper that she should know what she has to ex¬ pect." " Spare me, sir," cried Eleanor; " you overwhelm me with this kindness. » I know not how to reply." Charles pressed her hand, as he felt gra¬ tified at the effect his generous intentions produced. • ' Lord Montalban, spite of his assumed indifference, looked delighted; while lady Cecilia, j bursting with spleen, cried— 'i What a foolish and ill-timed discussion has this book occasioned! For my part, I do not know how it came in my apart¬ ment at all—a ridiculous novel indeed!". " I have been so ridiculous as to read it," replied lord Montalban, smiling, " and must' own it afforded me much amuse¬ ment ; for I was just feeling and partici¬ pating in the raptures experienced by the happy Laurence Percival, in receiving its* lovely heroine as his own for ever."
Lord Montalban here bowed to Elea¬ nor, with looks of tenderness. l ■» In great confusion she averted her eyes, while the marquis, smiling, exclaimed— " Well said, Frederick;' but however love¬ ly she might have been, you must own the present bachelor's- lieiress surpasses all ideal beauties, and presents to us the charming reality of so pleasing a descrip¬ tion." 1 " I am glad, my lord, to find your ideas and my own coincide so well," replied lord Montalban, in a tone of exultation; but the look which his aunt cast upon him instantly checked his raptures. ' She was indeed almost furious, and tak¬ ing him by the arm,'she whispered in his ear—" You shall repent this, sir." 1 She then summoned them to the door, and, with lady Lenox, entered their tra¬ velling carriage; and lord Montalban found himself obliged to ^follow, as he was to J>e their escort. - * > ■ ■ . The marquis took a kind leave of Elea*
nor, with whom he appeared quite pleased; and Charles Lenox ■ now, handed >his sister to /her carriage., .Eleanor, 1 ; Georgina,* and Robert, completed her party;, and (Charles, taking an,aflectionate,leave of all, returned ,to his home. .,..'.- \ t \ t , U , • -Whilst the t other, party* proceeded on their journey,.<?eorgina rallied Eleauqrfon hei%uncle's gallantry, * as she styled it lfi to¬ wards her; while lady Glendinning,.sat .wrapped in silence. r ^Eleanor was a <prey to the most acute sensations. J( The unexpected declaration of .Charles, Lenox filled 1 her with amaze¬ ment, made .top, dni the presence of the haughty Jady Cecilia, «who, she knew, con¬ sidered ( her only as a poor dependant. A momentary gratification^ .passed her mind, hut.it .was instantly chased away by an¬ other, .which surpassed all. > f> This was the ibehaviour of Jord Montalban, .who had again addressed, her an*terms, of v kindness. The approbation of lord Montalban, sur- vpassed' the.-wealth' of worlds, and ' the
pleasing conviction supported her during their journey, which was taken by easy stages. J Lord Montalban had' not much oppor¬ tunity of speaking to her, owing to their being in separate carriages, which ' was planned by the ladies Cecilia and Lenox'. He was a prey to the most uneasy sensa¬ tion, the perfidy of Eleanor still dwelling upon his mind. He heal seen, conviction forced itself upon his belief, and he could not doubt the evidenced!' his senses, and the remembrance of the scene between her and his supposed rival in the rocks tortured his imagination, and according as he had persuaded himself as to her guilt or innocence, so he behaved towards her; and Eleanor, ignorant of his real feel¬ ings, began to attribute liis varying be¬ haviour to caprice. In this way passed*on their journey,' which, as nothing occurred to prolong 1 it, was completed in safety; and Eleanor, with a palpitating heart, saw the white cliffs of Albion appear to her view. Her
admiration increased on reaching London; its noble structures, its wide and exten¬ sive streets, gratified her sight; and al¬ though used to the exalted buildings of Scotland's wide domains, she owned the vast taste displayed in the construction of the many elegant and serviceable build¬ ings with which London abounds. Lady Cecilia was in possession of a noble mansion in St. James's-square, to which place the party were conducted; and lady Cecilia welcomed her guests with ostenta¬ tious hospitality, Eleanor excepted, of whom she took not the least notice. She sighed to herself, at the idea of being obliged to reside under the roof of one who treated her with such pointed re¬ serve; and much it excited her wonder that she had been made one of the party, little imagining the plan which had been laid for her banishment from the family. Lord Montalban was particularly glad when their journey was completed, as during the whole time he had been lec¬ tured by his aunt for his behaviour to
Eleanor, t previous to their leaving B.—— House, and hearing ladyXenox comment on the folly of her son Charles, in declar¬ ing his intentions respecting Eleanor. He had been so pleased with the idea of her being declared heiress to the vast posses¬ sions of Charles, that he had forgotten his resolutions of erasing her from his heart; not that wealth could raise her in the esti¬ mation of his getierous mind, for, on the contrary, he would have gloried in raising her to his own rank, but he exulted in the idea, that her fortune v/ould be as much the means .of saving his father, as Geor¬ gia's ; nor could his aunt, as he supposed, now object to his uniting himself to her; nor was it until lady Cecilia and lady Le¬ nox reminded him of his willing promise to marry Georgina on their return to Scotland, that he roused himself from the pleasing delusion. It was now that the misery v of his situation again burst forth with redoubled horrors. The recollection of the conduct of Eleanor again crossed his mind, and drove him almost to, mad-
ness^ which ■ increased with 1 J tiril^; for after a r fow [ days; residence f with- her'-tinder?' tlie same'roof ', ' hesaw' ^o many virtuous- quali¬ ties display themselves,- thai-he -became a slave > to ■passi'drt'j- [ He saw ; the -ungracibiVs -treatmefitito'■which she; was exposed from •liis ^ aunt janW lady Liehbxi and his heart Cached for 5 'lier. r Yet while'lie ■ doted oil *her ! al rh Os t- to : distraction^ ■ In e -recollected, 'With" ; horrorj' that he.• had ".passed^his • word 'pfihonour^to devote himself tosGeorgina. "^^Lady Cecilia Avowed the ^Utmost extent '■of ; her-vengeance," if; he 'did not * fulfil "ihis "eng'agemeht^ ■ and fosave a father, he pro- -mis'ed : a sacrifice'at whiclv-his soul ^revolt¬ ed; 1 for though-;he 'belieted' Eleanor ; to be' guilty'of some "private amotuv yet he '-Still' hoped it might'be but transient, and ( that'she'Hvould herself 'explain all at isome -futur6'peri 6d r ; r **bu t : when' the ; scene' off li e rocks; aiid the -sentences-wliich ? ;he j; liad 1 Heard utteredp stole upon Iris rebbllectioh, ■he' again considered' her as *uf terly lost to 'him ? ; - ; ahd under this impressioni'heresolv- "ed' ( passively ' to submit' to' the -wishes:vof
his father and aunt, and to stifle his own feelings within his bosom, and, if possible, to forget the passion which he had hither¬ to encouraged for the too-lovely yet mys¬ terious Eleanor.
VOL, IL
K
CHAPTER X. ****************** Thy thoughts are vagabonds, all outward bound, ]\li:t sands, and rocks, and storms, to cruise for pleasure, If gsitu'tl, dear bought, and better miss'd than gairfd. YOUKG. Lady Cecilia Gray, who was a complete master of the human passions, closely watched the actions of her nephew. She was entirely aware of the struggles passing in his bosom, she was fully convinced of the affection which subsisted mutually between Eleanor and himself, and she much feared that her darling hopes would yet be frustrat¬ ed, in the failure of lord Montalban making good his engagement with Georgina. She imparted her fears to lady Lenox, and they together agreed as to the neces¬ sity of removing Eleanor from the sight of lord Montalban, as their interviews were now rendered frequent by residing under the same roof.
Lady Lenox mentioned the subject to her daughter, insisting upon her writing to Mrs. Conway, to inform her of their being in town, and of their intention of visiting her. Lady Glendinning complied 'with the wishes of her mother. AlmosHn a state of passive submission, her ladysliip had sunk into a sort of melancholy, very differ¬ ent to her former disposition; since leaving St. Michael's Castle, scarce a smile had animated her countenance; and4o avoid the trouble of conversation or argument, she instantly complied with the directions of lady Lenox. A note was thejrefore dispatched to Mrs. Conway, at Camber¬ well Grove; and Eleanor, with some ( de¬ gree of pleasure, reflected, that perhaps with that lady she might be permitted to pass some of her time; and although she' was not exactly the woman she w'buld have chosen for her friend, yet she pre¬ ferred her society to those with whom she was now passing her time. Ever since ' K2
the cojd repulse with which lady Glendin¬ ning had treated her, previous to her leav¬ ing Scotland, she had felt embarrassed and intimidated ,in her presence; whilst her ladyship did not appear to give it a thought, but behaved towards her with civility bordering on reserve. One circumstance perplexed Eleanor. She had promised to write lord Arthur on her arrival in Eng¬ land, not doubting but she should also hear > her ladyship express her intentions of doing so; but some days having passed, Eleanor at length ventured to ask her ladyship if she were going to write to Scotland? Lady Glendinning replied, that Robert and'deorgina were about to send a packet, and that if she pleased, she could enclose a letter to lord Arthur, as no doubt she wished so to do. s ^Eleanor, of course, joyfully acquiesced, and retiring to her own room, wrote a long and affectionate letter to lord Arthur. She likewise availed herself of the plea of writing to keep her chamber, as solitude
ELEANOR. I9'7 was the most congenial to her feelings*, her situation was, of all others, the 1 most unpleasing one; for ever in the presence of lord Montalban, yet surrounded also by the keen observation of others, she knew not how to act, so as to escape re¬ proof. ?She had various reasons,' and p?i- vate ones, for esteeming lord Montalban, and it cost her many a painful struggle to treat with coldness the man whom, of all others, she most valued. ., Large parties of visitors already'began to crowd the house of lady Cecilia. Her rank in life insured her the respect of the fashionable world; and Eleanor gladly availed herself of the permission she al¬ ways had to retire to her own room; while lord Montalban, forced by his haugh¬ ty aunt to mix with the company, had a more arduous task to sustain. It was soon whispered that Georgina was his intended bride, and he found him¬ self, in a manner, compelled to attend her side, while his thoughts reverted from the
gay room to that of Eleanor, in which he knew she sat alone and deserted. A short .time however made a great .alteration in her situation, as, on the re¬ ceipt of lady Glendinning's note, Mrs. Conway immediately ordered her carriage to St. James's-square, and on being intro¬ duced, declared she was so extremely glad of their arrival in town, that she could not rest a moment until she had paid her respects to them; adding, that it was so extremely genteel in her ladyship to have written her herself. On seeing Eleanor, she evinced great pleasure and satisfaction, and begged,that she would now avail herself of every, op¬ portunity ,to visit her at Camberwell Grove. Eleanor immediately promised to pass as much time with her as lady Glendin-. ning would permit. ." Now that is kind of you," replied Mrs. Conway; " and I am sure I shall always be proud to receive lady Glendinning,
and the whole of her family, whenever they will choose to honour my house; but I was going to observe that, as doubtless your ladyship," continued she, addressing lady Glendinning, " will be most likely greatly taken up with large parties, you may perhaps not be enabled to give me much of your company; but probably you will grant me the society of Miss Eleanor for a short time; for Mr. Con¬ way is about making a small tour round the tioast with some male friends of his, and I shall be extremely dull without him." " Make yourself easy, madam, as to that point," replied lady Glendinning. " You shall have the company of Eleanor as long as you please, and when you please; and no doubt she will find herself extremely happy under your ; roof." Eleanor* rather surprised at this acqui¬ escence, curtseyed her thanks. Lady Lenox and lady Cecilia exchanged glances of great satisfaction. Lord Montalban looked chagrined;
while Mrs. Conway expressed her thanks in the warmest terms.—" I had hoped," she cried, " to have prevailed on you to accompany me home to dinner to-day, which, if you do, I can't see why you may not take up your residence with me, as her ladyship has so genteelly given her permission for you to come when you like.' r Eleanor, who thought she should be more happy under any one's roof than lady Cecilia's, expressed her readiness to attend her immediately, if lady Glendin¬ ning was agreeable to it* Her ladyship assented; while lady Ce* cilia, determined not to lose this oppor¬ tunity of removing her so effectually, cried—" I am really very glad Mrs. Con¬ way has given this invitation to Miss Eleanor, for though I am most happy to accommodate lady Glendinning's family, yet I must own my house is so full at present, and I expect so much company while I remain in town, that I shall be glad of a spare room, and no doubt she
will be more happy with Mrs. Conway than amongst the high circles which fre-* quent my house." 1 The blush of indignation pervaded the 1 cheek of Eleanor at this rude avowal. , Lord Montalban darted a look of anger on his aunt r while Eleanor exclaimed— " I was not aware, lady Cecilia,, that I was such an intruder in your ladyship's house,. which, could I have had my wish, would never have been the case, as I would gladly have remained at St Michael's; but it was the wish of lady Glendinning that I should accompany her, and of course 1 considered myself as entitled to her pro¬ tection, and while she continued to honour me with it, the same roof which received lier ladyship, I thought must also shelter me; but I am sorry to find I have been considered as an unwelcome visitor during my short visit in St James's-square, and can only repeat my willingness to remove myself immediately J* Lady Cecilia did not condescend to< make a reply; but lady Glendinning felt
for Eleanor; she saw how much she was hurt,' and in a mild tone she exclaimed— " Do not disturb yourself with such thoughts as those, Eleanor; lady Cecilia, I am, sure, could not mean to commit such a breach of hospitality, as to say she con¬ sidered'you as an intruder, as in that case we might all be deemed as such, for you observed rightly, when you said you con¬ sidered yourself as entitled to my protec¬ tion; arid while I afford it to you, you are of courseone of my family, and I shall notthink myself even a welcome visitor where the least part of my family is not the same." Eleanor turned a look of gratitude on her ladyship, while lady Cecilia coloured with vexation, and attempted to convince her ladyship of the pleasure she felt in her company. Lady Glendinning coldly bowed, and turning to Eleanor, cried—" My motive for wishing you to accompany Mrs. Con¬ way was for your own happiness; as for many ?-easons, I think you will find it under her roof in a greater degree than
.203
here. Trust me, Eleanor, I wish you well, but, unfortunately for me, I am in¬ volved in a gulph of trouble." She paused, as if suddenly recollecting herself. She continued—" No matter—I scarce know what I say. My head is in excessive pain, and I feel much indisposed." " Why, I must say," cried Mrs. Con¬ way, " that your ladyship does certainly look very ill. You don't look like the same person as when I saw you in Scot¬ land." Lady Lenox looked angrily at Mrs. Conway.—" There," she exclaimed, " you are like the generality of the world, who, the moment they hear another complain, generally comfort them with the assertion of informing them of the debility of their countenance, thus depressing, instead of raising their spirits. My daughter has not recovered the fatigue of her journey yet, I suppose." Lady Glendinning shook her head.— " Mrs. Conway," she exclaimed, " will not add to, or dimmish, my indisposition by
her just observations. I am indeed ifr\ and fear I shall not speedily recover." Lady Lenox proposed her having ad¬ vice, which she positively declined. Eleanor had attentively scrutinized her face; she did indeed look ill, but the ex¬ pressive pensiveness which beamed in her eyes convinced her that her mind was ill at^ease, -and that she was evidently un¬ happy, though for what cause she could not exactly ascertain. Yet, notwithstand¬ ing her treatment to her on many occa¬ sions, she felt inclined to pity her. She had been kind to her in the present in¬ stance, and she was grateful for it. Mrs. Conway now begged Eleanor would attend her, as dinner would be ready by the time they should reach Cam¬ berwell, and Mr. Conway would be ex¬ pecting her. Eleanor therefore took leave of all pre¬ sent. Lady Glendinning shook her hand with great kindness, and wished her much pleasure in her visit.
Lord Montalban, in extreme vexation, faltered out an adieu; while Mrs. Con¬ way brightened his countenance, by ex¬ pressing her hopes that he would often visit her,, as likewise Georgina and Ro¬ bert. All promised to comply, and Mrs. Con¬ way led Eleanor to her carriage. During their ride, the former lady ex¬ pressed her dislike of lady Cecilia Gray, who, she declared, had behaved herself so very ill towards Eleanor, that she could never forgive it. She likewise declared herself so happy, in being allowed to have her entirely at her house, and evinced so much' good nature towards her, that Elea¬ nor really congratulated herself on being about to reside with her, for though she could not but feel diicress at parting with ford Montalban, yet she considered it>„ under all circumstances, the most advis¬ able plan, She was aware that he had promised to unite himself to* Georgina, and by being in his- presence she was only
feeding a passion 'which she considered must end in absolute misery. These thoughts now passed in quick succession in her mind, and rendered her pensive. * Mrs. Conway, with much good humour, tried to disperse her gloom, and the car¬ riage now turning up the beautiful Grove of Camberwell, Mrs. Conway pointed out her cottage. Eleanor was delighted with the situa¬ tion, and was still further pleased on enter¬ ing the house, which, though denominated a cottage, was fitted up in a style that would have graced a palace. Mr. Conway met them in the hall. He had beheld Eleanor from the drawing- room window, and hastened to receive her. He welcomed her to his house, and with the most graceful manners expressed his 1 pleasure at seeing her in Lcndon.— * I shall never forget," he cried,«' that >ou were our kind conductress to the house of lord Arthur, when we were so distressed
with our unfortunate accident, as we then- considered it; but I have ever since deem¬ ed it as the most fortunate circumstance that could have occurred, as it has given' to Mrs. Conway so lovely a friend. 1 ' Eleanor smiled, as he "proceeded to ex¬ press his hopes that she would honour them with her company while in London. Mrs. Conway interrupted him, by in¬ forming him of her intended stay, which he heard with unfeigned pleasure. As the hour of dinner was approaching, Mrs. Conway hastened to her dressing- room, and invited Eleanor to accompany her, and leading her to a room adjoining, begged her to consider it as her own. The beauty of the prospect, and the simple elegance of the apartment, all con¬ spired to delight Eleanor, and added to the kind behaviour of Mrs. Conway, she fancied herself in a paradise. She looked around her, and felt she could breathe in J peace. She here met no eyes turned upon her with scorn or impertinent scrutiny,
and she already congratulated herself on' her change of residence. Mrs. Conway leaving her for a few mi¬ nutes to > alter her dress, she took a view of her new abode. The apartment was* fitted up similar to Mrs. Conway's dress¬ ing-room; its prevailing colour was a deli¬ cate pink, which matched with the furni¬ ture. The curtains were beautifully cover¬ ed with white muslin, tastefully arranged. At one window ran a honeysuckle, which twined its branches round the frame, and gave a delightful perfume to the room. At the other window ran a grape vine, which already promised a luxurious pro¬ duce of its delicious fruit. Eleanor felt a ray of delight steal over her bosom, which she had not experienced since her departure from Scotland. In this sweet retirement she fancied she should at least pass her time in peace and content, and she wished that lord Arthur .could know of her destination, asr she fan¬ cied he would be more easy if he knew of her present abode. She continued buried
in her own. reflections until Mrs/ Conway summoned her to the dinner-table *,' and on • entering the parlour,, she beheld a gentle¬ man, who was introduced to her as Mr. Reynolds, the father of Mrs. Conway. - He expressed himself much pleased tot the opportunity of seeing a young lady, of whom, he added, he had heard so much, and returned his-thanks to her for the kind treatment which had- been afforded - to his daughter at St. Michael's Castle. i Eleanor expressed her happiness at hav¬ ing been instrumental to their, relief, for which, she added, she was already mow; than paid, in the kind attention of Mr. and Mrs. Conway; and she asserted, with truth, that she should experience far greater pleasure in residing with them than in St. James's-square. v Mrs. Conway felt highly gratified at this preference given to her; and it would be doing her great injustice, if we did not add, that she really displayed towards Eleanor the warmest affection; and the good nature of her disposition hid, in a
great measure, the defects of her under¬ standing. On dinner being over, Mrs. Conway and Eleanor arose; and as the evening was lovely, the former proposed to shew her the adjacent scenery. Eleanor readily acquiesced, and they set out for a short walk. The beauties of that delightful spot are doubtless known to most of my readers too well -to need a description; suffice it to say, Eleanor was delighted,at the lovely prospect which surrounded her. On reaching the top of jfche Grove, her admiration increased, and she expressed herself in terms of pleasure. Mrs. Conway replied, that it was in¬ deed a sweet place, and what rendered it still more agreeable was, that a number of genteel persons resided in its vicinity, al¬ though she had not yet formed an ac¬ quaintance with many; yet, she added, it was certainly more pleasant to be sur¬ rounded with people who were really genteel, than to have her sight annoyed with the motley group of the city*
She informed Eleanor tliat Mr. Con- way regularly attended Lincoln's Inn every morning, which greatly pleased her father, who "was now quite reconciled to their union, and that nothing could ex¬ ceed their mutual happiness. Eleanor congratulated her on her fe¬ licity, which she hoped might be perma¬ nent, and complimented her on her taste; and added, that she had made good the assertion of Thomson, who beautifully expresses his sentiments on the marriage state, in the following lines :— " Happy they, the happiest of their kind", Whom jjentler stars unite, and in one fate Their.pcrsoni*, being, and their fortunes blend/ 1 ' Mrs. Conway smiled.—" You are quite a poet," she exclaimed; "but I suppose you have read a great deal." "I have been in the habit, madam," replied Eleanor, " of studying those au¬ thors whose works are most calculated to the improvement of the mindj and which have been recommended to me by lord
Arthur, on whose judgment I have ever placed the most implicit reliance." Mrs. Conway owned she had not read much, owing to her having been brought up with her uncle, to whose business she had so closely attended. She added her regrets on the occasion; but informed Eleanor, that now she was her guest, they would together read all those works which Eleanor deemed most worthy of notice. Eleanor replied, that she should be hap¬ py to contribute to her amusement in any way she thought proper; and having now rambled as far as they wished, they re¬ turned homewards. In passing through the Grove, Eleanor observed the park and lodge leading to a noble mansion, and expressed her admira¬ tion of its construction. *« Ah," replied Mrs. Conway, "it is now only the remains of taste and splendour. That seat once belonged to the late cele¬ brated doctor L------, who distinguished himself for so many years in his profes¬ sional skill, and whose judgment as a-
physician can only be excelled by the humanity*, of his character, which was displayed to numbers of his fellow-crea¬ tures." " I have heard of him," replied Eleanor; " but I must confess your panegyric is the warmest which ever met my ears." " Perhaps so," replied Mrs. Conway; " it would be difficult to find that being, 1 believe, who could meet with general approbation; but as you set me the ex¬ ample just now of quoting, I shall follow it, by repeating some lines which I re¬ member reading somewhere, and I think applicable to the present subject— " Men's evils wo write in brass, Ihcir viitties in water." " Most excellent, as well as applicable, madam," returned Eleanor, " and from the pen of an author whose fame I trust will never die — the immortal Shake¬ speare." « I thank you," replied Mrs. Conway, " for your information. I can already see
what a source of amusement you have in store for me, by your thorough knowledge of all our best poets." ■ She paused, as they had now reached their own door, and on entering the draw¬ ing-room, found, their party increased, by the addition of sir Henry Conway and his son, who had taken a ride to Camberwell, as was their frequent custom. A fresh introduction of Eleanor took place, and both sir Henry and his son manifested their pleasure at seeing her. In the former she beheld the real gentle¬ man, whose whole appearance was pre¬ possessing to the extreme, his years sitting on him rather as an ornament than a bur¬ then. Mr. Conway was a fine-looking young man, lively and spirited to the extreme, and' his conversation was a source of amusement to all. He frequently ad¬ dressed himself'to Eleanor; and all present paid her so much attention, that if it had not been for painful ideas which crowded
on her mind, she would have fancied her¬ self happy. The evening passed on with great plea¬ sure, and before the departure of sir Hen¬ ry, he inquired of Eleanor the residence of lady Glendinning, as he wished to pay his respects to her, in order to return his personal thanks to her and lord Arthur, for their friendly interference to him in favour of his nephew. Eleanor informed him of lier residence with lady Cecilia, and with his son and Mr. Reynolds departed for town. At an early hour Eleanor retired to her room. She again viewed the lovely pros¬ pect from her window; a peaceful calm¬ ness reigned around, which seemed con¬ genial to her feelings. She raised a prayer of thankfulness to that Power who had <niided her steps to an haven of content. —.« Why need I fear," she exclaimed, " the frowns of fortune ? why dread the world's contumely, since there is One in whom I trust—
, 0h t thoi^ great arbiter oflife and death, I trust in thee, and know in whom I trust; Or life or death is equal—neither weighs, All weight in this. Oh, let me live to thee. YOUKG.
CHAPTER XL
Her foim vui;> fresher than the mnrning rose, Wlicn the dew wets irs leaves—uiistaincd and pure As is the lily, or the muuntniu snow. The modest \irtucs uiingl'd in hor«yes. . --------------------------- , a native grace Sat fnir proportion'd on her polish'd Jnnhs; Thoughllesi of heauty, sl-e «as» beauty's self. Thomson. The slumbers of Eleanor were awakened in the morning by the choruses of the feathered songsters, whose melodious notes stole in lengthened tones on the ear. She arose, after having enjoyed a night of calm repose, and felt herself refreshed, and her mind somewhat easier than it had been for a long while; she felt she was in a house where her comforts would be studied, VOL. II. L
and that it would be her own fault if she did not make herself comfortable. The morning was lovely, and all nature seemed to smile around. She opened one of the windows, and looking out, beheld the most lovely flower-garden in full bloom. Plants of every description were arranged in full perfection, and emitted their fragrance around. Eleanor, much pleased with the pros¬ pect, remained at the window. The scene before her fully reminded her of the beau¬ tiful description given by Thomson of the flower-garden, and she repeated aloud— «' Hail, Source ofHeing! To tluio I bend the knee, to thee my thoughts Continual climb, who with a master hand lltibt the gifat whole into peifectiun touch'd. Uy thee disposM into congenial soils, Stands each attractive plant." At length, recollecting that the hour of breakfast was near, she rung her bell, which was answered by Mrs. Conway's own maid, who informed her that her
lady had already entered .the-breakfast-. room. ! , ' .*. i - Eleanor .therefore hastened down, and found Mr. and Mrs. Conway waiting for lier. . She apologized for keeping-them, adding, it was not on account of her hav¬ ing slept so kite, but that she. had been so delighted with the prospect of their beau¬ tiful garden, that she could have remained all day gazing on it. > ' - / Mrs. Conway assured her that she had not kept them waiting, and once more begged her to consider herself as quite at home, and under no restraint Mr. Conway paid her the compliments of the morning, and congratulated her on her healthy appearance, alleging that he thought the air of Camber well had already added to the roses in her cheek. Mrs. Conway expressed herself of the same opinion, as she seated herself, in order to do the honours of her table. Eleanor was much pleased to see ,the harmony which ,really subsisted between L^
theni, 'andlmubh it redounded^ tb the credit of Mr. Conway, who, since his union with, his- lady, had certainly endeavoured tQf repajTiher kindness towards, him, by, tke;nlpst .grateful:attention on his*part.— " Ife were well/ 7 -thought Eleanor, " if all , marriages-were productive of such felicity, as, an union under such circumstances as theirs often • proves a* source of misery." < But Mr. Conway had. wisely reconciled- himself! to the trivial failings of his wife, which arose simply from education;- he remembered-that she had been the instru¬ mental cause of saving him from ruin; as such, she demanded his gratitude, and fr/aim that 1 feeling, affection actually had arisen. < Mrs/Conway, who had married-solely from motives' of tenderness, was of course happy in his love, and not a thought arose to i disturb her tranquillity. Eleanor gazed on their countenances, which evinced such peifect content, and she- mentally J drew comparisons between their and her own situation. A sigh es-
, caped heriipsi; she endeavoured:to repress it, and raising her eyes^ beheld those of Mr. Conway attehtively^fixed- on! her; nor •did he (withdraw, them;!but seeing! that she observed* him, he cried-—".I; beg your .pardon, Miss Qlendinning-^I fear you will think me guilty of great rudeness, in put¬ ting your modesty to" the -blushJby my jgaze; ■ but your features, so forcibly remind me of a lady, a friend of ;ours, thatt J .can¬ not but speak i;of the ^wonderful 'resem- jblance.,; :Ypu .were.t.apparently; in - *deep . thought just thenV :which, jif possible,;add- ; ed to; the likeness you;bear to ?her,, as she possesses *a wonderful "firmness; of; counte¬ nance,; /and : I. rhaveoften seen her almost .lost in; thought^; ;and only that L seev,so : youthful 'a form before me, I could really r'suppose; it was the same being.":; '■*..■ ■";'■•.:'..• : r " To whom do; you :allude, my dear?" ^inquired Mrs. Conway. . J .•>;■. ! r ■ v.- ."fI>!should /think,"; he ;> cried^ tf ;Ir.need scarcely answer ybii that question; as ydu must; doubtless ; observe; the likeness as !iweli as I.; Tell me now> if you^could not
almost 1 fancy that our noble friend Mrs, Clifford stood before us ?" ! i ,« Why yes," she replied, " there is cer¬ tainly a great likeness 1 indeed. I wonder I did not observe it before. 'Why any body might take you to be her daughter* Eleanor." ",< Indeed, madam," 1 she replied, in a voice of'agitation, occasioned hy this sud¬ den ^declaration; while Mr. Conway, ob¬ serving her emotion, exclaimed—"• Really we ought to beg your pardon, Miss'Glen- dinning, for this investigation of your fea¬ tures ; but I trust you will excuse it, and be assured, that Mrs. Clifford, the \&\y to whom we allude, is a woman of the most exemplary character, as a wife and mother, and whose noble demeanor and beauty of person can only be excelled by the good¬ ness of her disposition. Need I say she has only to be seen to be admired ? * and I am proud to assert she adds to the num¬ ber of our truly-valuable friends." >. , > " Yes 1 ," exclaimed Mrs. Conway,. " she is certainly a most genteel woman, and all
the family are particularly agreeable; and I am sure you must allow that Miss Clif¬ ford, their eldest daughter, is a most lovely young lady. I am sure Eleanor would like her, and I shall be happy," she con¬ tinued, addressing Eleanor, " to introduce you to them." " I should feel much obliged by the in¬ troduction, madam," replied Eleanor, " as of course the friendship of such an amiable family must be an acquisition; and I must own I feel some degree of interest to be¬ hold a lady who you say I so much re¬ semble." ' " You 1 are certainly very like her," re¬ turned Mrs. Conway, " and the more I look at you, the more I see it; but you shall judge for yourself, for we will take a ride this morning, and call upon them, if it will be agreeable to you." " Certainly, madam," replied Eleanor, " if will afford me the highest pleasure, if it suits your convenience." ' " Perfectly so," she cried. " I mean to devote 'my time for your amusement,
while you remain my guest, and I hope I shall be able to afford you as much plea¬ sure as your society gives to me." Eleanor thanked her, and Mr. Conway now rising, prepared to go to tov^n. His groom was in waiting with his horse at the door, and wishing them good-morn- in,g, Mr. Conway rode off. " Does Mr. Conway always ride to town on horseback, madam?" inquired Eleanor. Mrs. Conway replied that he did, being very fond of that exercise, and that the carriage was always then in readiness for her;-" bnt I often wish," she continued, " that I could sit a horse. I think I should like it much. I often envy a lady who I frequently see, though I don't know who she is, but she very often passes here on horseback, always attended by a groom, and sometimes I have seen two servants with lier. She is, I think, one of the most genteel-looking figures I ever saw, and sits her horse with so much grace, that I always take a pleasure in looking at her
Avheni'stepasses/hfl^tM^ somewhere ^nearihere/ and J; should !ye.ry .much like ito- become acquaiiited ; ,with .her."''"^ //;■:" d;iv-- W-^-Uv.y-x. y 5 y/ '.■.'•. :_•-'? \ Eleanor mentally smited 5 ;at th^ curio¬ sity of Mrs. Conway after } a)strangej:,trr "; I 'should think,'?, she rephedk • Hi •* r M i» . of the consequence you describe her, ;that she.could hot long remain: unkhow,n,r;par¬ ticularly if she resides; near to you/', ••<•>,;,:. ,y s Why, no, so I imagine/^cried -Mrs. Conwayi; ff and I dare, say;}- \ x shall find some-opportunity .of becomingacquainted Avith hen for genteel people yxCn\fox\g in finding out one another.^ •,■. ; ; ; :: Mrs. Conway here drew herself up, as ';the; idea of her own consequence passed Jier mind—-a theme on which she; was very fond oftdwelling. ,?,-<. ?.•:.'•:■'. v -| ; At an early hour she ordered her, cai*- i : iage,and stepping into it,with Eleanor, desired;to be driven to Brixton, .... at which .place;Mr.-and Mrs. Clifford resided.,/ , ■■; • During their ride^ Mrs. Conwayagain ' l3 ';
spoke of< the virtues and accomplishments of this family, adding, they had been in¬ troduced to her by sir Henry Conway, who was acquainted with Mr. Clifford, and 'that she had found herself much pleased^with them*; for though, she add¬ ed, she had not'said much respecting Mr. Clifford, yet she thought him no way in¬ ferior to his lady, as- his person was hand¬ some, and his manneis elegant and fasci¬ nating, 5 and a more congenial pair there could scarcely be found. Their house, she said, was the abode of harmony ; they kept out little company, as their own family circle appeared to constitute their happiness. < Eleanor expressed her admiration of such a picture, and much longed to be¬ hold them, particularly Mrs. Clifford, whom Mrs. Conway said she so 'greatly resembled; and on that lady pointing out to her notice an elegant house, and affirm¬ ing it to be theirs, she felt herself un¬ usually agitated, and she trembled as she
descended from the carriage, and entered the house. > , * > > The servant led the way to the draw¬ ing-room, -where sat Mrs. and Miss Clif¬ ford, as: also some of her younger daugh¬ ters. They arose on the entrance of Mrs. Conway, and expressed their pleasure at seeing her, / while Mrs. Clifford, turning her eyes full on Eleanor, appeared struck with her presence. * Mrs. Conway immediately informed them, that'having the pleasure of a young friend's company, who was from Scot¬ land, she could not resist the pleasure of introducing her. Mrs, Clifford immediately advanced to¬ wards Eleanor, and in the most affable manner welcomed her to her house; but on Mrs. Conway's pronouncing the name of Miss Glendinning, she hastily seized her hand, the* colour fled from her cheeks, and she appeared almost incapable of speechj «L Eleanor -looked on her with astonish¬ ment, i In her face and figure she beheld
all that Mrs. Conway had described ■; and she felt, she knew not why, peculiarly in¬ terested in her fate: she was herself hard¬ ly less agitated than Mrs. Clifford, who pressed her hand still between hers, with a warmth that bespoke a feeling ibeyond that of an acquaintance. Miss Clifford saw the emotion of i her mother, and advancing towards her, ten¬ derly inquired if she felt herself indis¬ posed? f i ; " Rather so, my dear Emily," she re¬ plied ; " a sudden faintness stole over me, but I am better now."' She endeavoured to smile, and turning again to Eleanor, cried—" I hope, Miss Glendinning, you will not impute this weakness to a want of respect or pleasure I feel at the honour you have done me by your visit, as it will afford me the highest satisfaction in being favoured with your society as often as possible." " So far from imputing your behaviour to a wrong cause, madam," replied Elea¬ nor, " I -feel highly gratified'shy .your
warm reception of me, which bespoke a sentiment far beyond what I could have hoped to find in a lady who till >now' was a stranger to me; but if you will grant me your friendship, I shall prize it as an inestimable gift." Mrs. Clifford .gracefully assured her she already possessed it to the highest degree, and tlie expression of her countenance crave evident proof of -her assertion, as she continued to gaze on her with looks of the teriderest regard ; when Mrs. Conway turning to her, suddenly exclaimed— " You have heaid me say, JVIrs. Clifford, what extremely kind and genteel 'beha¬ viour Mr. Conway and I met with when in Scotland 'from lord Arthur Glendin- nine\ from whose interference indeed I may say I owe my present happiness." j "'I'have often heard you mention it," replied*Mrs. Clifford ; " and in you, Miss Glendinning," she continued, addressing Eleanor, .'f I presume I behold lord Ar~ thurlS'dauglUei*." >J >* The cheeks of Eleanor assumed a crim-
son blush at this question. - Her lips mov¬ ed, - but no sound issued. ' ■ ; < Mrs. Conway saw her embarrassment] and wishing to relieve her, replied—" Oh, no, madam, his niece Eleanor is the daughter of his sister lady Frances, who, I understand, has withdrawn herself from her family." • > . »" The daughter of lady Frances!" re¬ peated Mrs. Clifford, in a voice of extreme agitation, ".impossible! AVho'can have asserted such,.an erroneous report?", - i . " Really I don't know, ma'am," replied Mrs. Conway, staring at her with astonish¬ ment, while Eleanor, , greatly agitated, fixed a look of inquiry on her, which Mrs. Clifford observing, exclaimed--" I beg your pardon, Miss Glendinning, but your great resemblance to lord Arthur led me to suppose that you claimed a nearer tic of j relationship to him than that-of a niece." ( . , > i t ,i ."Are you acquainted u then, , madam, with lord Arthur?" quickly -inquired Eleanor. .' •> > , i o '* .oo;.!
.1 Mrs. Clifford looked confused.—"I for¬ merly knew lord Arthur," she.replied, " and have seen lady Frances Glendin¬ ning, but it is now many years- since' she has withdrawn herself from the world; and depend upon it, from what little I knew of her, she never could or would have been separated from her child. Yet, perhaps, it is cruel in me thus to remove the veil which is thrown over your eyes respecting your birth; yet rest assured, you are a near descendant of lord Arthur; but, however high your rank, it cannot raise the regard I feel for you ; and I have only to request you will excuse the appa¬ rent rudeness of which I have been guilty in thus criticising your countenance." < " 'Tis something strange,"* cried Mrs. Conway, " for it was only this morning at breakfast' that Mr. Conway -was notic¬ ing the remarkable likeness' which Miss Glendinning bears to you, madam, and which is indeed very striking." Mrs. Clifford endeavoured to smile off this assertion,, but the ^alternate' pale and
Ted Which varied on her cheek bespoke an inward emotion which she endeavoured to conceal. Eleanor marked her visible agitation with wonder: the conduct of Mrs. Clif- "ford had filled- her with surprise. -She felt, she knew not why, unaccountably drawn towards her. The ties of affection even appeared to interweave themselves .around her heart, and she scarce knew how to reply to the questions she asked. Mrs. Clifford, however, dropped the subject entirely, which Eleanor by no • means wished to renew, and the conver¬ sation became more general; though airs. Clifford still contrived to make a few in¬ quiries as to the family Of lord Arthur, and whether earl Campbell was still living; and on Eleanor replying in the affirma¬ tive, a smile of dignified satisfaction stole over her lovely countenance. If Eleanor was pleased with Mrs. Clif¬ ford, she was no less delighted with her fascinating daughter:* in'Emily-Clifford she beheld all .that could please the eye,
or gain upon the heart: her disposition appeared as amiable as her manners were gentle and irresistible; and Eleanor fan- cied in her a mind congenial to her own. During their stay, Mr. Clifford entered the drawing-room, when his lady ladvanc- ing towards him, introduced Eleanor as Miss Glendinning. Eleanor thought he cast a look of ini¬ quity on her, but instantly collecting himself, he welcomed-her in the most cor¬ dial terms, and expressed Jiis .pleasure at seeing her. Fleanor was flmieh prepossessed by ihis appearance. ,H f e was rather in the mid¬ dle age oflife, but his person still agree¬ able, and retaining the activity of youth. Miss Clifford, she saw, 'resembled iher father, and not Mrs. Clifford, which was accounted for by ^ the intelligence which she heard during their visit. Emily Clif¬ ford was the offspring of a former mar¬ riage, as Mr. Clifford had twice entered the nuptial state; but so great an harmony subsisted in^this amiable family, that Mis.
Clifford regarded not her own children more than the lovely Emily, who, in re¬ turn, loved her with the sincerest affection, and looked up to her as a mother, as her own she never remembered. - The time flew on so imperceptibly that Mrs. Conway looked at her watch in some surprise, as she found the morning fast advancing, and in consequence arose. Mrs. Clifford appeared loth to part with Eleanor, and begged she would favour her with her company at all possible op¬ portunities. Mrs. Conway good-humouredly remind¬ ed her that she would always > find Miss Glendinning at her cottage, whenever she chose to honour her with her visits ,* and it was likewise agreed, that Miss Clifford should spend the following day with them at Camber well Grove—a propo¬ sition which Eleanor heard with great de¬ light, as she felt much inclined to culti¬ vate this young lady's friendship. j . On taking their leave, Mrs. Clifford again pressed the hand of Eleanor with so
much warmth, that she felt more and more surprised, and on entering the carriage with Mrs. Conway, she expressed her ad¬ miration of her in the highest degree.— " I thought you would like her," she re¬ plied ; " every body admires her that has the pleasure of her acquaintance." This assertion was readily believed by Eleanor, who felt not only a sentiment of admiration, but that of affection, which even at this early period the amiable Mrs. Clifford had raised in her bosom ; nor did she anticipate scarcely less pleasure in the idea of cultivating the esteem of the fasci¬ nating Emily, and she congratulated her¬ self on the prospect of passing her time so agreeably while under the roof of Mrs. Conway, and being removed from the haughty lady Cecilia Gray; though her thoughts continually wandered to St. James's-square. Lord Montalban was-a resident there: doubtless he would now fulfil his promise, and comply with the wishes of his family. The thought cost her a pang. She sighed deeply.
>Mrs. Conway looked earnestly at her, and half-jestingly inquired the cause of her regret. Eleanor evaded the question, and the carriage now driving up the Grove, they were instantly set down at their own door, and they soon separated to dress for dinner. When alone, Eleanor again reflected on the behaviour of Mrs. Clifford, which, though kind in the extreme, was certainly mysterious, and something strange, in ia lady who till mow had been a perfect ^stranger.—*• How,"'thought Eleanor," can Mrs. Clifford doubt !my -being the child of lady Francesi? Alas! what strange emo¬ tions she raised dn this aching heart! Oh, my mother 1' she mentally ejaculated, " when shall we meet ? when shall I be restored to the embraces of a parent? Sin¬ gular fate is mine : Mrs. Clifford viewed me as the daughter of lord Arthur. Oh I she knew not the feelings that supposition raised in my bosom! How painful is concealment to an ingenuous mind! yet
it must be so. I am the child of myste¬ ry: a veil obscures my birth, and until fate shall tear it away, I must remain to the world, as I truly am, the daughter of Adversity and the victim of Suspicion."
CHAPTER XII.
With aspect mild and elevated eye, Iiehold him sauted on n mount serrnc, Above the foj.-s uf sense and pasiion's storm ; All the black cares and tumults of this life, Like harmless thunders, breaking nt his feet, Excite his pity, not impair his pence. YorKo. Iiis nature is too n»b!c fur tlie world j lie would not flatter Neptune for his trident, Or Jove for his power to thunder; his heart's his mouth. What his breast forges, that his tongue must vent. SlIAKTSl'LAIlE. Eleanor remained in her own room un¬ til Mrs. Conway joined her. She inform¬ ed her that Mr. Conway was returned home, and waiting for them in the dining- parlour. She likewise added, that he had a gentleman with him, who she believed he had prevailed on to stay dinner.— " I don't know though," she continued, " whether we shall find him an agreeable
acquisition or not: 'tis according as his humour prevails." • / " Is he so very changeable a being, ma¬ dam, then ?" inquired Eleanor, as a smile dimpled on her cheek ; " I should think the mode of conduct tb constitute a gen¬ tleman is that of always possessing the same agreeable suavity of manners and temper, particularly when in the house of a friend: but perhaps this gentleman is one of our fashionable beaux, who are scarcely the same being two hours to¬ gether, and whose temper and whole de¬ portment are the slaves to caprice of the present moment." " Mercy on me," replied Mrs. Conway, laughing very heartily; " why, what a mistake you are making, my dear! this is an old gentleman, I dare say seventy years of age. Did you think you were going to be introduced to one of our young beaux ? if so, you will be greatly disappointed, for I promise you this Mr. Crosby is one of the severest old beings ever breathing: he is almost sure to of-
fend me by telling me his mind too plainly. Why, do you 1 know he has the audacity to tell me of my faults, as lie terms them, to my face; and yet you will think me very strange, when I say I am hardly ever affronted with him, for ho looks so venerable, and possesses, I know, a good heart at the bottom, that I gene¬ rally look over his rudeness; though it is not at all times pleasant; but Mr. Con¬ way values his friendship, therefore I al¬ ways behave civil to him." " It is a proof of your good sense, ma¬ dam," replied Eleanor, " to pay such im¬ plicit reliance on Mr. Conway's judg¬ ment ; and, by what you say of this Mr. Crosby, I suppose he is like a rough dia¬ mond, which wants but the outward po¬ lish of art to set forth its intrinsic worth."' " Perhaps so," icturned Mrs. Conway; " but you will be able to judge for your¬ self presently." She then left the room, requesting Eleanor to follow her as soon as she was attired, with which she in a very short
time complied, and on entering the par¬ lour she saw a gentleman conversing with Mr. Conway: his voice seemed mild and prepossessing, but before she could see his face, Mrs. Conway exclaimed—-" Come, Eleanor, we are waiting your presence:. give me leave to introduce you to Mr. Crosby." On hearing this speech the stranger turned round: a sound, almost resembling a stifled groan, burst from his lips as he - sank extremely agitated on a chair, from which he had just risen. On entering the room, Eleanor had dropped a graceful curtsey, but much astonished at his sudden behaviour, she advanced nearer towards him, while Mr. and Mrs. Conway, also greatly surprised, inquired if he was taken ill? For a few moments he made no reply, when, as if not regarding their question, he exclaimed—" Tell me who is that young lady ?" "That is Miss Glendinning," replied vol. n. m
Mrs. Conway, " the niece of lord Arthur Glendinning, with whose family we have the honour of being acquainted, and who has done me the pleasure of paying me a visit in London." " Miss Glendinning!" he re-echoed, while a deep sigh escaped his bosom: •" the name is unknown to me." Mrs. Conway again inquired as to his health, while Eleanor stood gazing in speechless wonder at the venerable form be¬ fore 1 her. He appeared, as Mrs. Conway had asserted, as much as seventy years of age; his figure and face extremely prepossessing. It was in vain Eleanor looked in his coun¬ tenance for those traits of severity and crossness which Mrs. Conway had describ¬ ed ; his features wore the stamp* of bene¬ volence, and the furrows of age which stole over his face, and the silver white¬ ness of his hair, combined to render him an object at once interesting and pleasing. He appeared to be now recovering, and on Mr. Conway pressing him 1 to take a glass of wine, or some restorative, he re-
plied in the negative.—" 'Tis not wine," he cried, " can remove a constitutional complaint, though I thank you for your offer. Tis here," he cried, " my pain lies," placing his hand to his heart; " 'tis here I am afflicted." He then fixed his eyes on Eleanor, who stood terrified and trembling.—" I fear, young 1 lady," he cried, " I must have alarmed you; but you must excuse the infirmities of age. I know," he added, relapsing into a tone of severity, " I have done enough to frighten the nerves of our modern young ladies of fashion into hys¬ terics, who would be absolutely terrified to death, as they so falsely term it, by the attacks of an old man," Eleanor scarce knew how to reply; she felt much inclined to possess herself of his good opinion. With a look of softness, and a gentle tone, she replied—" But I am not a young lady of fashion, sir; 'tis a word only known to me by name ; I am not its votary: nature, pure, and unac* w 3
companied by art, is my deity; that has ever taught mc, I trust, compassion for the woes of another; and believe me, sir, although a stranger, your sudden illness has caused me the greatest concern; per¬ mit me to offer you my hopes that you feel yourself recovering." Mr. Crosby took her hand.—" You ap¬ pear an angel," he cried, in a tone of warmth, though strongly marked by agi¬ tation ; " pure and unsophisticated nature seems indeed your guide; may you con¬ tinue such!" " Astonishing !" cried Mrs. Conway; " can this be Mr. Crosby ? are you turned flatterer at last ?" " No, madam," he replied, " but if you are surprised at my using such language, it is in consequence of your never having seen me in the presence of any who me¬ rited my encomiums, not because I am incapable of rightly appreciating merit." " With the exception, sir, of Mrs. Clif¬ ford and her daughter," said Mrs. Con-
way; " they are, I believe, favourites of yours." " They are, and deservedly so," here- plied ; " but I feel myself too ill for con¬ versation now. You must excuse my making a longer stay." As dinner was now being placed on the table, Mr. Conway insisted that he should not depart until he dined, as he originally intended. He kept refusing till Mr. Con¬ way, smiling and addressing Eleanor, begged, as she was already so great a fa* vouritc with Mr. Crosby, that she would add her entreaties. " With pleasure, sir," she replied, at the same time, in a voice of kind persua¬ sion, begged he would favour them with his company. Mr. Crosby regarded her with marked expression.—" How few there are," he cried, " of your age, who would thus in¬ terest themselves for an old man like me! I feel I cannot refuse you any thing, yet you must grant me one favour in return." * " With pleasure, sir," she replied ;
" teach me how to comply with your desires; name your wishes, and, if pos¬ sible, they shall be complied with on my part." • t " Your name, I think, is Eleanor: is it not ?" he inquired. " Mrs. Conway called you so." " It is, sir," she replied; when he again taking her hand, looked at her tenderly in the face. A -tear dropped from his aged eyes: she felt the precious gem upon her arm: her own feelings gave vent, and a reciprocal tear forced its way down her check. He observed it.—" Do you weep for mc ?" he exclaimed; " angel of pity i may thy tears ever flow from her dictates, unaccompanied by self-conviction or guilt J Yet," he continued, " Innocence itself is not safe—Vice hovers near: she raises her towering plumage aroimd, and envi¬ ous of her superior competitor, spreads her temptations over the young and un¬ wary ; few can withstand her fascinating allurements; they grasp at her invitations —they become her votaries—they fall—
they sink! Yes,/innocent as thou art* this may be thy fate. Destruction may crop another flower! I once■ was. in pos¬ session of one as lovely, yet she fell like a blighted rose, and by the rude' hand of man was thrown disregarded to her parent dust, never more to rise!" Eleanor gazed on his agonized counte¬ nance with wonder and concern, while Mrs. Conway, rather impatiently, begged them to seat themselves, as the dinner was.on table, and while Mr. Crosby raised his handkerchief to his eyes, she whisper¬ ed in the ear of Eleanor—" This is for ever the way; always, moralizing upon some dismal subject or other. He will absolutely teaze you to death, my dear." - "No, madam," replied Eleanor; "on the contrary, it will afford me much gra¬ tification to listen to his conversation. I feel much interested in him." ; . She paused, as rising from his chair, .with an effort of composure, he bowed to Mrs. Conway, exclaiming— i( I beg your
et.eanor; pardon, madam; I will no longer detain you-from your dinner/' - . " * • 4 ' " But your request, sir??' said Eleanor; '* You 'have not told me in what I can oblige you." s n ( " By permitting me the privilege of conversing with you as an old friend," he replied, " and," continued he, in a voice of tremulous emotion, "by suffering me to call you by'the appellation of Eleanor i 'tis a name deeply engraven on my heart, the recollection of which brings -agony to my soul.' r '■ '' '• • ' ^ 5 * ' ,J,U He sighed deeply,^ while ^Eleanor,' with a smile which might have graced a bloom¬ ing cherub,*exclaimed~" Is that the whole of your request, sir ?> f Most certainly 'tis granted on my part: and I shall consider it as a proof of your friendship in "thus laying aside all cold formality, and address¬ ing me only in the way you' wish." '-■ - ' Mr/ CJrdsby 1 turned a lo r 6k- j of delight \ipon her, and the little party sat down* to' the table,- and the' conversation' became
general,! but supported only "by Mr. and Mrs. Conway, and Eleanor, for Mr. Crosby remained totally silent during the meal, which,'to him, was that of a form only, as scarcely a morsel passed his lips. His eyes insensibly fixed on Eleanor, to whom he sat opposite; and Mrs. Conway twice addressed him without obtaining any an¬ swer, so deeply lost in thought was he, as to heed no question put to'him. "* Now is not this abominably rude ?" whispered Mrs. Conway. " This is the way he frequently serves me. Did I not know him to be a genteel person, I should suppose him a downright brute." Eleanor smiled a reply. She was con¬ vinced that the strange manners of Mr. Crosby arose not in consequence of inhe¬ rent rudeness, but the effects of a mind ill at esse. Whatever were the nature of his sorrows she could not tell, but that misfortune had shed her bitter drops upon him, she clearly perceived, and she regret¬ ted thai so venerable a form should carry u3
the. rankling thorn of i grief within his.bo- som.- : i . - . ' - :, • ■ <■<■ v.-"'' *. . It was not until the cloth was removed that he iraised his, eyes around,, and ad¬ dressing Eleanor, inquired if she had ever before been in London. ■-»She replied in ithe negative. , v ' •" What then could induce your friends," he cried, "to trust you in its vortex? Have you a relish for all its gaieties? and with all the ardour so natural to youth, does your heart, pant for its vain amuse¬ ments? Are you," continued he, "to be initiated and trained up to fit you to mix with the world of fashion ? Are you, I say, to be corrupted by its follies, and sa¬ crificed to its vices?" " Lord, Mr. Crosby," replied Mrs.* Con¬ way, " hour you talk! You are enough to terrify Eleanor ''by such »a picture as this; Do you suppose; sir, I am going to plunge her into suclv scenes as you de¬ scribe?" ' '• ' ■' * " Heaven knows,' madam," he returned; " you are a lover of the gay world. I be-
lieve you would not willingiyaenter into its vices—your heart, is good,'but I am of opinion your head is mot.strong- enough to resist its temptations.? 1 ? ,' " Thank you/' retorted Mrs. (Conway, " for your compliment.'PTis such/as f I expect from you; .but I thinkithere is one virtue which you in particular ought to allow me—that is the quality.of good temper^ in,bearing your.liberal remarks, which you must own J receive with toleiv able composure." , <. ** I am ever willing to- allow all that is. due to you, madam," was his reply. "- Heaven forbid L should deprive you of the share you possess; since none of us can boast of many truly,valuable qualities, it would be a sin in me to reduce the num* ber allotted you. Haw > few.i there are whose'judgment can guide them* through life's tedious path!.for-though*Wisdom crieth aloud in the streets, whqicaiubct found to answer her?" <- 'j.i * " No one better than yourself," I'should suppose," cried Mrs. Conway, at the same
time; laughing; ; at iher; own' fancied smart retort, i* since-youcan^soiwell converse on the subject; with?age in one hand, and wisdom in the others you are most excel¬ lently qualifiedMto answer all thejinquiries made to ydu" by the searchers t afters wis-. dom,' whichK I am afraid, according to* your opinions r : not to: be found altogether in the streets; of London.": I ; ■.,■■;:« True, madam," he replied; ^ your ob¬ servation is just there,, for Folly is so ofteii obtruding herself abroad, that Wisdom can. scarcely ever shew heself without being, annoyed by her presence." . '■ ':'■ ", Well,; but: Mr/ Crosby," said Mrs;. Conway, "what you denominate as folly Is .considered -by the generality of the world: as pleasure, after which pursuit, every,orie is busily employed." v :,-. : ^ Pleasured liei repeated \:df how. is that word^ abused!: how few^there are who know and; feel ?>5 real meaning!: Thefine lady seeks it in scenes of riot and dissipa-. tibni^The libertine and' the despoiler of
virtue in exulting over the victims of their lawless designs; the miser in counting out his hidden treasure, and secreting that which, if rightly employed, would save a fellow-creature from ruin, from want and wretchedness. Are any of these, think you, capable of appreciating the word pleasure ? Oh, no, it is self-gratification. True happiness consists in the heartfelt satisfaction of relieving the wants of our fellow-creatures; for oh! what pleasure can equal that of beholding an unhappy and distressed object rescued from misery and want by a well-timed irelief! ' What ecstacy is in the thought of saving an un¬ fortunate being from wretchedness!" " If being charitable and humane can con¬ stitute true happiness," cried Mr. Conway, " I must congratulate you, sir, on possess¬ ing it to its.fullesf extent; for the'charities of Mr.'Crosby are too well known not to be universally admired. You'there¬ fore/according to your own doctrine, must be most supremely 'happy." • - l
'"-■' " Pshaw'P' ihe replied; -endeavouring to force a look of severity^ which bu V ill con¬ cealed the benevolence; of his^ countenance: •*■' I happy!" lie continued ; ;ff I have no- thing to do witlrhappiness, sir*^-I am eon- terit, and that is sufficient. I.was-happy once. I was poor, dtiwas true, but how much niore rich than now! I had that to constitute my felicity which surpassed the wealth of worlds; ibut that is gone; and in its stead I possess the vain ^riches of this transitory^^ earth. >oWhat a change for me! Qh^Eleamrfi ElemiorF's 'he sighed deep, ly, r and appeared lost In the agony of; his thoughts i while bur heroine, surprised at his address;? which: she considered as direct¬ ed^ to herseif, inquired as ito the-nature of his^wislies towards herself)r ?! r:i » ; i; n, - For' some few moments f he remained lost in thought, - and vain were the endea¬ vours of all around to draw him into con- <yersation; v ' .^:-da?h:) ■■:}),■■: rrfdiir -:..'r '■.■-: ■ WhateverIwas-the i nature of; hisi reve¬ ries, it was evident that they: caused him
the greatest agony; the tears arose in'his eyes$ his aged form became agitated to the extreme, when suddenly rising, he expressed his determination of retiring. It was in vain ho was pressed to pro¬ long his stay. He took the hand of Elea¬ nor, and gazing tenderly on her, bade her adieu.—" I will often' see you," he cried, " if my company will not prove tedious to you; for my heart seems insensibly drawn towards you. I have not felt*so much for any one since I lost my own i-----But no matter," he continued, " why should I speak of my own sorrows ? they are past—they are ------Yes,, they shall be forgotten," he added, in a tone of forced resolution. " To grieve for calamities past- does not evince the resignation of a true Christian. Farewell, Eleanor f Guard well thy heart against the insidious attacks of man; keep thy present innocence, and thou shalt ensure happiness. While your bosom is the seat of virtue, peace- shall reign in your heart. * Adieu 1" ' £ .
," Farewell, sir," replied Eleanor, much affected at his manners. " I will treasure up your advice, and profit, I trust, by your counsel." " We shall see you to-morrow, sir," cried Mr, Conway. " We shall have an¬ other favourite of yours here — Emily Clifford is to pass the day with us." " Then will your cottage be graced, Mr. Conway," he,replied, " by the sister hand¬ maids of Truth, Innocence and Virtue, Yes/' 1 he added, " if. those divine emana¬ tions still exist on this corrupted earth, they are to be exemplified in an Eleanor and an Emily. They shall redeem the sinking honour of their erring sex, and convince us that purity still dwells ori earth." " I hope it does," replied Mr. Conway, smiling; " at least, we ought not to doubt it, when so many of our lovely females carry the stamp in their faces." " You are a young man," returned Mr. Crosby, " and are, .therefore, deceived by
false show; but I will not dispute the point with you. Farewell! Most likely I will see you to-morrow," He then repeated his adieu to Eleanor, and bowing to Mrs. Conway, left the house.
END OF VOL. II.
Printed by J. Darling, Leadenhall-streer, London.
Eleanor: or, The spectre of St. Michael's: a romantic tale
N
CHAPTER I.
*r-+r+r-r
rr*-r**++t
How fearful— — — — — — And dizzy 'tis to cast one's eyes so low! Tho crows and choughs, that wing the midway air, Shew scarce so gross as beetles Half-way down Hd-ngs one that gathers samphire—dreadful trade! Methinks he seems no bigger than bis head; The fishermen that walk upon the beach, Appear like mice— — — — — — — — — —The murmuring surge, That on the unnumber'd idle pebbles chafes, Cdnnot be heard so high. I'll look no more, Lest my brain turn. Shakespeare. If there is an hereafter—and that there is, Conscience, uninfluenced, tells every m«n-^- Their must it be an awful thing to die; More horrid yet to die by one's own hand. .— — — — — —Self-murder J Name it not—our island's shame. Blair. JLHE morning sun had gilded the horizon * with his cheering rays, and '"already pro-< K VOL. I. B
claimed the pleasing prospect of a fine day; a gentle breeze was heard to mur¬ mur, and echoed. the distant sound of a merry peal of bells, which issued from the towers of St. Michael's church, and vi¬ brated, in lengthened accents, on the shores of Scotland's wide domains; the strain was calculated to inspire all hearts with the most lively sensations, save that of one, who alone appeared incapable of feeling a sentiment of joy—amidst the generality of mirthful countenances which surrounded the church and adjacent Castle of St. Mi¬ chael's, one appeared, alone and unobserved, to droop in dark despair. A' young and interesting female issued from a retired cottage in the glen ; her whole demeanour bespoke the extreme agitation of her mind; her eyes were cast upwards, and settled in calm despair, but which too plainly evinced the vacuity of her thoughts: the melan¬ choly softness of her features might have excited the warmest commiseration in the breast of a stoic, and have insured her tlie
balmy blessing of sympathy in her misfor¬ tunes ; unheeded, however, passed on this hapless child of sorrow—no one observed her distracted demeanour, as with slow and silent steps she left her abode for the last time; the disorder of her dress, the wildness of her air—all conspired to ren¬ der her an object of solicitude to any be¬ holder; but, alas! no one was near to stretch forth a saving hand, or to save her from that fate which, with all the delirium of insanity, she had already premeditated. Cautiously she bent her course towards the domains of St. Michael's Castle, which superb edifice arose in a romantic spot 'midst Scotia's glens; at its extremity ran the sea, the waves of which dashed in ma¬ jestic currency against the massy stones which supported tlie vast structure. On approaching this spot, the lovely sufferer stopped, and for some minutes gazed sted- fastly on it. At this instant the bells broke forth v ith redoubled clamour, the length¬ ened peals ran on the clear surface of the ii 2
sea, and gave a softened mellifluous sound to the lively strain. It caught the atten- tion of the mourner; she looked towards the steeple from whence the sound pro-. t ceeded,.an hysterical laugh burst from her lips, and for a while she seemed.lost to. all sense of feeling, save tlxo.se. dreadful ones., which,had dep>riy;ed t .her 0 of, reason. fj Aj. length she rushed onwards o towards., the,. church door, at which stood a bridal equi-.^ page^ which "had j ust'.arrivedi, fro. m .the ad-, jacent 'castle-'J Feaiful of. being seen by. ; the'attendants, with'all .'the cunning ,of mental.derapgement, i ,.she. i reta'eated. i . t to a.. private entrance,' at which she paused.—-^ " The hour is then arrived," she exclaimed,,, " whichjstairi£s my^^stin^i.w^njLe.then^ that period ,w r hich^ I have. ,so Jong, ^ntjei^, pated! I^ush,jy^ '^^nSjPfjo^—be, silent, or else charlee thy tones to that of a fune- ral- knell; yes, let -the happy bridal, pair ; hear a strain like that, let them reflect,.on what they must come to as well.as f J. Bu]t,! 5 ' ^he ^continued, with increased wi|d- t
ness, " I can once more behold him —for ' the last time gaze on those features which how cause agony to my soul." i She then cautiously entered the.church, and proceeded down the side aisle; she beheld the choicest flowers scattered on the around, which had evidently been thrown before the bridal pair. She con- cealed herself behind a pillar which sup¬ ported the ancient structure of St. Mi¬ chael's, and clasping Her hands together, appeared for some moments lost to despair. At the'altar stood a youthful arid "ele¬ gant couple, in tlie act of phghting their mutual faith; a venerable priest was al¬ ready placing the ring upon the finger of the bride; on each side they were sur¬ rounded by t!h'eir friencls, oh whose cbun- tenances appeafecl the stamp 6f satisfaction. The [bride and bridegroom were not the Yeast interesting of the group;, the former was a female of extreme elegance and beauty; her countenance might perhaps have been deemed faultless, had it not ex-
hibited a strong expression of haughtiness; her black and piercing eyes darted scorn around, and bespoke the general hauteur of her soul, which was greatly contrasted - by the countenance of the gentleman, which was tinctured by the glow of affa¬ bility; his features were dark and hand¬ some, but unaccompanied by those traits of pride which shone so conspicuously in his bride's; it was evident that he pos¬ sessed great gaiety at heart, but, on the present occasion, it was visible that his mind was ill at ease; deep-drawn sighs issued from his bosom, and dejection marked his countenance. The unhappy unknown observer, start¬ ing from her reverie, closely scrutinized his face.—" He is not happy," she cried, " nor will he ever be. Can his once-noble and generous heart be united to pride? will that suffice for the horrible sacrifice- will that avail in lieu of the life of a fellow-creature? But see—already are their hands joined. Can I have more sa-
tisfaction than this?" she added, with an hysterical laugh. At this instant she heard the priest in an audible voice pronounce them to be " man and wife." A loud and convulsive scream burst from her lips, as, rushing in¬ stantaneously from the church, she gained the outside without discovery; with in¬ creased wildness she ran precipitately across the glens, till she gained the sea side, about a mile distant from the Castle of St. Mi¬ chael's. This spot was a place well cal¬ culated to horrors; high and almost im¬ passable rocks projected from the sea, which human footsteps had scarcely ever surmounted. Unheedful of the danger, the frantic female climbed this stupendous work of nature; her feet were torn and cut with the sharp and pointed fragments of the rock. The sea dashed its foaming billows against the sides, which echoed in dismal accents upon the ear of the wretch¬ ed wanderer, who, nearly exhausted, at length arrived at the summit of the rock
—a j height at which any other individual would have shuddered to ; attain. For jsome-few minutes she viewed the scene around her in calm despair, when again the breeze, gently murmuring, brought with it the distant sounds of the bells. fThe wretched maniac listened attentively, and^then sinking on her knees, raised her diands in devotion.—" If such a wretched tbeing as myself darepray," she exclaimed, « do thou, oh Heaven! receive my dast supplications: first, 'to forgive the cruel, yet still iloved author of ^my woes, ss I do •at >this awful moment—imay^every happi- mess ?be Ms on eauth! -and next, receive •my humble solicitations in behalf ^of Uhat innocent being, who, unconscious of its sorrows, reposes in peace. My aged pa¬ rent too—oh God! pour the balm of peace and consolation in his troubled breast— grant him fortitude and resignation! And now dare I add a prayer in behalf of my own wretched, guilty bosom? Ah, no! I cannot pray for myself—my mind is a
chaos—all, all is madness; I dare not look up with hope—my hopes lie there," she added, pointing towards the sea, " 'tis there I look for peace." She arose from her kneeling posture; she approached the edge of the rock, and uttering a piercing scream, leaped from the craggy point to the bosom of the sea. The rolling waves received their willing victim; she struggled for some little time, when another wave arose, and eventually covered the hapless sufterer, who thus, unbidden, plunged herself into eternity.
b3
CHAPTER II. To be good, is to bo happy: angels Are hnppier thnu men, because they're better. Guilt is the source of sorrow—'tis the fiend, Th' avenging fiend, that follows us behind With whips and sting-s. Ruwt.
A wife !—Heaven's last, best gift. Cowley. The festivities which were taking place in the Castle of St. Michael's were occa¬ sioned by the union of lord Arthur Glen¬ dinning with lady Georgina Lenox. Both were descended from high and wealthy Scottish families. Lord Arthur was the only son of the earl Campbell, whose hopes and whole pride were centered in him, as the last remaining branch of his family. The earl had beefi left a widower, with two children, a girl and a boy; the eldest,
lady Frances Glendinning, had early dis¬ covered a disposition and amiable man¬ ners resembling her departed mother, to which she added a strength and firmness of mind beyond her years; and as she ad¬ vanced towards womanhood, she displayed a countenance of extreme loveliness; her figure was elegant, though extremely de¬ licate, and in her face the lily and the rose vied with each other to add a sweetness to her fair complexion. Lord Arthur, only a year younger than his sister, was also an object of general admiration: his person was a regular mould of manly beauty, to which he added the most graceful and fas¬ cinating manners that ever distinguished his sex. The elegant lord Arthur and his lovely sister were universally beloved and admired, and not a chieftain in Scotland but what would have been proud of an alliance in their family with the heirs of Campbell, The tenderest regard subsisted between the brother and sister; their amuse¬ ments were shared together, and their dis-
positions were so truly congenial, that they never formed a wish in which they did not mutually partake. The earl ex¬ ulted in his children; he felt their worth, and determined they should fill that sta¬ tion of life to which they were born; to the highest degree already did his proud heart bf at with ambitious delight, at the prospects which he had in contemplation for their future aggrandizement; and so fully bent was he on his own private de¬ termination, that the idea of failure in his intentions never entered his head. The earliest friend of earl Campbell had been the right honourable lord Lenox, who was united to a lady of high rank; lady Lenox was the daughter of a duke, and inherited a considerable share of fa¬ mily pride; and Lenox House was the seat of grandeur, wealth, and splendour. Amongst a numerous offspring, two only survived—a son and a daughter—the ho¬ nourable Charles Lenox, and lady Georgi¬ na, who inherited a title in right of her
mother. With this family earl Campbell had kept upon very intimate terms, arid the young people were jui/ehiie compa¬ nions, and passed much time together, their residence not being far distant. The first interruption to their mutual intercourse was occasioned 4 by lord Lenox removing with his family to England, where they intended remaining for a couple of years, at the expiration^ of which period they were to return again td Scot¬ land. It was during their absence that the earl, as he beheld the opening graces* of his children, first anticipated the idea of a double union taking place between the two families; and so fixed Was he up¬ on this design, that he c6ntinualiy up¬ braided himself with Ms" neglect in hot having earlier intihiated his wisn'es to lord Lenox, fearing, dturing Ms absence, he might form .other connexions for his fa¬ mily; and in great anxiety^ of mind fie 1 awaited their return to ScotlafidV At the end of the tirne prescribed ford 5
Lenox returned, and the earl took the earliest opportunity to visit his friend, who expressed his pleasure in seeing him in the warmest terms, and immediately conducted him to lady Lenox, where he also beheld the two objects of his secret solicitude—Charles Lenox and lady Geor¬ gma, and he viewed with inward pleasure the improvement manifest in their persons during this absence. Charles was indeed a fine young man; his countenance was in¬ telligent, and beamed with good-humour, while his mind was replete with sense and information. Lady Georgina was also a most captivating figure; but the earl be¬ held the visible pride and hauteur in her ladyship, which sitting so forcibly in her countenance, checked the admiration which a first glance had excited; he could not, of course, on this first visit, speak on the subject next his heart, and departed there¬ fore, with the promise of dining with them the next day, accompanied by lady Frances and lord Arthur.
On his return home, he was profuse in his praises of the Lenox family, and both his son and daughter expressed their im¬ patience to behold their old companions, and anxiously awaited until the succeed¬ ing day, when they proceeded to Lenox House; and on being ushered into the drawing-room, soon found themselves in the arms of their young friends. Lady Georgina embraced lady Frances with warmth, and while welcoming her to her heart, appeared to throw aside all traces of her natural pride. Lord Arthur then ad¬ vanced towards her, and taking her hand, gallantly pressed it to his lips. She was much agitated; she turned pale, and seemed near fainting; but soon recovering herself, she asserted that the pleasure of meeting her old friends had been almost too much for her feelings. " And I can assure you," cried lord Ar¬ thur, " that pleasure has been reciprocal in the bosoms of all." Lady Georgina looked at him with
marked expression, but remained silent, while Charles Lenox was expressing his delight at this happy meeting td lady Frances, with whom he appeared quite enraptured, and paid her the most visible attention. After the little party became more com¬ posed, £hey passed a most agreeable ddy ; while lady Georgina, recovering her viva¬ city, again appeared as the scornful beau¬ ty. Lord Arthur observed the pride of her heart, which evinced itself in her conversation; and it was evideni that lady Lenox encouraged the arrb|*arice of her daughter. Lord Arthur, ever a lover of that softness arid pleasing humility iri a female', beheld this unfavourable trait in her ladyship's character with sentiments bordering on disgust; and beiri£ resblved not to be the instrument of dddixig an¬ other" feather'to her towering pluma'ge, he oehaved tdwards her with the greatest coldness. The day af length pasVeflf over, and they
returned to St. MichaelY Castle, with in¬ vitations on both sides. Theearl entered into a warm eulogium on'the'agreeable Charles, in which 1 he was joined by both; and lady 'Frances spoke of him in the most affectionate terms. The earl was de¬ lighted, and turning to his'son, expatiated on the beauty and accomplishments of lady'Georgina. " True," replied lord Arthur; « c but there is one'gem of which her ladyship is >not 'in possession, and which, in -my opi¬ nion, constitutes every chdrm. w '"What is 1 that?" said'Che'earl/in-a voice 'df-alarm. "^Humility 'and affability," "'he replied. " Your lordship must We observed the visible hauteur of her countenance:" « Why true," returned the J earl, biting his lip, "lady'Georgina certainly possesses some pride; but when you consider her ! high descent, yoirwill make some allow¬ ance ; and I trust it is more 'the result J o'f education than arising from her heart."
This was in reality the truth; lady < Georgina had been brought up under the entire guidance of her mother, who had early impressed on the mind of her daugh¬ ter the superiority of her descent, and lady Georgina soon considered herself as an object of universal admiration; she was taught to look on her inferiors with dis¬ dain, and encouraged in those ebullitions of pride which early broke forth, and which were deemed, by the misguided lady Lenox, as expressions of dignity and consciousness of birth. Lady Georgina had been left independent by her grand¬ father the duke, and a fortune of thirty thousand pounds, at her own disposal, had greatly added to the proud spirit of lady Georgina; she, however, was not devoid of feeling or humanity, and her heart had frequently been known to melt at the woes of another: but her ladyship pos¬ sessed no common soul, for seldom could her real sentiments be defined, and what¬ ever were her private feelings, they were
always concealed beneath the scornful brow, which completely awed all in¬ truders. During her residence in England, her captivating figure had gained her many conquests; her hand had been sought by the first and noblest families; lord Lenox had approved, but lady Georgina had re¬ mained inflexible, and without deigning to assign any reason, had dismissed all her suitors. In this state had she returned to Scotland, and the earl Campbell took the earliest opportunity of speaking to lord Lenox on the subject of his projected al¬ liance; his lordship received the proposal with pleasure, but added, that he had no control over his daughter whatever; but that he would propose it immediately to Charles and lady Georgina; however, as she had already refused so many offers, he much feared her rejection. Lord Lenox kept his word—he men¬ tioned the subject to his family. Charles joyfully acceded, and owned he felt the
'tadst impkssidhed regard'for'lady Frances, %hose hand would be the summit of his wishes. Lady Georgina was then called upon for her answer; 1 she turned extreme¬ ly pale.—" Does lord Arthur coincide in 'the wishes of his father in this alliance ?" she at length demanded. " No doubt," replied lord Lenox—" all iparties are agreeable to the premeditated 'union, if it meets with your ladyship's ap¬ probation; and for your answer I J now wait." Lady Georgina arose with great dignity. w- w A v son' of the earl Campbell," she cried, "certainly is entitled to some attention; nor will I refuse to bestow my hand on him, if it meets with the wishes of my family." Lord and lady Lenox were delighted with her unexpected compliance, and a favourable answer was returned to the overjoyed/ earl, w'ho had now to break his commands to lady Frances and lord Ar¬ thur Glendinning; this he did without
delay, to_their mutual surprise,,as,neither had ever entertained the most distant,idea of the kind. Lady Frances .frankly de¬ clared that she both admired,and t esteemed Charles Lenox, but had no sentiments of, love towards him, though she did not pre¬ fer any one else. With this avowal .the earl, waq, quite. satisfied, an ( d he insisted upon the privilege,of ,returning j a^aypur^, able answer to Charies. La^ly (f Frances gave , a reluctant, consent; she wished ^ oblige s her, father, but felt she .was, acting only.in compliance to his.wishes^ and, T not ir in-unison wither own.he^rt^ The earl then turned towar^s..hi5.jSop, K who had been. silently pacing,, the, ,ropm ever,since,the proposal made ( by { ,the f earl„ w^io now.,exclaimed-—«?, WeU, s A^t^ur^I A nqw, f wait for your r answer, ; if,you/ineari ri to favour me, with one at all" * Lord t Ai;thur, started.—*',!^ reaspn.for^, remaining silent," he at length exclaimed " was 0 because I must. disappoint,'-your lordship's, wishes—I cannot.comply^with^ the 0 hon I o.ur / yqu jn^enjl me."
The earl looked severely at him.—" You cannot!" he repeated; " and pray what are your objections then ?" " Can you wish me to unite myself to pride and arrogance ?" he replied. *'* Ridiculous !" interrupted the earl; " you forget the high descent of lady Georgina, and mistake that conscious dig¬ nity of birth which distinguishes her, for a mere empty pride. But beware, sir," he added, with a severe countenance, " how you raise trifling and frivolous reasons to mar my plans; I am resolved on this union, which will reflect such glittering honours on our family." " But, my lord," cried lord Arthur, " I am not inclined at present to marry; a wife was the last of my thoughts, much less' lady Georgina, who, though, 1 ow r n, accomplished and beautiful to the ex-' treme, is not the object I would make my choice." " I do not wish to hasten you into ma¬ trimony," returned the earl, " sooner than you like yourself;'only give me your pro-
mise that you will, at any future period you shall name, comply with my wish in uniting yourself to lady Georgina: con¬ sider her high descent, the noble dignity of her conduct; and, above all, after hav¬ ing obtained her consent to bestow her hand on you, would you give her the mortification of a refusal? Gallantry for¬ bid a son of mine should act such a part! beside, I am convinced it would be thei means of breaking that friendship which has subsisted so long between lord Lenox and myself, who would not forgive so gross an insult." Lord Arthur again took a few turns across the apartment; the earl continued to use threats and entreaties, till at last, unable longer to withstand them, lord Arthur gave a reluctant promise to wed lady Georgina, on condition that he might be allowed his liberty for two years, during which time he should wish to travel. To this the earl assented, at the same time ex¬ pressing his satisfaction at his compliance.
"-Lhave, my lord," said lord Arthur, " complied with? your, wishes, .and merely so, as I avow I.have not ,the least inclina¬ tion to^this marriage; and should it even¬ tually prove an unhappy s one, ,you must thank yourself abne for the misery which you have brought on my head." The earl half shuddered at this speech; butforcing a smile into his face, he replied thatiheiWas .willing to run the, risk of all sorrow*productive in,an union between? lord Arthur-and lady Georgina Lenox.-
CHAPTER nr.
Can love bo cotitrollVi by adiice? Will Cupid his mother obey ? Gav. Earl Campbell had now attained the summit of his wishes—he had obtained the promise he so much desired from his children; 'twas true, it was indeed reluc¬ tantly granted from each, but that did not in the least disturb his repose, while the minds of lady Frances and lord Arthur laboured under great uneasiness on the occasion; to each other they owned their repugnance to the projected alliance, but particularly on the part of lord Arthur, who dreaded the haughty disposition of lady Georgina. Lady Frances had no fears of this kind, for in Charies Lenox she beheld every virtue combined; and with a zeal that marked the sincerity of vol. i. c
ELEANOR.
affection which he felt for her,, he hastened to her, and poured out those vows which were sanctioned by his friends and ap¬ proved by his-own heart. Lady Frances, in compliance with her promise to her father, received him with modest sweet¬ ness ; and though he could nbt obtain an avowal of tenderness in his favour, yet he contented himself with her acquiescence ( to the wishes of all parties. . Lords Arthur had also an embarrassing scene- to go through, to address lady Geor- ginai without feeling any affection for her, save that of friendship; yet on hisi first interview with her after, the proposed alli- arice,< he was struck with the dignity of manners with which she received him, and he half forgave her pride, in consideration of : her<hoble demeanour: lord Arthur was not without pride himself. Lady Georgi¬ na was 'every where the admiration of all circles; her beauty, her rank, and fortune, made, her every where an object of eager desire;.-all this was to be in the possession of lord Arthur, and he soon reconciled
himself to the thoughts of their union; preparations were, however, made for his departure, as he still expressed his wish to travel previous to yielding his liberty. Lady Georgina Jieard the proposal in si¬ lence; lord Arthur never consulted her wishes on the subject, and she was too proud, unasked, to express her feelings on the occasion. As the time now drew near for lord Arthur quitting them, they projected many little parties of pleasure to enjoy his company, among which v/as a short excursion on the water; and on a lovely summer's evening they proceeded, in -a large awned barge belonging to the earl, accompanied by a band of music, down the clear stream, which appeared to £tuy the roughness of its waves to give a beauty to the scene. Charles Lenox, in the so- ciet3 r of lady Frances, was completely hap¬ py ; and leaning*with her near the edge of the vessel, pointed out to her the pleasing prospects which surrounded them. c 2
. On their return, just previous to their landing, the attention of lady Frances was directed towards a young man who stood on the shore near them: his attitude was that of deep contemplation; a melancholy pervaded his countenance, which was re¬ gularly handsome, while his dress and figure bespoke the gentleman. Lady Frances pointed him out to Charles, ob¬ serving how deeply he appeared fixed in thought, and expressed her wonder at his abstracted appearance. He cast his eyes towards the stranger, while at the same moment the barge, making towards the shore, suddenly gave a violent jerk against a bank, which instantly precipitated lady Frances, who was standing in a bending posture, into the sea. The effect was so instantaneous, that for a minute no one appeared sensible of the dreadful calamity: but in an instant all was horror; the la¬ dies screamed; Charles Lenox was pre¬ paring to plunge in to her rescue, but in a moment he heard the splashing of the water; the stranger whom they had ob-
served leaped in, and soon bore lady Fran¬ ces in his arms above the waves. Charles* Lenox received her lifeless form with transport; all crowded around to render assistance, and with anxious solicitude watched for a return of animation^ Hap¬ pily the poor sufferer had not been long enough under the water to endanger her life, and they soon beheld the colour re¬ visit her cheeks: she opened her eyes, while all the party, now landing, bore her towards her home. During the first minutes of confusion they had been unmindful of her brave preserver, when lady Georgina reminding them of their vast obligation, they turned to tender him their thanks; but he had disappeared, and was no where to be seen. This circumstance caused them all the greatest alarm, in the idea of not having poured forth their gratitude to their un¬ known friend. Lord Arthur immediately proceeded along the shore, hoping to over¬ take him, while the rest conveyed lady Frances to her own abode, where she was
instantly put into a warm bed, and in a •^short time she recovered her senses suffi¬ ciently to inquire the particulars of her preservation. Upon being informed that it wqs the stranger who had so attracted her attention that had preserved her, she expressed her warmest gratitude to him, and earnestly prayed that she might be ^able to return him her personal thanks; in this she was, however, disappointed; lord Arthur returned unsuccessful—he could no where find tlie object of his search, who, it was evident, had thus re¬ treated, to avoid the thanks of all parties. " What a noble fellow!" cried lord Ar¬ thur; " I would give half i possess to know to whom it is we are thus indebted; at any rate, I will use every means in my power to find him out." " Heaven grant you may be successful, my dear brother!" replied lady Frances— ** my heart beats to ease itself of the vast debt I owe him; there was something that insensibly attracted my attention to¬ wards him previous to the unfortunate
accident, and now I long again to behold him, to tell him how grateful I feel." J Charles Lenox beheld the glowing cheek of lady Frances with an eye of jealousy, and he secretly hoped the stranger might not be found out, lest he should prove the disturber of his repose. His wishes were propitious, as neither earl Campbell or-his- son could gain any intelligence concerning him. While lady Frances cherished the most uneasy, though secret sensations concern¬ ing the unknown preserver of her life, her ladyship soon recovered from the effect j of her accident, and her feelings were called in question on another occasion; this was the departure of her brother, from whom she had never before been separated; and so attached were they together, that both felt it severely. Previous to his departure, lord Arthur had a long conversation with lady Georgi¬ na, and in the most graceful and fascinat¬ ing manner, if not in impassioned terms, thanked her for the honour she had con-
ferred on him by the promise of becoming his, and begged that, at the expiration of two years, during which he meant to tra¬ vel, she would receive him on those terms so wished by all parties, and that she would not forget her engagement with him. In this address lord Arthur was only- actuated by the sentiments of honour; he felt he did not love, but he could not look on the lovely object before him without admiration. Lady Georgina for a moment dropped her eyes in soft confusion; he thought he never saw her look so truly beautiful; a tear started in her eye, but struggling with herself, her countenance resumed its usual haughtiness, as in a firm tone she- replied—" I am not accustomed, my lord, to break my word; when it is once passed, I hold it sacred; and rest assured, at the period of your return, you will find me the same as you leave me. And now, my lord, permit me to retire, as this interview is painful to both, as I believe we are each repressing the natural sentiments of our
hearts, though unfortunately not in uni¬ son." Lord Arthur caught her hand.—" Ex¬ plain your meaning," he cried; " I do not understand you." " I know you do not" was her answer,. as she again made towards the door; " nor would I have you," she continued; " oil' your return, perhaps I may be more ex¬ plicit; and rest assured, my lord, that the- honour and promise of lady Georgina Le¬ nox are sacred, and, likewise recollect, are not to be trifled with on your part." Lord Arthur, rather surprised at her expressions, pressed her to become more- explicit; he knew not what to think, but possessing great generosity of heart, he likewise renewed his sacred promise to fulfil his engagement with her at his re¬ turn. With great emotion she again wished him adieu, and then hurried from him,> to conceal those feelings which over¬ powered her; the meaning of which lord Arthur could scarcely define, as he enter-, c 3
tained a decided opinion that every senti¬ ment of hers arose in consequence of some ebullition of fancied dignity, which he de¬ nominated by the title of pride. . This was the last interview between them, and lord Arthur commenced his torn His intention was first to visit Eng~- land, from which place he was to write them; and lady Georgina had condescend¬ ed to promise to correspond with him. The families of Campbell and Lenox bialh experienced great sorrow and anxiety during the absence of lord Arthur, and lady Georgina passed the greatest portion of her time w r ith her brother and lady- Frances. It was soon observable that this young lady had lost much of her natural vivacity, a deep melancholy appeared to overpower her, and' it was deemed by her friends to have arisen in consequence of the departure of a brother she so tenderly loved. Charles Lenox, with unremitting assiduity, endeavoured to assuage her evi¬ dent grief; but his tenderness only ap-
peared to add to her distress, and a general (doom took place on all countenances. At length letters were brought them from lord Arthur, in which he gave them jrood accounts of himself; he stilted? he was then on his way to England, where he intended to remain some time. He had addressed lady Georgina also, and though not in an impassioned strain, yet its lan¬ guage was fraught with politeness; and lady Georgina answered him, as he had requested her to do so. For the first twelve months he was regular in his cor¬ respondence, but at length the letters of his family, and even lady Georgina's^ re¬ mained unanswered for some time; for which he at length excused himself, by alleging that, in consequence of his tra¬ velling about from place to place, it ren¬ dered a regular correspondence impossible. It was also about tins* period that a total reversion of affairs took place in the fami¬ lies of Campbell and Lenox. The increasing dejection of lady Frances drew forth the attention of her anxious
friends; Charles Lenox beheld with pain the evident alteration in her whole beha¬ viour—she shunned his society and court¬ ed solitude; he was greatly distressed at her conduct, and strove with unremitting tenderness to gain her confidence and esteem; he loved her with unabated ar¬ dour, and, unable any longer to endure the uncertainty in which he remained, he sought an audience with the earl,, and to him expressed his fears that lady Frances was averse to the projected alliance. The earl immediately assured him that he was mistaken, as his daughter had never made the least objection; and added, that he was certain lady Frances would be willing, at any time, to ratify her engagement. With all the eagerness of a lover Charles. caught at this assertion, by proposing that their nuptials should immediately take place, and not delav his happiness, as was originally intended, until the uncertain return of lord Arthur. To this the earl consented, and took upon himself the task of speaking to his daughter on the subject,
and added his belief of her compliance. Charles expressed his hopes that he might prove propitious in his undertaking, and hastened from the castle, while the earl re¬ paired to his daughter's apartment, where, after some little preparatoiy conversation, he informed her of the purport of his visit, and begged her to receive Charles as her husband in as short a time as possible. The varying countenance of lady Fran¬ ces betrayed her agitation; but endeavour¬ ing to collect herself, she replied—" This is a subject, my lord, on which I have long wished to speak, but apprehension has -*ept me silent; yet I am sorry, very sorry that I have so long suffered both you and Charles Lenox to dwell on hopes which I cannot realize. To be plain, my lord, I cannot marry Charles." " What P exclaimed the earl, while his features were distorted with rage and sur¬ prise, " sure I cannot hear you right— you never can be so base of soul as thus to wish to cancel, engagements so solemnly, entered into."
» Indeed, my lord," cried lady Prances, " I have spoken the sentiments of my heart; and thougli it is painful to me thus to disappoint your wishes, yet, I repeat, it is totally impossible for me to unite my¬ self to Charles." " Your reason," exclaimed the earl, in a voice of rage—" give me your reason for* this extraordinary conduct, and why you refuse to ratify those engagements in which you are bound." " Because, my lord, I love another," re¬ plied lady Frances, in a firm voice, " which renders it totally impossible for me to com¬ ply with your wishes; my vows are given to the object of my affections, I have re¬ ceived his, and no power on earth can part us." To describe the rage of the earl at this unreserved declaration is impossible—he vented the most bitter invectives on her Iiead; she, however, remained firm, till at length he demanded, in the most violent terms, the name of her favoured lover— " Tell me who he is," he cried, " that has
thus dared to alienate you from your duty;- give me up the author of your disgrace, that I may wreak my vengeance on his- devoted head; by Heaven I swear he shall" feel the revenge he merits! Tell me, I say, who is the daring intruder ?" <( Never? replied lady Frances; •** after the declaration you have'just made^ I will never give up the beloved object of my affections to your unjustifiable rage; oiv me alone shall your anger fall, but he shall escape your reproaches. I am aware, my lord, I have forfeited your good opinion, perhaps for ever; but even that cannot now alter my future destiny." The earl was enraged almost to madness at her calm declaration ; he upbraided her in the bitterest terms, and concluded by vowing she should be close confined, lest she should disgrace her family by uniting herself to one who was no doubt below her. Lady Frances forbore to complain, and patiently submitted to the commands of* her father, who actually put his threats in-
to force, by locking her up in her own room, in hopes by this method to force her into compliance, though he well knew the firmness of her disposition, which made him fear she would never recant from what she had so strenuously asserted. Her con¬ duct was a blow to all his hopes, as he dreaded lest he should be totally disap¬ pointed in his wishes of uniting his house to that of the proud and lofty one of Lenox.
CHAPTER IV.
" Why should I indiscreetly tell The iiiime my heait has kept so well?"
" To be nlwnys erring is tiie weakness of humanity; to be- nhviiys repenting, its punishment. Alas ! could we learn wisdom without expeiience, mankind would perhaps be too happy." According to the commands of the earl, lady Frances remained confined to her apartment, her own maid waiting on her with her meals; it was in vain the carl offered her liberty, on condition of her re¬ vealing the name of her concealed lover; she remained inflexible, and continued firm in her refusal of Charles. The earl was mortified almost to madness in having to convey such an unfavourable report to Charles, and knew not how to assert the rejection of lady Frances, fearing lest lord Lenox should consider it as an affront of-
fered to his family; this task was, however, spared him, as lady Frances addressed a letter to Charles, and in the most eloquent language confessed her attachment to an¬ other object; and concluded by throwing herself upon his mercy and generosity. This letter was conveyed to Mr. Lenox through the medium of lady Frances's maid, and in some surprise he broke the seal. Upon the perusal of it his feelings may readily be conceived, and for some minutes he remained in a sort of stupor; the disappointment of all iiis hopes and Wishes almost overcame him, yet his rea¬ son told him he should have prepared him¬ self for such a blow, as he had of late too plainty perceived that lady Frances did not regard him with the eyes of love; all the noblest passions of his soul arose in his bosom, disappointment and anger gave way to pity and generosity, and he re¬ solved to convince lady Frances how ten¬ derly he loved her, by preferring her hap¬ piness to his own. He therefore took his pen, and in the most affecting terms wrote
an answer to lady Frances, in which he resigned all his claims to her hand; though, he added, in so doing he gave up all hopes of earthly happiness, as he was convinced he should never fix his affections, on any other female. On the conclusion of his letter he sought his sister, lady Georgina, and informed her of the cruel blow which he had just sus¬ tained in the rejection of lady Frances. She was much hurt at the sorrow of her brother, though, with a generosity only equalled by his own, she pleaded in the behalf of her friend lady Frances, alleging how totally impossible it was to control y the feelings of the human heart. Charles replied, by shewing her the letter he had written to lady Frances. She attentively perused it.—" Now you are my brother," she cried; " continue to encourage these noble sentiments, and you will soon find the reward arising from honourable reso¬ lutions. Alas!" she continued, " perhaps, ere long, I may have occasion to put in
practice the theory which I now preach to you." " Heaven forbid, my dear Georgina, that you should ever experience the sor¬ row I now feel! nor can I comprehend why you harbour sentiments so injurious to yourself. Lord Arthur has voluntarily promised to unite himself to you on his return, and no doubt he will remain firm to his word, and confer happiness on my sister." Lady Georgina looked earnestly at him for a minute.—" Heavens!" she cried, " what a sentence is this! Though I part¬ ly drew it on myself by my incautious expression, yet believe me, Charles, I am not yet in so abject a state as patiently to await the decision of lord Arthur in my favour; tis very probable I may yet refuse him; my hand must be earnestly sought before I bestow it, and even lord Arthur must return more the lover than he left me, before I consent to become his wife " Charles saw he had unintentionally
touched a chord in her ladyship's heart, which, of all others, was the most unfa¬ vourable, namely* that pride which reigned with such powerful dominion in her bo¬ som as to absorb every other noble pas¬ sion ; he therefore pursued the subject no farther, but quitting her presence, and giving his letter for lady Frances to a ser¬ vant, he retired, and shutting himself in his own apartment, gave way to those feelings which his disappointment had oc¬ casioned, and which, notwithstanding his boasted heroism, nearly overpowered him. It was soon understood by the two no¬ ble families that the engagement was can¬ celled between lady Frances and Charles, and the earl had the pleasure of finding lord Lenox not in the least diminished in his friendship towards him on the account of his daughter's conduct; while Charles, with a generosity which did credit to his heart, even pleaded in behalf of lady Fran¬ ces, to whom the earl still continued unre¬ lenting, and treated her with the greatest severity. She was much affected with the
noble behaviour of Charles, for whom she felt the greatest admiration, thougli it was totally impossible for her to extend that sentiment any farther. - Meantime the earl secretly flattered himself that she would eventually be tired of confinement, and make concessions for her liberty; in this he was, however, to¬ tally disappointed, for in a very short time lady Frances effected her escape; her own maid was likewise missing, and it was evi¬ dent had accompanied her in her flight. All search proved ineffectual—no traces of the fugitives could be gained, and earl Campbell was at length obliged to give up all hopes of discovery. He entertained not a doubt in his own mind that she had eloped with her unknown lover; and so great was his fear iest he should prove her inferior, that he soon reconciled himself to her flight, preferring that she should re¬ main in obscurity, rather than openly dis¬ grace herself by avowing her marriage with some one much below her in point of birth and fortune.
Months passed on, and no tidings were gained respecting lady Frances, while Charles Lenox endeavoured to exert all liis fortitude to recover the shock he had sustained: he somewhat succeeded in re¬ gaining his spirits, though he had mentally received a blow which he feared he should never recover. Lady Georgina was assi¬ duously attentive, and proved a true and kind sister to him in affliction; he was "rateful to her, and in return obtained her confidence respecting her own private feel¬ ings, which, to every one else, were re¬ served and secret. During this period of time no letters ever arrived from lord Arthur, and all be¬ gan to be in serious alarm respecting him, as no one knew where to address him. At length, after nearly a twelvemonth, a packet arrived, addressed to the earl—it was from lord Arthur, in which he begged his excuse for his long silonce, alleging his uncertain ramblings as the cause: it was dated from England, at a small village'no great distance from London; at which
place, he added, he was so well pleased, that he intended to remain there some time longer. - He had not written a line to lady Geor¬ gina, and merely desired his remembrances, without even glancing at his engagements. The earl was much displeased with this want of politeness, and immediately, with all the policy of a Scotch courtier, endea¬ voured to make amends for this deficiency in his son by instantly waiting on lady Georgina; and after informing her that he had heard .from lord Arthur, added a long message of his own composing, which he asserted had been dictated by his son. Lady Georgina received it rather cold¬ ly ; and on being asked by the earl if she would write a letter to him in return, as he was going to forward an answer to him immediately, she replied by saying, that as lord Arthur had only sent her a verbal message, the same return was only neces¬ sary. The earl, mentally much displeased with lord Arthur, wrote him directly, com*;
manding him, in peremptory terms, to return without delay, and' fulfil his en¬ gagements with lady Georgina', adding, that certain unpleasing circumstances hav¬ ing transpired in his family, rendered it necessary that he should hasten his return, which was even now extended' much be¬ yond the limited time. The earl carefully' avoided mentioning the hame of lady Frances, or her 1 elopement, fearing lest the letter might 1 fall intoother hands; and so* tenacious was he of the honour df his family, that' he kept'the subjects secret as possible. The pride of lady Georgina' was again roused by the neglect of her lover,, which the earl observed with chagrin and pain; indeed he was in a situation which might be said to be a pitiable one; he had sacrV ficed in a 1 manner the happiness of his children-in commanding this'alliance, to f which he well knew they had both been averse, and he now saw himself in danger 4 of losirfg all his* promised schemes of'great- vol. I. d
ness; on lord Arthur all his hopes were now centered, and he remained in a state, of agitation almost beyond endurance, wishing, yet dreading the return of lord -Arthur. In this state of suspense he was kept much longer than he expected, when at length one day, without any previous in¬ timation, lord Arthur was announced. The earl, in a transport of joy, rushed to him x and embraced him, while his son stammered out something of an apology for his abrupt return; his air was hurried, and his whole frame agitated; his counte¬ nance was dejected, and bespoke a mind ill at ease. He inquired for his sister, lady Frances; the earl replied she was then ab¬ sent, and they would converse on her here¬ after. In a confused voice lord Arthur then mentioned lord Lenox and family, while the earl, making a suitable reply, ordered refreshments for his son; and after giving necessary orders, and the servants being withdrawn, he resolved to sound lord Arthur on the .subject so near his
heart. He began by remarking that lady Georgina was even, if possible, improved in beauty; and, after a long eulogium in her praise, concluded by congratulating his son on his prospects of uniting himself to such a lovely woman as lady Georgina. The earl almost gasped for breath, as he awaited an answer; his whole hopes now appeared to rest on the words of lord Ar¬ thur, who was evidently much agitated, and in a faltering voice replied—" I had not intended thus early, my lord, to speak on this important subject; yet as you have thus addressed me, I must be explicit, as it would be a cruelty in me longer to de¬ ceive you or lady Georgina with false hopes, with whom, I now positively affirm, I cannot unite myself." This dreaded sentence had no sooner escaped his lips than the earl sunk back in his chair; he could not speak—rage and disappointment overcame him. Lord Arthur was astonished at the violence of his feelings, and endeavoured to sooth D 2
him,—« It is in vain," at length cried the earl, " thus to address me; you know not what I feel at this culpable conduct ot yours—to have my long-cherished hopes thus annihilated by a boy, who is not wor¬ thy the honour intended him. You well know I had centered all my hopes in unit¬ ing our ancient house with that of Lenox, and to be thus totally disappointed—it is agony insupportable." " But, my lord," interrupted lord Ar¬ thur, " you will not entirely fail in your hopes; 'tis the conviction, of this which makes me thus endeavour to lay aside my engagements, as the alliance between my sister and Charles Lenox will join the two houses in those ties for which you are 1 so desirous." The earl, on hearing this speech, was quite overcome—he actually burst into tears, and taking the hand of lord Arthur, exclaimed—"Alas! you have yet to learn the disgrace which has fallen upon our house. Frances- has quitted my protec¬ tion; I have no longer a daughter—she
has basely fled from her engagements— she has wounded my honour, which was sta]ked for her; and scarcely have 1 reco¬ vered the shock, when my son, on whom I had placed my whole dependence to re¬ gain that honour which I have partly lost through her disobedience, returns only to wound it farther, by plunging me still deeper in the violation of my heart's dear¬ est treasure^— that honour which I never forfeited but through my children." ' . " Hold, my lord," cried lord Arthur, ** for mercy's sake, explain this dreadful intelligence! Oh! where is this dear, this unfortunate Frances ?" " I know not," replied the earl, " nor do I ever wish; she has disgraced herself, and she is no longer my daughter." He then gave lord Arthur an account of her attachment to her unknown lover, and her eventually eloping, and his inability to trace her steps. " In this state of dis¬ traction," continued the earl, " I have re¬ mained, but still cheered myself with the hope that I had yet a son to retrieve my
sinking honour, and who would glory in nobly fulfilling his sacred word. But, alas! he is also degenerate and fallen. But go on—pursue the path you have chosen— behold thy father spurned by lord Lenox, see his long-ficquired honours expiring at his feet; and when you have glutted your eyes, then repeat, with inward satisfaction —* I have completed the task begun by lady Frances—I have struck the dagger to the heart of my father." Lord Arthur beheld the agony of his father with horror; this was a blow for which he v/as not prepared; the honour of his family was dear to him as life, he saw the unpleasing situation in which his father was plunged, and whatever were his own private reasons for wishing to avoid an union with lady Georgina, he resolved to sacrifice every feeling of his own to save his father. As was his usual custom when any thing disturbed him, he took a few turns across the room, and then stopping before the earl, exclaimed—" To preserve the sacred honour of my father I
will make every sacrifice; your son shall yet fulfil your hopes—he will retrieve the sinking honour of your house." The earl caught his hand—this sudden gleam of hope again gave him new life; he could only exclaim—" Arthur, do not deceive me." " No, my lord," he replied; " every other consideration sinks in comparison with your sufferings. Frances! unfortu¬ nate girl!" he added, with a sigh, " may your happiness be permanent, as thy bro¬ ther sacrifices all his hopes to retrieve thy misconduct! yes, I now again pledge my irrevocable word to unite myself to lady Georgina." " My son," exclaimed the delighted earl, " thou art again my promised dependence; honour once more resumes her place in thy breast, and may the blessing of thy father fall on thy head!" Lord Arthur was affected with his fa¬ ther's joy, and felt at that moment he would give up every thing to ensure his happiness; his own heart was the seat of
generosity, and to that sentiment he yield¬ ed himself a willing victim. He now re¬ quested permission to retire in order to compose himself, while the overjoyed earl - sent off an express to Lepox House, to inform them of the arrival of lord Arthur Glendinning.
CHAPTER V.
You took her up a little tender flower, Just sprouted on a bank which the next frost Hacl nipt, and, with a careful loving hand, Transplanted her into your own fair garden, Where the sun always shines— — — __ __ — —There long she flourish'd, Grew sweet to sense and lovely to the cjo. Otway. The instant the intelligence was received at Lenox House, Charles; with all the warmth of a sincere'friend, immediately hastened to St. Michael's Castle, to give the welcome to lord Arthur, who received him likewise with every mark of esteem and cordiality; both were much agitated; in the bosom of Charles it revived all his sufferings in the loss of lady Frances, while lord Arthur, overpowered with com¬ bined feelings, could scarcely speak; but* d3
at length ventured to articulate something respecting the mysterious flight of his sister. " She is lost to me for ever," sighed Charles; " but here she still reigns with triumphant sway, and no other object shall ever efface her image from my bo¬ som. But," he added, looking earnestly at lord Arthur, " we may yet be brothers; lady Georgina remains firm to her engage¬ ments." Lord Arthur was affected, and at that moment felt how impossible it would have been for him to have broken his word.— " True," he replied, with quickness, " hap¬ piness awaits me in the possession of your r lovely sister, whom I am impatient to be¬ hold; and believe me, Charles, the plea¬ sure of my engagements will be doubly enhanced hy being able to call you bro- v ther." Lord Arthur here spoke the sentiments of his heart; generosity was his ruling passion, and while under the influence of
that power, he would have sacrificed every consideration of his own. Charles appeared pleased with the warmth of his friend, and offered to conduct him to Lenox House, and introduce him to lady Georgina. Lord Arthur resolved to persevere in the resolution he had taken, and therefore instantly acquiesced,- and delighted the earl by his readiness to visit lady Georgina, who now once more pro¬ mised himself the accomplishment of alL his wishes. Lady Georgina had heard,, with much secret emotion, the return 1 of lord Arthur; and on being informed, of his arrival at Lenox House, she endeavoured to collect her agitated spirits,, and throwing the na¬ tural haughtiness of her disposition into ■ her face, she repaired to the drawing-room to meet him. She had previously deter¬ mined to- receive him. coldly, in conse¬ quence of his visible neglect during his absence, whilst lord Arthur flew towards her, and seizing her hand, poured forth- every fond, expression. The dignity of.
her manners, the improved beauty of her person, again called forth his admiration, and almost enslaved his soul; and from that moment he resolve^ to bury all past -tender recollections for ever in oblivion, ancl to devote himself to lady Georgina. His soft attentions won upon that lady, and she relaxed in a trifling degree from her usual haughty demeanour. After this visit all parties appeared sa¬ tisfied, and in compliance with the wishes of earl Campbell, their union was to take place as early as possible: in the interme¬ diate time, lord Arthur was punctual in his visits to lady Georgina, who continued on good terms; and thougli that sweet reciprocity of mutual affection had not yet escaped their lips, they were, for fan shionable lovers, happy. But as the time approached which was to celebrate their nuptials, lord Arthur grew thoughtful and reserved, and sometimes very inattentive to lady Georgina, which did not escape the observation of her penetrating ladyship; but the proceedings had now gone too far
to retract, and both parties appeared to await the result as a matter of course. Lord Arthur had tried various means to gain intelligence of lady Frances, but in vain; while earl Campbell, contented that his son would fulfil his hopes, gave himself no farther trouble about her; he considered she had disgraced herself and family, and therefore was no longer worthy of his soli¬ citude or regard. Frequently did the ab¬ stracted manners of lord Arthur attract his attention, for which he always account¬ ed, by asserting that he was reflecting on the flight and loss of his sister. Lady Georgina frequently heard these excuses, but whether she believed them or not, re¬ mained confined within the limits of her own bosom, as she never condescended to communicate her opinions to any one, particularly respecting lord Arthur. At length the morning was ushered in with every demonstration of joy that was to unite the noble heirs of the two most ancient houses in Scotland. Lord Arthur arose, after a sleepless night, and repairing
to his dressing-room, summoned his valet; he almost involuntarily opened a box which stood on his toilet, out of which he took a ring composed of hair; he placed it on his finger, and in a transport of joy raised it to his lips, and imprinted on the insensible circle the most impassioned kisses; but suddenly stopping, he with¬ drew it from his finger, and striking his' hand against his forehead, remained for a minute lost in thought, unheedful of the presence of his valet, who having entered the room at the moment of his masters fervent rhapsodies, naturally imagined they were of course directed towards some- token of his destined bride's, and therefore did not wonder at his master's actions, who at length starting from his reverie,- and carefully locking up his treasure, sur¬ rendered himself to the hands of his man. The bells of St. Michael's tower now broke upon his ear, the lively strain of which ap^ peared to have no other effect than that of plunging him into a profound melancholy, from which he at last aroused himself with
a desperate effort, and instantly repaired to the earl, who received him with every mark of delight. The carriage waited to convey them to^ Lenox House, where an elegant breakfast- was prepared. Lord Arthur received the congratulations of his friends with that elegance which so distinguished him, and forcing his spirits, inquired for his lovely bride, who had not yet left her toilet. At length, like a beauteous rose just burstinp* from its transient covering, bloom- ing forth in native loveliness and perfec¬ tion, to charm the eye and delight the sense so arrayed, in conscious dignity ap¬ peared lady Georgina; a blush of modesty pervaded her countenance as she met the eyes of the company; for a few minutes she appeared embarrassed, but recovering herself, and calling forth her usual assist¬ ant to her aid, namely that pride which was her constant attendant, she attained her usual composure and dignity of man¬ ners. Lord Arthur almost went beyond himself
in his endeavours to express his delight at her appearance, and repeated softly in her ear his raptures at the pleasing idea, that in a short time he should be the possessor of that hand for which so many had sighed in vain. Lady Georgina fixed her penetrating eyes full upon him.—" No more, my lord," she cried; " compliments but ill accord with the sentiments of my heart, which scorns such flimsy effusions; sincerity, my lord, is tlie immediate jewel of our souls, and for that I would rather prize you than all else beside. Can you bear my scru¬ tiny?" Lord Arthur appeared confused at this pointed address.— " Why should you doubt my sincerity V he replied. " Can that man be insincere who professes the most ardent admiration for the loveliest figure nature ever formed ?" " Forbear, my lord, and speak the dic¬ tates of your heart." " On my soul / dor he replied; " to say / admire you beyond expression, is
.indeed the spontaneous effusion of my heart. And now, my charming monitor, will you be as candid in owning the feel¬ ings of your heart ?" Lady Georgina blushed excessively.—- <v That is a scrutiny which you, my lord, have never yet thought fit to make," she cried; " when I see you worthy its confi¬ dence, I will unfold to you its inmost thoughts and failings." A tear dimmed the lustre of her lovely eye as she spoke. Lord Arthur was af¬ fected; he took her hand, but was pre¬ vented making a reply, by the carriages being announced which were to convey them to the church. A bridal procession was arranged to pro¬ ceed before them; and on alighting at St. Michael's, young girls, in white, strewed flowers before the bridal pair. The cere¬ mony "w as read by the earl's chaplain, a ve¬ nerable old man; lord Arthur and Charles Lenci appeared the most melancholy of the party, as the latter forcibly dwelt on tlvi recollection of his disappointment;
lady Georgina conducted herself with her usual dignity; and the ceremony drew near to a conclusion, when they were- in¬ terrupted by a loud scream, which vibrated along the arched and vaulted aisles of the church. All endeavoured to fathom the cause—no one was to be seen from whence the sound proceeded. Lord Arthur in¬ voluntarily shuddered, his cheeks turned pale, and a trembling seized his whole frame; he appeared to fix his eyes, as if expecting the appearance of some one; but all remained silent; ancl after a short pause occasioned by the interruption, the ceremony was concluded. Lord Arthur, who now appeared the image of inward grief and horror, silently took the hand of his bride, and led her back to the carriage, in order to convey her to St. Michael's Castle, one wing of which had been fitted up in the utmost splendour to receive lady Georgina, it bc- inef the earl's wish that lord Arthur and his lady should fix their residence there, and thus keep up the usual splendour and
hospitality of that noble mansion. Lady Georgina had condescended to agree to this proposal, and had superintended the arrangement and improvement of the va¬ rious rooms designed for her ladyship's use. On their entering the castle, every mark of joy resounded throughout the walls, the bells of the tower kept up a successive peal, while the white favours worn by the domestics announced the joyful occasion. The earl beheld the completion of all his earthly hopes with inward exultation, he felt as if he trod on air, though the gloomy countenance of his son in a great measure damped the joy of his heart. Lady Georgina having retired to her dressinsc-room in order to throw off a beautiful hat and veil, was informed by her own maid, that a basket had arrived at the castle, directed to lady Glendinning. " To me!" replied her ladyship, in a tone of surprise; " from whom can it come, and what can it contain ?" " I don't know indeed, my lady; a
stranger delivered it, saying it required no answer * and I wait your ladyship's or¬ ders to unpack it, as it is directed for no one else to open it." " It is very strange," replied lady Geor¬ gina. " Bring it hither directly." Her attendant left the room, and soon returned, bearing in her arms a clean wick¬ er basket: it Was weighty, and she gladly set it on the table before her lady, who, with increased astonishment, beheld it di¬ rected to herself, and to be opened by her only. As this was, however, a piece of business not consistent for lady Georgina to perform, she ordered her maid to cut the cords which bound it together; which command she was not long in obeying, as a certain powerful passion, denominated by some curiosity, or designated by others under the more softened term of a very natural longing, had taken possession of her soul. w I dare say, my lady," she cried, as she cut the first cord, '* it is some beautiful wedding present—perhaps from lord Ar-
thur himself, who intends you this agree¬ able surprise." Lady Georgina shook her head incre¬ dulously, as the basket lid was opened; she cast her eyes on its contents, with her own fair hand she withdrew a white cover¬ ing, and beheld—not indeed a bridal pre¬ sent, as her maid had anticipated—not a rich display of costly jewels suitable to the occasion, or a glittering glare of dia¬ monds; it indeed contained a jewel, for in it was deposited the lovely gem of in¬ nocence—in a sweet sleep lay a beautiful infant, a rosy smile dimpled on its cheeks, which were adorned with the stamp of health ancl beauty. Lady Georgina uttered a loud and pier¬ cing scream at this unexpected sight, whilst her maid, following the example of her lady, shrieked aloud,-which reaching the ears of lord Arthur and Charles Lenox, who were conversing in a. room at no - great distance, they immediately! hastened • to the scene of* confusion, where their sur¬ prise was increased by-*the. explanation*
which lady Georgina, trembling violently, attempted to give. Lord Arthur appeared hardly capable of supporting himself, as he took a view of the still-sleeping infant. A paper was. pinned to its breast, addressed to lady Glendinning, which ran as follows: " If ever humanity touched your breast—if the sweet impulse of pity and compassion dwells within your heart— oh! then in mercy extend it to my help¬ less child; at such a moment as this, on which perhaps hangs your destiny, refuse not to protect this little unfortunate, who supplicates through me for your protec¬ tion. Oh! let her not plead in vain; fos¬ ter her as your own, and supply the place of her wretched mother, who now sleeps for ever in eternal rest; past all farther earthly sorrows, her spirit reposes—she is no more. To your hands she commits the wretched pledge of her unfortunate love to its perjured father; disdain her not— her birth is high, her family good; she is
three months old, and her name is Ele¬ anor" Lady Georgina dropped the paper from her hands, as lord Arthur, in extreme agi¬ tation, involuntarily uttered an exclama¬ tion of horror, as, raising the child, he gazed earnestly at it. His pressure awa¬ kened the infant, who opening its eyes, discovered a pair of lovely blue. Lady Georgina turned towards lord Ar¬ thur; she plainly saw his emotion,,and in a tremulous tone exclaimed—" What am I to do ?" " To do!" replied lord Arthur, violent¬ ly ; " have not nature and compassion al¬ ready pleaded in thy bosom ? Can you ask how to act, when you are already en¬ joined what steps to pursue?" " Do you expect, my lord," she cried, " that I shall adopt this child, so forced upon me?" " I not only expect," he retorted, *« but ' insist on your immediately protecting this little innocent. She shall be sheltered."
" You insist!" replied lady Georgina, while the glow of pride mounted in her cheeks; " is this a language to be directed to me?" Lord Arthur still held the child w his arms, who now began to utter a plaintive cry.—" I beg your pardon," he cried; " my compassion for this child led me beyond myself. I request then y6u will coincide with mc in affording our protec¬ tion to this helpless babe." " For Heaven's sake!" cried Charles Lenox, in a voice of extren-e agitation, " let not this circumstance thus early cause a dissension between my dear brother and sister. For my part, I own myself greatly interested for this little Eleanor; for, if I mistake not, she has claims upon us ail. Look at her features ;.do they not forcibly remind you of——*" " Of whose?" vehemently demanded lord Arthur. " Of one, iny-lord," he replied; " whom I shall never forget, and whom I now again behold'in this infant. Need I say
bhe is the exact copy < of lady Frances? Yes, my heart tells rae she is the unfortu-> nate mother. Qh! let us then protect her child: I will adopt it." Lord Arthur appeared to revive at this declaration, and seconded the sup^sitiony while lady Georgina shook her head doubt¬ fully, and fixed" heroes' upon lord Arthur, who now again entreated that she would receive the child; Charles Lenox also pleaded for her compassion, till at length her ladyship agreed to receive it. She could not deny the resemblance it bore to lady Frances, but she did not appear to believe it to be her child, as, she added, in a tone of sarcasm, there were other rea¬ sons to be assigned for her likeness, which were more probable. Lord Arthur confusedlv asked those reasons. " I dare say, my lord, your own heart can answer you that question," was her reply; " and, if not, I choose to bury my ideas for ever in the oblivion of my own VOL. i. E
bosom: suffice it to say, she shall be taken care of, and I will protect her, let her be whose child she will; yes," she added, with energy, " the first action of my mar¬ ried life shall be that of shewing you that I rise superior to a contemptible preju¬ dice ; and however I may feel the pangs- of suspicion, I will adopt the unfortunate Eleanor,"
CHAPTER VI.
VI hare is there faith and honour to he found ? Ve sods, that guard the innocent and guide The wpak, protect and take me to your care; For, oli, I love himl—there's the rock will wreck me. Whv was I tnade niih all my sex's softness? ~~ — — — —Vet, to conceal its f lilies, I'll be a true woman—rail, protest my wrongs, fiefroUe to hate him, aad yet love him still. Otway, The important and mysterious event of the new-found infant greatly interrupted the tranquillity of the wedding-day; it was evident lord Arthur took great in¬ terest in its fate, and certainly he was vi- sibly gratified at kdy Georgina's consent¬ ing to receive it; but it had caused the most unpleasing sensations in the bosoms of those whom it appeared most to con¬ cern; lord Arthur was particularly agi¬ tated, inasmuch that, during tne remain- £ 2
der of the day, he was so dejected and ab¬ stracted, that it called forth the attention of every one; and he would have rather appeared as a chief mourner at a funeral, than a happy bridegroom/in the posses¬ sion of beauty, wealth, and splendour. Lady Georgina watched his every look; the most uneasy sensations were passing in her mind also; while Charles Lenox openly avowed his emotion at the opinion he had formed respecting the little Elea¬ nor, as it so forcibly brought the image of lady Frances to his imagination; and lord Arthur so strenuously asserted i his' belief in the opinion of Charles, that he acknow¬ ledged how much his spirits were shaken on the occasion; " for," added- he, " does not this senseless paper express that its unfortunate mother is no more ? and the conviction of this torments me beyond endurance—her clay-cold form rises before my eyes, and drives me to madness." ,He paused, and striking his forehead with his hand, appeared - almost convulsed with agony.
The earl, who was now present, and had been made acquainted with the strange appearance of the infant, expresoed his disapprobation of lord Arthur's conduct. __" Is the remembrance of lady Frances's error ever-to be a drawback to our happi- siess?'Mie exclaimed. " For shame, Ar¬ thur! is' this a time to indulge such a weakness as this? Your feelings are, at most, excited merely on supposition— you only imagine this child related to you, and have suffered your ideas to lead you beyond yourself." " Indeed, my lord," cried lady Georgina " I must own I think lord Arthur's emo¬ tion very natural, as this unfortunate babe has doubtless claims of the strongest na¬ ture on him, as likewise to your lordship." The earl started.—" Do you believe then that she is the child of lady Fran¬ ces?" he inquired,—Lady Georgina paus¬ ed, as the earl proceeded^—" Does your ladyship think seriously that this little object, forced upon your bounty, is really my grandchild'?"
" I do indeed, my lord/' f quickly replied lady Georgina; " I would stake my life upon her affinity to you." ? *^ - » 1 Lord Arthur started from hiss reverie, -and fixed his eyes upon his lady, while the earl, struggling i with > his feelings, which arose at the call .of, nature, and pleaded for his lost* daughter, but sup¬ pressed by pride, exclaimed—'* If that is indeed your ladyship's f opinion, and to which I certainly pay all due deference, I must in that case, I suppose, receive,this litde outcast, and place her under my pro¬ tection ; though the world must not know our private thoughts concerning her." " Pardon me, my lord," interrupted lady Georgina, with great warmth, " this helpless babe has been sent by its unfor¬ tunate mother to me. How far she may have been culpable is not for me to judge; I can only pity her sufferings, and drop a tear at the idea of her misfortunes." . > ^ . Lord Arthur here arose, and taking the hand of his bride, gazed at .her with s inde¬ finable expression, whilst her ladyship,
casting a■:; look of full meaning on hi m, thus proceeded:—"This-innocent pledge of her guilty intercourse with its unknown father she ^has 'bequeathed' to my protec¬ tion, I have already said I will receive % andt your lordship must pardon me when I say she sliall remain under my immedi¬ ate: guidance; nor will : I relinquish the right: bestowed on me by her mother; and in this L know I meet-the wishes of lord Arthur.":^ -v^nj- : : J*:v.: v ■^■■i:^ ■■■.;y-:-.^- ; ;; il-fv" You do indeed,^'he quickly replied; .fv.arid'rl must thank a your, ladyship for your acquiescence to my will, and express my /admiration at your .sentiments*, which, aslfar as, related to the wretched .mother, supposing her to be the unfortunate Frari. ces, does credit to your heart, and exalts you in my estimation" ■ ^ i " Indeed, hiy lord, : then," interrupted her ladyship,*;"' Iam not desirous of gain¬ ing i your r good; opinion only through the channel-of ;:my compassion to the mother of Eleanor, who, for ought 1 know, may be arir object of. reprehension rather than
pity. Doubtless your lordship..can, best define that question.'' i .-..,,*, ;; .' She cast a look so expressive jon> lord Arthur, that, he could, not .misunderstand . - her; the glow which mantled on his, face gave evident, proof of his quick concep¬ tion. Lady Georgina read Ms .feelings; she felt a giant in strength, who in a mo¬ ment could crush the worm before her; she turned from him with an expression of haughtiness which stung him to the soul, and he mentally exclaimed— *f I will never be a woman's slave; she shall yet learn that I was not born to wear the gall¬ ing chains of pride and disdain.. Oh! why am I thus married? Alas! could I but have followed the dictates of my heart, how different now would have been my feelings! As it is, united -to such a wo¬ man as lady Georgina*r~r' ! . , ■ . Lord Arthur here checked \he progress of his thoughts, and sinking ori his chair, reflected that he was wronging lady Geor¬ gina. She had that day, evinced a noble¬ ness of sentiment which increased his ad-
miration* andhe felt dissatisfied with him* self; for, strange as itmay appear, though he acknowledged the superiority of his bride's /understanding, and admired her exalted and noble expressions, which she had poured forth in the instance of the little Eleanor, yet he did not love- and all liis future prospects appeared as a blank. Lady Georgina had given the most li- * beral orders respecting the helpless babe, who, she affirmed, should have a proper nurse provided for her, and be brought up under her own eye. Both lord and lady Lenox had been much disconcerted at their daughter's having had such an unpleasing event forced upon her at such a time as this, and much chagrined at the visible dejection of lord Arthur; nor was earl Campbell less uneasy on the occasion —every, circumstance appeared to combine to thwart his long-cherished hopes; his son had irrevocably acceded to his wishes, but his whole behaviour during the day was so replete with discontent and wretch-. E3
edness/ that > the earl was a.'preyt'fo the most uneasy sensations, and heavily passed on the time. < "* * *«: ■ ^ The attention of lord Arthur -was en¬ tirely devoted towards Eleanor,, while'ihis bride almost appeared -neglected, and her presence unheeded by him who ought to have been the most alive to all those ex¬ quisite feelings of the lover and husband. This behaviour was not lost upon lady Georgina, and, as it may be supposed; suited not with" her ideas of superiority; accustomed ever to the most flattering attention of both sexes, and universally courted and admired by the gentlemen, how was her pride awakened by the con¬ viction that he, on whom she had conde¬ scended to bestow her hand, was cold, and even wanting in common politeness to¬ wards her! Sensations of the acutest kind were thus early impressed, even on l her wedding-day, and the result proved exact¬ ly as might have been expected. Lord Arthur and his kdy were merely united by the ceremony of the church, and lady
- Glendinning,' stung to the heart by his neglect,'adopted a reserve and haughtiness of manner, which unfortunately operated ori lord Arthur with the most poignant dislike. 1 ;- r '•; 'i '• * ." ' >• Lady Glendinning,-true to her promise;. bestowed a great share of her attention towards the little Eleanor, who flourished under<the protection-of her benefactress; and'a few 'months made a visible altera¬ tion in the'little infant, who grew apace, and continued'improving-in beauty and strength. Lady Glendinning was herself much attached to her protegee, but she was- unhappily the innocent cause of all that lady's sorrow, for she beheld with-in¬ ward agony the interest which lord Arthur took in her fate;, the little Eleanor was his whole delight; frequently would he pass hours in caressing her; the. company of lady-Glendinning' was slighted for- Elea¬ nor. .Oftendid'her ladyship behold him 1 sazinjr on its features with rapture and enttiusiasm;"and> then press the most ar¬ dent' 1 kisses on its innocentvcheck; it/was 1 .
at such times as these that lady Georgina, unable to conceal her feelings, would ad¬ dress him in tones of sarcasm bordering on reproach..—" Were it not, my lord," she one day exclaimed, " for the affection. you bestow on this child, I should almost think you void of all those feelings of the heart which are incidental to human na-j ture—feelings which, since our weddings day, have appeared entirely to be absorbed in your own abstru&e reflections. How¬ ever, I see you can call forth the senti-. ments of affection where your heart is in¬ terested, as in tlie instance of this child, who is so fortunate as to engross the whole of your attention." " Certainly," replied lord Arthur, in a tone of warmth. " Can you suppose this child must not be dear to me ? Her doubt¬ less affinity renders her doubly so; my sister stands before me in her, and for her unfortunate mother's, sake I almost dote on her." " No doubt," interrupted her ladyship; i( but the motiwr dwells most forcibly an,
your imagination.: , Ah,, my, dord! my lord! when you first parted "with since¬ rity, you sunk yourself below your fellow- creatures, and reduced yourself to an ob* jeet of compassion;, yes, my lord, justly offended as I am, still I pity you." Lord Arthur started up, and v casting a look of anger on her, exclaimed—" This is a language to which. I have not been accustomed, nor will I suffer it,to be di? rected towards me, even by j your ladyship; the haughty presuming spirit of # woman was ever my utter abhorrence, while gen«r tleness and humility had power to capti¬ vate" my soul. You, madam, are, now in possession of my sentiments on that head, and it lies in your own power to insure my future approbation,' or to, create total indifference, by pursuing ,a mode of con¬ duct with mei which, < though it may sue* ceed in awing! a lover, will never :gain you the affections, of a. husband, who is„resolved to preserve the prerogative,of this rights "v . Lord Arthur proceeded to,the.door, and hastily left the room. >• Lady Glendinning
gazed ^silently > after him for some time her cheek became flushed,- the starting tear glistened in her eye, and for a few minutes she gave way to her emotion, fiom which she was roused by the infan¬ tine caresses of the little Eleanor, whom lord Arthur had left in the room. Lady Georgina gazed on it with increased agi¬ tation—" Alas!" she cried, " thou inno¬ cent cause of all my secret grief, thou little knoWest the daggers thou art daily destined to plunge in this unhappy bosom! Sad ,task for me to fulfil! Could thy mo¬ ther know my feelings, even she would pity me. -Oh ! why did I ever marry ? ? '- ■ <• As she uttered this last sentence, earl Campbell entered the apartment,*, and im¬ mediately enquired into the nature of her present griefs .Her ladyship endeavoured as much iis a (possible to conceal^ the real cause, but the earl was convinced it was occasioned { by r the behaviour of > his son,' whorfivhe immediately sought' out, and warmly'^remonstrated 'with "him- on -his unkind* treatment*to ladysGeorgina; who,
he added, was now in a situation to call forth his tenderest concern, and who, in all probability, would soon confirm their hopes, by giving an heir to their house. Lord Arthur was somewhat softened, and on his next meeting with his lady he conducted himself with more tenderness towards her than he had done since their marriage. The earl was overjoyed, and he once more flattered himself that their union would yet prove an auspicious one. Lady Georgina soon fulfilled the wishes of her family, in giving birth to a son; and, in justice to lord Arthur, we must avow he received the precious gift with all the transporting feelings of a fa¬ ther. This circumstance appeared to have wrought a change in his sensations to¬ wards his lady, and for some years they lived in a state of harmony. Her lady¬ ship bore him two more infants, both girls, which comprised their family, whcf grew up endowed with every promised qualification. Robert Glendinning, their- son, - early
displayed a nobleness and ingenuousness of disposition which endeared him to every one; his person was the counterpart of his father's, and the handsome features of lord Arthur were visible in the face of his son. His next sister,. Georgina, was also a most lovely girl; her disposition was good, though tinctured with some traits of her mother's pride, to which she united a dis¬ position of such extreme liveliness, that rendered her absolutely giddy and vola¬ tile. The youngest, who had been named Frances, after her unfortunate aunt, had early exhibited strong symptoms of de¬ cline; and although every advice was pro¬ cured, the distracted parents beheld her consigned, at the early period of twelve years, to the tomb. This distressing event caused the most painful sensations in the bosoms of all, and in none more so than in the breast of the affectionate Eleanor, whom, though we have not yet noticed, was not the least interesting of the juve¬ nile group at St. Michael's. She had watched with unremitting zeal the crisis
of the little sufferer's fate, and beheld with acute agony the painful termination; she received the last sigh of Frances on her bosom, and repressing"with Jieroic forti¬ tude the grief of lier own heart, she en¬ deavoured to pour comfort into the wound¬ ed minds of lord Arthur ancl his lady; while the former, after gazing on her with looks of admiration, and taking her hand, exclaimed—" I am not indeed bereft of all—I have yet a treasure left me; yes, my Eleanor, thou art still preserved to me. Thy efforts to sooth my. mind shall not be in vain; from this moment; sweet girl, thou art doubly endeared to me, and never will I forget the mild and winning condolence uttered to me, in ^the^ moment of distress, by my heroic Eleanor." <
.. .-:-vl ■ f >i:-r-,>XHA-PTER-:-yiI^-:..v .-«: ' >■ . v Beauteous was she, as the beam ■ \-.\\ ■• . Of eve on Derwent's stilly laUe— Pure as th* unsullied 'parent'stream, -' ■'■'■•..';■ 'That glitters to' the' par : tiat gleam,": :■-.'.:; iFrom mountain's, top or flow'ry brake., ■ ■ ; . ■ .. Uer neck as fancy's pictures fair, : ' • ■ •.;;;: And o'er that neck her waving hair 1 ''"' Fl6w'ilJbriglit,"'lu*tirious,''like tlie shroud '::'■■ •: 'Of morn on suramer's loveliest cloud;? <■..,-,,.;. pf.deepdelicjous blue, her eye,., ; ' ; ■ ,^ Mock'd■ night's serencst,.clearest sky. _ Wrnz above/elegant lines were truly appli¬ cable to ouriyoiing heroine, who united to a person of bewitching loveliness a dispo¬ sition attuned to sweetness and amicabi¬ lity. Eleanor, at the above-mentioned period, had attained her seventeenth year; she had been brought up under the eyes of her protectors—lord Arthur and lady Glendinning had spared no pains in the
cultivation of her mind, and she had shared in all the accomplishments bestowed on Robert and Georgina Glendinning. Her quick capacity in receiving her instructions gained her universal admiration, whilst the urbanity of her manners, and disposition so peculiarly fascinating, rendered her an object of enthusiastic regard; her mind was softened with all those genuine marks of feeling which so truly adorn the female character, to which she united a firmness and courage almost beyond her years; in short, Eleanor was every where the uni¬ versal magnet of attraction; and lady Glendinning beheld, with some degree of chagrin, the superiority which tslie at¬ tained over her own daughter, whose gid¬ dy disposition rendered her merely a plea¬ sant companion for a moment, as the vo¬ latile ebullitions which flowed from her heart were too flimsy to retain attention from her auditors. Lady Glendinning fre¬ quently looked on Eleanor with sensations of pain; a harsh expression would some¬ times escape her lips towards the innocent
disturber of her impose, which, if in the hearing of lord Arthur, generally termir nated in dissension between themselves. Jjord and? lady Lenox had always ex¬ pressed their disapprobation of the little intruder,; as they styled Eleanor; arid the injudicious mother was ever inflaming the breast of "lady (Georgina, by her remarks and disapprobation of lord Arthur's evi¬ dent partiahty towards Eleanor. A violent dispute had arisen in the fa¬ milies respecting the name Eleanor should bear; it was necessary she should have some appellation to distinguish her, and lord Arthur gave it as his opinion, that as she was supposed to be the daughter of lady Frances, it was right she should be called Miss Glendinning. To this lady Georgina at first strongly objected, as she conceived it putting her too much on a level with lier own daughter. - Charles Lenox, who had ever been a staunch friend to Eleanor, coincided in the opinion of lord Arthur, as he firmly believed her to be the child of lady Frances,
as her surprising likeness to that lady and lord Arthur grew daily more observable. On hearing of the dispute* he, however, with much native generosity, desired she might bear his name—" I 1 intend her td be my child by adoption," he exclaimed'; " let her therefore adopt the name of Le¬ nox, and I will take care she shall possess the means to support that name with the dignity due to our noble house." Lady Lenox and lady Glendinning heard this proposal with greater anger than the first; that a poor dependent, forced on her daughter's bounty, should bear their ancient name, filled the haugh¬ ty soul of lady Lenox with inward rage, and she warmly expressed her disappro¬ bation; while lady Glendinning, after a few minutes' Consideration, exclaimed-^ " There is no necessity for this subject to bear farther discussion; I have certainly the greatest right, in regard tc this unfor¬ tunate child—a right which her dying mother, as it appears, bequeathed to me. It would have been rny wish to have
Called her f by some name irrelevant to our families; but as it is the wish of lord Ar¬ thur that she should be designated by the appellation of Glendinning, I yield to his better judgment, and agree with him, that she has doubtless the greatest claims to that name," Her ladyship here cast her expressive eyes on lord Arthur, who fully understood her real meaning; but seeming not to no^ tice it, he merely thanked her ladyship for her acquiescence to his wishes. This little affair thus settled, Eleanor had been taught to call herself Glendin¬ ning; and as she grew up, a faint outline of her supposed affinity to lord Arthur had been related to her, while the bosom of poor Eleanor frequently cherished an uneasy sensation, in the idea that some mysterv attended her birth; and as reason unfolded itself over her expanded mind, she frequently sighed to herself—" Alas! who were my parents ? If I am indeed the offspring of the unfortunate lady Fran¬ ces, and who is thought to be no more,
who then is my father ? does he also sleep in death? or,? if not/ .why does he not claim his child, who would pant to receive a father's embrace ?" ■ j Eleanor would sometimes sink under these painful ideas; but (recovering her¬ self, she would reflect on the kindness of lord Arthur, who behaved towards her as a father, and she loved as such. To lady Glendinning she also bore the sentiments of affection; but the coldness with which that lady always treated sher prevented her natural ebullitions of esteem, and she could only treat lady Glendinning with respect, not with love. Earl Campbell was also cold and repelling to her, and the haughty lady Lenox seldom condescended to notice her at all. With lord Arthur and Charles Lenox she was a universal favour¬ ite, and in their regard and favour she felt happy. Eleanor was also greatly attached to het young friends, with whom she was per¬ mitted to associate; nor was a single in^ dulgence bestowed by lady Glendinning
on her own 1 children in. which Eleanor did not partake; and her ladyship truly fulfilled the trust reposed higher, in regard to the morals and education *of her prote* gee; she indeed.appeared to evince a de¬ termination to convince the world how much pains' she bestowed in the welfare of the unknown Eleanor, while lord Ar¬ thur plainly shewed how much satisfac¬ tion he took in her improvement; nor did he regard even his*own children with more- affection and delight; the little Frances had ever been a great favourite with her father—long sufferings and patient for¬ bearance had endeared her to every one,! and it was with feelings of the acutest na-' ture that lord Arthur beheld her consigned to the tomb. Ever since her decease a melancholy appeared to pervade his mind, from which nothing had power to rouse him but the kind attentions of Eleanor; frequently did.he wander to the church of St. Mi¬ chael's, and proceeding to the spot where the little Frances had beeri interred, he
would often indulge in his meditations. It was one evening ,that, in the exercise of his favourite custom, he entered the sacred building, and proceeding down the vaulted aisle, reached the silent tomb of liis daughter; the evening was far ad¬ vanced, and the moon, rising in majestic splendour, darted her chaste beams through the Gothic windows of jthe church; the scene was at once solemn and consonant to the mind of lord Arthur, who, folding his arms, stood for some, time in the atti¬ tude of deep thought; the striking ele¬ gance of his person, and the visible traits of gaiety which his features had evidently once..exhibited, formed a contrast to his now sad and melancholy demeanour.— With an eye moistened by a tear of affec¬ tion, lord Arthur bent over,the marble urn which was erected, and with parental love perused the inscription; he then took a book jfrom,his pocket, and recollecting a beautiful passage from a poem by Rogers, as peculiarly applicable to his feelings, he r^ad ( alpu4 the following liues^-r- VOL. i. E
"At length the father, vain his power to snve, Follows his child in silence to the grave— That child how cherish'd ! whom he would not give, Sleeping the sleep of death, for tdl that live — - Takes ti lust look, when not unheard the spade v Scatters the earth, as * dust to dust* is said— Takes a last look, and goes; his best relief, Consoling others in that hour of grief; And with sweet tears and gentle words infusing T , The holy calm that leads to heave-dy musing." At the conclusion of this sentence lord Arthur paused; a sweet and religious awe appeared to steal over his frame; he re¬ flected on the alteration a few years had made in his own disposition—he who had in youth been one of nature's gayest vota¬ ries, was now become, through private sorrows, which were confined within his own bosom, a melancholy personification -of grief. A deep-drawn sigh burst from his lips, as he again leant over the tomb: iit was immediately answered. Lord Ar¬ thur, in violent agitation, started up: no one was to be seen, or a sound to be heardj yet he was convinced the sigh was re -sponded. He listened with silent appre* hension, but all remaining quiet, he en-
deavoured to persuade himself that it must only have been the wind murmuring through the vaulted aisle. His thoughts reverted to the morning of his ma-riage, when all had been alarmed by the piercing scream which had broke upon their ears, tlie cause of which had never been ascer¬ tained.—" Strange spot of mystery!" lie involuntarily exclaimed, " how forcibly does the recollection of that hour dwell upon my memory! Oh, fatal day! oh, inauspicious union!—Could I but recall the past actions of my life!—Oh I if I had been but permitted to make restitution to that injured form, what a weight of grief would have been removed from this guilty bosom! Dear sainted shade!" he conti¬ nued, sinking on his knee, " if thou couldst witness the contrition of this heart, thou wouldst at least own that some atonement had been made for thy wrongs—thou wouldst evert pity thy cruel destroyer." He paused, as a convulsive sob of agony burst from the lips of some hidden form. Lord, Arthur arose, and trembling with f %
horror, demanded, in faltering accents, who thus participated in his grief? No answer was returned him, and in great apprehension of who might have heard his unguarded expressions he remained for some moments. The shiides of night were fast taking place, and lord Arthur felt a superetitious fear assail him, which he in vain endea¬ voured to shake off; the solemnity of the .scene, the tomb of his child—all conspired to render it awfully terrific Ashamed of his own weakness, lord Arthur determined ^to 1 leave the place, ^vhen a voice, with great solemnity, pronounced the name of « Arthur!" His lordship, 1 with sensations of frenzy, turned from whence the sound proceeded; J but who'can describe his horror on be¬ holding J a figure retreating behind his ^daughter's tomb ? Her form was' enve¬ loped in sable garments, and'along black veil was partially-thrown over her face. -Lord Arthur uttered'a groan* of horror— i«*' Merciful Heaven 1" ho cried, ^ do* my
senses deceive me? Thai form-:-----Oh! speak to me, and say it is not delusion." The figure waved its arms in-silence, and slowly retreated. A mist seemed to overpower the sight of lord Arthur; he staggered a few paces — his head grew giddy—he paused; when again casting a fearful look, he found the figure had-va T nished, and he was alone, His feelings were roused f almost to madness; he rushed vehemently down the aisle, he searched every aperture, but nothing was to bo seen or heard; and after remaining for nearly an hour in fruitless search, he re¬ turned to the castle. Lady Glendinning was out at a party, and lord Arthur proceeded to the drawing- room, where Eleanor was seated alone* The wildness of his air, the disorder of his dress, and, above all, the agony of his fea¬ tures, attracted the attention of Eleanor, who, in a voice of kind alarm, inquired if he was not well. .Lord Arthur threw himself on achair, aiid seizing her hand, gazed on herwith.a
look of horror that terrified the affrighted Eleanor.—" You are ill, my lord," sl^e cried; " permit me to get' you. some ad¬ vice, or at least inform me of the nature of your complaint." " " Tis here, Eleanor," he replied, violent¬ ly striking his breast—? 'tis in my heart, in my head, in my very soul; my brain's on fire." " Pray, my lord, compose yourself," in¬ terrupted Eleanor; " you terrify me." " Terrify youT exclaimed lord Arthur; " talk not you of terror, 'tis I alone who have witnessed cause for terror; for, oh, Eleanor! I have seen thy------" He stopped short, and leaning his head upon her - shoulder, actually burst into tears. This in some measure relieved him, while Eleanor repeatedly inquired what he had seen ? Lord Arthur recollecting his folly, ndw endeavoured to persuade her it was only the disorder of his spirits, which had been depressed by remaining too long at his daughter's tomb, and charged her, upon
,- \ J the forfeit of his favour, never to disclose to any one his wild expressions, or ever again to question him on "the subject. Eleanor promised to comply with his wishes, and lord Arthur enforcing it on her mind, i^tired to his chamber for the night, while Eleanor remained alone, ru¬ minating in silent wonder and horror at the agony evinced:by lord Arthur. :i , _ \
1 'AnU'tnelniicliolymarUdhim for her"own. G'b'aV. The preceding- circumstance hadmade so deep an impression on the mind of lord Arthur, and so completely disordered his nerves, that a severe fit of illness succeed¬ ed. Lady Glendinning, in ignorance of the state of mind in which lord Arthur had returned home, supposed it only to be the effects of n fever incidental to the human frame; not so Eleanor, who was convinced that his lordship's indisposition arose from no common cause, though she dared not to reveal her secret opinion to any; his incoherent sentence of—" Oh, Eleanor! I have seen thy------" still vi¬ brated on her ear, and raised a powerful sensation in her mind. He hud owned he had been at the tomb of Frances, but how
could that apply as relative to her? Fran¬ ces was the name of her supposed mother, who likewise, as it was believed, rested also in peace; had she broken through the confines of the grave, and revealed herself to lord Arthur ? This idea Eleanor instantly banished, as too weak and super¬ stitious to be for a moment encouraged; yet the effect was such that she deter¬ mined, on the first opportunity, to visit the tomb alone, and at least endeavour to find out the recent cause of lord Arthur's alarm. His lingering illness, however, made it impossible to effect her wish, as she was his constant companion and, nurse while on the bed of sickness. On the first of his confinement lady Glendinning had constantly attended in his chamber; she listened with wonder and horror at the many wild and incohe¬ rent sentences uttered by him in the height of his delirium, which always in* creased in the presence of the earl, who> frequently visited him; lord Arthur always i F 3
addressed him with upbraidings, accusing him of forcing him into a marriage he ab¬ horred. These sentences were not lost up¬ on lady Glendinning, who heard them with sensations of agony and disappointed pride; still she remained his kind attend¬ ant, until one night, having declared her intention of remaining by his side during the whole of the night, lord Arthur vio¬ lently started up, declaring lie would have no one but Eleanor with him. This asser¬ tion was enough for lady Glendinning; she quitted the room, and hastening to her own, she burst into tears: the proud spirit of her ladyship was at length sub¬ dued, and for a while she indulged in the weakness of her sex; but again her pride returning to her aid, she recovered herself, and from that moment gdve a new turn to her feelings, and in a short time lady Glen¬ dinning appeared quite an altered woman —her ladyship sought in the vortex of dissipation for that pleasure which her ©wn domestic ills prevented her from en¬ joying.
Lord Arthur continued long on the bed of sickness, during which time t Eleanor was his constant companion; nor did he appear to taste any happiness but in her society., Lady Glendinning seldom now visited him; she daily made inquiries as to the state of his health, but never made a second proposition of remaining by his side, while lord Arthur appeared perfectly contented with her absence. His daughter Georgina was of too giddy a tender to allow her to be an inmate in a ock room, and with her mother she flew lo scenes of dissipation, to which she was e^rly intro¬ duced. Robert Glendinning, with unremitting assiduity,, attended on his father, and sit¬ ting by the side of Eleanor, exerted his efforts to amuse. Every action, every word of Eleanor's, appeared to convey pleasure to both father and son. Robert, verging, fast into manhood, and only a year younger than Eleanor, beheld this lovely object with eyes of affection; his heart was formed in nature's softest mould,,
eleaStorv' tb- wrnih'liie^^ctrfefi;i refinement 6f temper wfii^A l ^eyite.n'eai , ala's !• to plunge' hini in> to miiny "ef ifs ; . MeMoi: loved him 1 : with - trieafTectibii of c. sister/ and uhdonscioiis of. the' faM; pasaioii which was rising' iri the bpso]^ Gf Kobeffc, sYie' bestowed on liini' the most 'Every' marks of her regard'. The sick- iSaKiber Of lord Affhur had beeri.the nursery of love, for Robert had been a' close rtttendant there, because' ; Efe a^hor >vas its. inmate* Lord Arthur at IehglJi rsc'overed from his ilmesS;' bi>t how-' differeTpit wa's iiow liis appearance! I-Iic spints were absorbed in a deep. melancho^, from which no efforts could arouse hini, arid no one would have believed the once gay - aiid elegant idrd Arthur to be the same emaeiatdd arid p* hsive; misarithrbp'e. Eleanor s"aw with pain the fatal change in Ker beloved behe^ factor;: she was fully aware* that a secret pang assailed his bosorii, but all her efforts tb gaih a'Hy knowledge of the c^iise wes'e iherle'ctual, as he carefully avoided revert¬ ing to trie higlit of his •visit tb the tomb
of Frances. Eleanor still sighed for ans opportunity to repair to it herself, but her close attendance on lord Arthur prevented her; uor was it until some months after his- illness that an opportunity offered itself.^ It was now in the height of summer, and Eleanor, with Robert, had drawn lord Arthur to the Window, in order to breathe the fresh air; the evening wds lovely and serene, and calculated to inspire the bo¬ soms Of this susceptible trio with the most exquisite sensations. Lord Arthur fixed his eyeS on Eleanor, and viewed her at¬ tentively; and at length remarked that she had lost some of the native bloom of her cheek, and tenderly inquired if she Were riot well? She replied in the affir¬ mative, While Robert suggested the pro* bability of her long confinement having hurt her health, by having been deprived of her accustomed exercise. Lord Arthur coincided in this opinion, and begged her to take advantage of the present time, by taking a short ramble in the grounds. Robert instantly offered toustompany
her;-but Eleanor wishing to be alone,, begged him to remain with his father, who would doubtless find himself dull without a companion. Robert turned an anxious eye upon his- father, who, con¬ trary to his expectation, and to his great chagrin, requested him to remain with him. Eleanor therefore departed alone. This was the moment for which she so* long had sighed;, and with a quick step, and a heart beating with apprehension, she entered at a private door to the church of St Michael's. Though possessing a heart naturally courageous and firm, she could not divest herself of a secret dread which assailed her. With a slow and si¬ lent step she proceeded down the^aisle which contained the tomb; she stopped,, as she thought she heard a human^voice;, a trembling seized her frame, and she leaned for aid against a huge pillar which supported, the massy structure; she scarce¬ ly allowed herself to breathe,, lest she should discover herself to the cause of her alarnr juira&in an instant she heard a voice
in pathetic wildness sing the following verse of Queen Mary's Lamentation*:— <• I si»h and lament me in vain, ' ' " ' T ' These walls do but echo my moan; ,; Alas! it increases my pain, - , , When I think on the days that are gone." Eleanor was almost transfixed to the spot with surprise; yet recovering herself,, she resolved to approach the tomb, from x whence it was evident the sound proceed¬ ed. With cautious steps she approached, and beheld a figure leaning over the tomb; its hand was extended towards the top of the marble.' Eleanor gave a faint shriek; the figure wrapped its veil closely over its face, and instantly disappeared.. "Oh stay, thou fleeting vision!" cried Eleanor—" Oh! in pity to my feelings, reveal this mystery—say what art thou, and why dost thou wander over this con¬ secrated spot ?" " 'Tis a fond mother lamenting over the bitterness of her fate, in being torn from her child—from her beloved offspring," replied a hollow voice..
1 " : Aniazement!" ejaculated' Eleanor. Could it be lady Glendinning mourning over the tomb of her child ? was her first idea; but the voice, she was convinced, was not her ladyship's. She now advanced to the tomb, and beheld a paper lying on the top; a faded rose was placed on it, to which were affixed the following lines:—
« THE ROSE. Addressed to Lord Arthur. M In the sunshine of youth, when henrt's-ease was mine, And my breast was, attun'd to repose, I cull'd a bouquet of sweet eglantine, But my garden produe'd not a rose. I sigh'd for a rose. «' My nosegay I view'd with delight and with pain, Such sweets did its fragrance disclose; « How perfect!' I cried, ' could 1 but obtain Tiie odoriferous scent of the rose ! It wants but the rose.' K Not long did I sigh ; iny lament was o'eiheard; For, ah ! the truth I iiow must disclose; Tlie youth that I lov'd before me appear'd, And bore in his hand a fresh rose; Yes, 'twas ,the sweet rose.
«Tinsflowefi'-he'excTaimM, 1 ^ a short 'ti'trie will flourish^-v . .How sweet is thescerttitbestbws! /. ;-J | ;: ;'. _- : [ In thy bosom then place it, and love with it nourish; For I love thee, I swear by this'rosei' I-sighM as he^ave'iric 1 tbe roSeU "1'he roise^preser'v'd with affection and'care^- Sad'emblem'of sorr'6\v"ancl wbes! Ah! : why did I smile on' the cruel betfayer,; ^ . , ; > Who stungras he gave mc .the. rose.? His truth'wTtHeVdTast with' the"rosev " Yet still I have given it a place in my breast; I have watch'd the decay of' its blobni; Tis an emblem of love which once thou profess'd,' But now'tis consign'd to the tomb, ; . And faded, alas!' is the rose. «' Then weep o'er-thy child, weep oyer this ilower. And weep in rcniorse o'er my woes"; Oh!' thiitkl oh the time} reflect on:tlie hbur,'i When thou gav'st-me-a tlio'rn- with the-rose-: * ■ r Ah! remember the rose." To describe the'surprise of ElVariOr,- oh the perusal' of the above lines, is ; impot£ sible, and: she remained with 1 them ; in her hand, doubtful hb# to proceed j w'H'eh : the' sarhe hollow' vbice again exclaimed-- ""Eleanor, bediscreet^-bei silertt; the time shall come when thou shalt know more;
be thine the task to convey that scroll to lord Arthur. Farewell, sweet girl! we shall meet again." Eleanor sav/ a form flit along the vault¬ ed arch, and vanish at the farther end; she almost doubted the whole scene, and thought it the effects of illusion; but the paper and the faded rose which she held in her hand convinced her of its reality, and she resolved to convey them to lord Arthur. With feelings of the keenest nature she slowly left the church; the mysterious figure occupied the whole of her thoughts, she appeared uncommonly interested in her fate, and would have given worlds, had she possessed them, to have elucidated this mystery. Doubtless it was this same form that had so alarmed lord Arthur. She again thought on his strange excla¬ mation towards herself. Was it possible this awful figure had any connexion with herself? could it be tlie lost lady Frances? This was a doubt which Eleanor could not answer, and lier senses were so disordered
that she could hardly think it was an earthly being she had seen. '"- ' ' In a perturbed state of mind she reached the castle; she dreaded the task she had to perform, in presenting to lord-Arthur the paper containing the rose. He was preparing to retire for the night, and on her return, after inquiring if her walk had benefited her, he bid her adieu, and re¬ paired to his chamber. Eleanor had not the courage to speak on her mission that nigh'c, and therefore wishing him a farewell, withdrew to the drawing-room. Lady Glendinning and her daughter were, as usual, both out, and she sat herself down to ruminate on her strange adventure, when Robert entered the room, and taking her hand, tenderly inquired how she found herself, and ex¬ pressed his regret at not having been able to accompany her in her walk, which, he added, would have given him such plea¬ sure. " You had a greater pleasure afforded you than that," replied Eleanor; "for you
had thesweet task of affording amusement to a parent." ..;■ , tc True," cried Robert; " yet, believe rae, 1 my dear Eleanor, nothing, can give mefsuchffelicity as being in>your society*. such pleasure* it is to be with those we loveL!' He' 1 gazed? tenderly on her, with a look so f full of expression that; Eleanor could not but understand him; she felt dis¬ tressed' and 1 confused, and endeavouring tO' turn the conversation, she pleaded^ a Violent headache as an excuse for retiring to her own room; while Robert, with un¬ feigned^ arixiety^ expressed his fears for her health; and^ pressing her hand between his own, tenderly wished her a-good-night
CHAPTER IX.
*' Thue was a time," he said, in niild Henrt-humblcd toucb, " beloved child, i , When young, and haply,pure as thou, I look'd and pray'd like thee; but now------" He hung liis head; each nobler aim, And hope, mid feeljug, vyhich had slept Tiom boyhood's hour, that instant came Iresh o'er him, and he wept—ho wept. •iLalla Rookh. The next morning Eleanor, with a.pal¬ pitating heart, repaired-to the chamber of lord Arthur, :>s was herusual'icustom,'in order to inquire »into the .state, of his health; ske found him<absorbed,, as usual, in melancholy contemplations, from which her presence *only aroused * him. f -Ke-cast a pensive ^mileoniher—■a-smilesoJexpres- •sive-of tenderness, that it deeply affectdd her. Conscious of the nature- of 'her* mis¬ sion to'hinvshevfeltso^extremely agitated
tYiat her voice trembled as she addressed him. He saw her visible emotion, and taking her hand, tenderly inquired the cause- Eleanor still hesitated—she knew not now to address him; when his lord¬ ship again demanded the reason of her evident agitation. " I am agitated, I own, my lord," she at length falteringly replied, " because I have to speak to your lordship on a sub¬ ject which will, I fear, give you pain; it is the conviction of this that renders me thus weak, and almost unable to proceed." " You surprise me, Eleanor, by this preface," cried lord Arthur; " what can you have to impart > to me, that should cause so much emotion ? But, be it what it will, speak freely; I am well attuned to misery; therefore, should you give me ever such pain in your communication, fear me not; I will hear all; you cannot wound a heart already probed with wounds keener than you can give. Speak on then without fear." " It is the conviction of your lord-
ship's mental sufferings," returned Eleanor, " which makes me thus hesitate to inflict a pang on your mind; yet, Heaven knows, I am made a reluctant messenger to you; but I dare not disobey commands given to me in so awful a manner." " What is it you mean?" interrupted lord Arthur; " speak, I say, and keep me no longer in suspense." Eleanor bowed her head, and proceeded —" I last night, my lord, paid a visit to ihe spot which has claims to me in the cause of affection and regret; it was to the tomb of our lamented Frances." " To the tomb of Frances!" reiterated lord Arthur, while his whole frame under¬ went a total change. " Ah! then," he continued, " I see the cause of your fatal preface; you are now aware, I suppose, of all—Yet, what am I saying ? Go on; tell me instantly all I have to hear." Eleanor, terrified at his violence, related, in trembling accents, the particulars of the mysterious form, and concluded by pre¬ senting the rose and the paper to lord
Arthur. He snatched them from her hand, and in extreme agitation read the verses, on the conclusion of whjch he threw him- . self op a chair, and clasping the rose in his , hands, exclaimed—" Too well I remember thee, thou pledge of ill-fated love! 0\\, rEleanor! .Eleanor!" he continued, " why ,hast thou inflicted such u torture as this on my already-shaken frame ?" ^"Indeed, my lord," cried Eleanor, "I .would not willingly have added a ,pang to your sorrows; but how could I avoid obeying a mandate so awfully given ?" <4 I did not accuse you? .replied lord Arthur-^"il did not say you tortured me." " You repeated my,name,,my lord," she cried: •" I thought you addressed me." " True," 0 he cried,' "J did repeat your name. Oh, J$leanor!Jook on me well; I am, the veriest wretch in existence. Pre- pare to hear* wonders. That form which you last night.,saw,«and which I have so ,long .believed, numbered with the, dead, i( fWho^^niyMjpjrd?" demanded Eleanor,
as his lordship made a deep pause, and struck his forehead with his hand. She knew not why, but her own fate appeared; to hang upon his answer; her feelings were roused to agony, as she repeated her question of-—" Who, my lord ?" " Do not ask me, Eleanor," he replied; " why should I unfold to you the know¬ ledge of that which will make you hate me? A fatal secret weighs heavy npon iny mind, but I cannot yet divulge it; the time may come when I shall unfold it to your view. Eleanor," he added, af¬ fectionately pressing her hand, *' I think you love me. I have, I trust, fulfilled my duty by you. You possess my best affec¬ tions ; yes, child of mystery, when over¬ powered by painful reflections, 1 have looked on thee, and amidst the most agonizing sensations I have found com¬ fort in your smiles. I could not then bear to think you despised rae." His lordship paused; he struggled with his weakness, but nature uncontrolled vol. i. o .
overpowered him, and he actually burst into tears. Eleanor supported his head on her shoulder—lier own dewy drops mingled with his.—" Compose yourself, my lord," she cried; " could I be so un¬ grateful as to despise my benefactor, my friend, my more than father ?" Lord Arthur looked mournfully in her face—" How ill do I deserve that name!" he replied. " Eleanor, you no doubt think me a strange being; but if, as you assert, I have been kind to you, bear these my inconsistencies with patience; pity those sufferings at which you in secret wonder, and sooth my distracted state of mind when you see me oppressed beyond my .strength; but, above all, conceal from every eye the knowledge of that myste¬ rious form, and reveal to no one the cause ■of my misery; on your discretion I rely. And now I would request that you would desist from your visits to the fatal tomb; yet I- know not why I ask it, for nature 'will have.,-way; therefore use your own discretion, only promise me inviolable sc-
crecy to all you may see and know; assure me of this, and you are at liberty to act as you please." Eleanor sunk on her knees before him —" I solemnly promise to remain for ever silent on this subject," she cried; " ard should your lordship ever think me wor¬ thy of your confidence), I will repose it in the inmost recesses of my heart, till which time I will cheerfully exert my simple ef¬ forts to draw your mind from its wonted gloom. Command my actions, limit my loiiffue to vour own wishes—I will be all to you; for, oh, my lord! something at this moment pleads at my heart—I feel I am allied to you by some close tie. For¬ give my presumption; but you have ever given me reason to suppose I am the child of yourisister, your affectionate niece. Oh then refuse not the ebullitions of my heart, which overflows in gratitude and, love!" " My Eleanor!"my dearest child!" ex¬ claimed lord Arthur, as he clasped her iu his embrace. g 2
Eleanor was agitated to the extreme-^ she sobbed aloud, as the door opened, and lady Glendinning made her appearance; Lord Arthur hastily concealed the paper and the rose; Eleanor, in great confusion; arose from her knees, while lady Glendin¬ ning looked at each in silence. Lord Ar¬ thur walked up and down the room in evident dismay, when her ladyship, break¬ ing the silence, cried—" I was not aware your lordship was engaged, or that I should have intruded at such ah affectino; moment; I came, my lord, merely to speak to you on affairs.of consequence, little supposing that my visit would have proved so ill timed. Over your lordship's actions I pretend to have no concern; I have long since ceased to disturb you with my inquiries or solicitations; you j my lord, are therefore master of your own actions; but over you, Eleanor, I feel I have some authority. From the moment you were committed to my care^ it be¬ came my duty to watch over your actions; and I will do you the justice to say, your
conduct has been uniformly correct; but, in the present instance, I feel myself jus¬ tified in calling upon you for an explana¬ tion of a scene to which I have been an unintentional witness." ** Oh, madam," exclaimed Eleanor, " you have a right over every action and thought of mine—your kindness to a poor outcast orphan, like myself, demands my utmost gratitude and obedience; yet, in the pre¬ sent instance, I fear I shall lay myself open to your indignation, as I cannot ex¬ plain a scene no doubt much misjudged by your ladyship. Yet, oh think not too harshly of me! indeed, indeed it was re¬ flections of the most painful nature which reduced me to the situation in which your ladyship found me." The tears flowed so fast from the eyes of Eleanor that she could not proceed. Lord Arthur saw the agitation of her soul, he knew the real cause, and resolved to release her.—'* Eetire, Eleanor," he cried, " and compose yourself; I will ex*
plain all there is to explain to lady Glen¬ dinning." Glad of this permission, Eleanor turned a timid glance on her ladyship, and curt¬ seying respectfully, withdrew, while lord A* thur, turning to his lady, exclaimed— " You appear, madam, to have strangely misinterpreted this late scene, which had, on its commencement, the most pure and innocent intentions." " Your lordship is mistaken," replied lady Glendinning; " I have as yet put no constructions on your conduct, I only in¬ quired of Eleanor upon what sentiments she thus prostrated herself before yoiu Rut, my lord, you have dismissed her from my presence: it is evident you wish the inquiry avoided. You arc the best judge of your own conduct, and be as¬ sured, my lord, I will not stoop to a se¬ cond inquiry, nor will I endeavour to gain the confidence of any one who would not willingly and voluntarily repose it in me. I came, my lord, to speak on a subject of
importance respecting my daughter; but as your lordship appears not in a very fit state to give me the necessary attention which the subject demands, I wiil retire for the present, and await your leisure." ' " I will attend on your ladyship in the drawing-room," cried lord Arthur, " as soon as I leave my chamber, when I shall certainly give a willing hearing to all that concerns Georgina, or that your ladyship may think proper to unfold." Lady Glendinning bowed her head with an expression of haughtiness, and with¬ drew ; while lord Arthur, left to himself reflected in mental agony on the foregoing scene-—his feelings appeared roused to madness. The mysterious rose and lines were again viewed, and alternately pressed to his lips; too well he knew the fatal allusion contained in the verses—he alone understood their real meaning; and he remained best part of the morning in re¬ flecting over the mysterious transaction, until at length recollecting his promise to
lady Glendinning, he endeavoured to com¬ pose himself, in order to join her. The communication which her ladyship had to unfold to him, was that where the dignity of her family was concerned, and in which she was obeying the proud and lofty commands of lady Lenox, whose whole concern was that of keeping up the. ancient greatness of her house—her whole soul was .wrapped up in the idea of dig¬ nity; and as soon as the two heirs of Glendinning were verging into years of maturity, she began to reflect in her own mind who would be proper objects fop them in a matrimonial alliance. She had already frequently consulted lady Glen¬ dinning on the subject, who, though anxi¬ ous to see the dignity of her noble house still supported by her descendants, had not as yet troubled herself with these thoughts, alleging the youth of her son and/daughter as a reason, who had not, she believed, yet formed any attachment of the heart.
ELEANOR. " It was* for this very reason, lady Lenox replied, that proper means should be taken in order to direct them to pursue a right path, before any foolish prepossession might arise in favour of any one below them. For Robert, she proceeded to say, she had not found any object yet on whom he might bestow his hand ancl for¬ tune ; but for Georgina she had such pro¬ posals offered to her acceptance as could not be rejected by any of her family. Amongst the few whom the aspiring soul of lady Lenox had condescended to; rank among the number of her friends, was lady Cecilia Gray, a maiden lady, whose similarity of disposition hacl gained' her a place in the esteem of lady Lenox: both were tenacious of their family ho¬ nours and pride, and considered all below them in rank as too inferior to issociatcr with. Lady Cecilia resided with her bro¬ ther, on a beautiful estate in Scotland..' The right honourable the marquis of B, ------was many years younger than his,
sister, and at an early period having had the misfortune to lose an amiable wife, he had invited lady Cecilia to become'his in¬ mate, to which she had readily consented. The marquis had one offspring, a lovely boy, who was the darling of his heart, as likewise the delight of his aunt, who watched with unremitting zeal over his youthful years: nor were her care and at¬ tention ill bestowed; the young lord Montalban had, from his childhood, dis¬ played a disposition adorned with every virtue that could grace his sex; his heart was open, generous, and sincere, while his mind was attuned to sensibility and soft¬ ness, vet possessing the utmost cheerful¬ ness and gaiety of temper. His person was a counterpart of his good qualities, and in his sparkling black eyes you might read the vivacity of his soul; he was in¬ deed a true pupil of Lavater, as his coun¬ tenance was a real index of his mind. Such was lord IMontalban as he advanced into manhood—free from all the vices and follies of some of our young men of fa-
shion, as to his natural gaiety of disposi¬ tion he added the gems of wisdom and discretion. The marquis and lady Cecilia liad only parted with him for a short period, for the improvement of his studies; but as he was now approaching his one-and-twen- tieth year, the marquis had sent to the university at which he was, to desire his return home; and' lord Montalban was quickly expected in Scotland. Lady Cecilia, whose whole hopes were centered in her darling nephew, whom' she had declared the heir to her vast pos¬ sessions, had set her mind to work in or¬ der to find out an alliance worthy his" acceptance; and this in confidence she* mentioned to her friend lady Lenox, who immediately suggested the idea of her 1 granddaughter becoming lady Montalban, as their fortunes and high rank in life were every way so suitable. Lady Cecilia was delighted with the proposal; lady Lenox, she considered, was the daughter' of a duke, and her descendants were con-
sequently of great importance; and the two young, people were therefore in a manner betrothed together by these ambi¬ tious matchmakers, who never considered unity of hearts as being of any conse-- quence. Lady Lenox undertook to gain the acquiescence of her family, while lady Cecilia hinted she possessed too much power over the marquis and his son to fear any objection on their part. The ladies, therefore, mutually pleased with the prospect of their high alliance, parted; and lady Lenox took an early opportunity of informing lady Glendin¬ ning and her daughter of the proposed union. Lady Glendinning, whose own heart was ever alive to the dignity of hev. family, approved of the alliance, wliile the. giddy Georgina, unacquainted with any of those soft and exquisite sensations so. necessary to render the marriage state happy, only declared her delight at hav¬ ing so elegant a young lord as he was de¬ scribed to be, in her train. , Lady Lenox expressed her approbation...
at her granddaughter's conduct, and de¬ clared nothing now should prevent the match, as she was certain that lord Mont¬ alban would be sensible of the honour con¬ ferred on him in receiving the hand of a descendant of the house of Lenox. -It was in consequence of the above in¬ formation that lady Glendinning paid her mala-propos visit to lord Arthur, to ac¬ quaint him with the proposals made for his daughter; and on his lordship joining her in the drawing-room, she repeated them to him. Lord Arthur, whose whole mind was occupied on other subjects, heard it with indifference, and merely replied, that of course he should ever feel anxious for the welfare of Georgina, nor could he object to such an alliance; he theieforc left it entirely to her ladyship to use her own discretion, as, for his own part, he added, he had long ceased to set any value on grandeur and ambition, since they were both so totally unconnected with real hap¬ piness.
" True, my lord," "replied her ladyship; w I' coincide in your opinion; I have for some years now found their fallacy. Yet though my own once-brilliant prospects were early blighted, still >my children's aggrandizements are dear to my soul, and I look forward with hope to that time when the heirs of Glendinning shall shine forth with that dignity with which their mother was once possessed; and oh may their virtues, as well as their high descent, grace the proud and ancient houses of Lenox and Glendinning!"
> 3 <> ! I ' " i < y ) ' " v . ' )/ '. ..'. * ^ CHAPTERS. - Delightful task! to rear the infiii.t mind, '- And teach the young idea how to shoot. Thomson*.
An habitation, giddy and unsure, Until he that buildetll on the "Vulgar hcait.' Shakespeare. Eleanor had retired to her own room, glad of the permission given her by lord- Arthur to quit a scene in which she had made so awkward a figure; and she almost dreaded to meet the penetrating glance of lady Glendinning, who she w'as fearful- might misconstrue her behaviour' to lord Arthur; and, should her ladyship again question her on the subject, she knew not how to answer her, as she had promised lord Arthur to bury the fatal cause of their mutual embarrassment in her own bosom;
and she was resolved, let what would be the consequence, never to betray him. She reflected on the strange events which had transpired at the tomb, and could not divest herself of the idea that she was in some way connected with the mysterious female. A vague idea crossed her mind that it was lady Frances; she was then doubtless her mother: her heart beat at this surmise. Had she then been in the presence of a parent ? " If so," she men¬ tally exclaimed, " why does my mother fly from her child ? oh! why docs she not bless her EleaUor with a maternal em* brace?" Again she checked the wildness of her thoughts. The language of the verses crossed her recollection; were they such as a sister would address to lord Ar¬ thur? Too surely riot—it was the^ com¬ plaint of slighted'love; and oni the per¬ usal of it lord Arthur had evinced, by his. agitation, that he had rightly ^understood^ their hidden meaning. Eleanor therefore' dropped the idea her imagination had led her to form, and <sighed, as she reflected;
she could Hot fix her wandering thoughts- in a right channel. She continued in her own room the re¬ mainder of the morning, dreading the hour of dinner, when that would bring her to the presence of lady Glendinning: her fears on that head, however, proved groundless, as that lady took no farther notice of what had passed, but behaved towards her with her usual demeanour. Eleanor also found herself somewhat re¬ lieved by* finding a family party present^ consisting of earl Campbell, lord and lady Lenox, and Charles., - Lord Arthur had' previously promised to^make his first appearance,' since his ill¬ ness, in the dining-parlour, and the'above party had agreed to meet him, iu order to offer their congratulations on his recovery. Lord Arthur was compelled to make his appearance,, but the incident of the morn¬ ing had' again so shaken his nerves, that he could scarcely support himself at table," Eleanor .beheld. the agitation of his mind,, and his abstracted manners and de^
meanour, with silent wonder; his melan¬ choly communicated itself to fhoiy and in silence she continued during the meal. It was* true, Robert, who was by her side, attentively watched her, and endeavoured to draW'her into conversation, as by all the rest she was unnoticed and disregard¬ ed, Charles Lenox excepted, who ever be¬ haved towards her with the utmost kind¬ ness. The conversation chiefly ran on the ex¬ pected return of lord Montalban;- and Georgina, laughing violently at the praise bestowed on him by lady Lenox, declared she longed 'to see such a paragon as he was described to be; and added, he 'must indeed be all perfection, or she should be greatly disappointed. * ' ■ " I have no fears of that kind," replied lady Lenox; ** my friend, lady Cecilia, speaks of him in the t highest terms. ,»I have not seen hmv since he was a boy, but he then promisedto be )anv ornament to his noble house;' and I assure you, Georgina, I cannot give hihva higher
proof of rny approbation, than by consent¬ ing to his alliance; with a descendant of mine; and I expect, when you are intro¬ duced to him, you will receive him with the, dignity, due to your family;" ; ■-,■■, ; s e " Oh never fear me, gmndmammai'- she replied; *' I will summon up all: the pride of your ancient house into <my coun¬ tenance, which ishall serve as.a memento mori, to remind him that I am the great granddaughter of a dukej and consequent¬ ly not . to.' bei approached without all due respect."; ■ - .'■/■■•fci :-.:'.-■.• W.i.\i : '.'? ; Lord Arthur, who had hitherto kept a profound silence.during N the above 'disser-. tation, now first broke it^? by replying Ito his daughter's giddyjspeech;-r-;" I should hope, Georgina;" he ; criedj^.if;you?per ? ceive lord Montalban is reaily the amiable character which,he is described to be, you will receive him: with that modest dignity so pleasing?in a female.: Trust me,;Geor¬ gina, pride,-though sometimes a necessary evily;will never captivate /a man of sense; i^: you wisk forvhappinessi ? thereforeiid"
the married state, banish all traits of that unamiable quality from your bosom; the woman who treats her lover with haugh¬ tiness, will find that he, when transformed into a husband, will r resent the indignity offered to his understanding."' He turned his eyes on lady Glendin¬ ning, who fully understood his allusion; she, 'however^ remained silent on the sub* ject, while earl Campbell, with his usual policy, gave a turn to the conversation, fearing lest any unpleasant- discussions should take place. - On dinner being ended, it was with some difficulty that lord-Arthur was pre¬ vailed on to remain with the gentlemen, as his mind was in a state of distraction; and the earl was convinced that some pri¬ vate cause of'sbrrow dwelt in his son's bo¬ som, though of what nature he knewnot; he was aware that' his union with lady Glendinning had not'contributed" to his happiness, still lie saw no cause why he should so evidently v give himself' Up to melancholy; unless he had indeed some-
private source of uneasiness; this lie could not ascertain; he was therefore compelled ta~confine his ideavS to his bosomi and he endeavoured, though in vain, to arouse his son from his dejection—lord Arthur remained silent and abstracted; it was true, he was profuse in drinking glad ac¬ knowledgments to, his wine^ and with which he kept supplying .his guests, but it was plain he endeavoured to drown his own thoughts in the glass. The ladies, on retiring to the drawing- room, had entered into their own conver¬ sation,- in which Eleanor had no interest; indeed, in the presence of lady Lenox, she always felt restrained; lady Glendin¬ ning always paid great attention to her mother, and the subject of their discourse again being lord Montalban, Eleanor had ho share m it J She stood for some time at 'the .window, contemplating -on, the beauty of the evenings and reflecting how much slie had, of late, been deprived of en¬ joying her ^favourite exercise in visiting tlie neighbouring village, which.place,was
the seat" of her bounty; from her earliest childhood she had sought out the poor, who by her hand had been relieved from many distresses; and as reason had guided her iri her charitable purposes, it had prompted her to an act which had already benefited many a child of poverty. ' Ele* anor had observed the number of children, who,, through the poverty aud careless¬ ness, of their parents, were brought up in a total state of ignorance, unacquainted with the least rudiments of education, or, what wat, still worse, without the least sense of religion; a plan, therefore, en¬ tered her 'head * to save her little fellow- creatures from this distressing fate, and she had quickly communicated her inten¬ tions to-lord Arthur and his lady, who had both applauded i her generous motive. Her proposals were, to arrange a school for their daily instruction, and at'her own expence to provide able assistants to teach her little flock, who were likev/ise to meet every ; Suiiday to attend on divine 1 service. Lord Arthur had always liberally 'supplied
her with money, and the generous heart of Eleanor felt no pleasure equal to that of appropriating it to the use of the poor; lord Arthur had also given her a large house in the village for her benevolent purpose, and here, under the guidance of a proper governess, had Eleanor beheld many a child of ignorance trained up in the paths of religion and instruction. Lady Glendinning had also contributed her year¬ ly subscription ,to this institution,i and it was carried on in a .flourishing state. Eleanor used daily to repair to the schoolhouse, and, inquiring into the me¬ rits of her infant train, reward them ac¬ cording to, their deserts; it afforded a sweet gratification, to her heart to see a number of youthful countenances beam¬ ing on her with delight, while their pa¬ rents, as she passed along the village, would t bless their patroness, and hail her a* their guardian angel. Of this pleasure Eleanor had, of la^e been deprived—her long and close attendance on lord Arthur
had prevented her from her visits to the schoolhouse; but this present evening ap¬ peared to be a renewed opportunity; her presence, she saw, could be easily dis- pensed with; she therefore turned to kdy Glendinning, and expressed her wishes to that effect. " Certainly, Eleanor," replied her lady¬ ship; " I never wish to prevent your cha¬ ritable intentions; therefore bring me word how your young flock improves, and any comfort I can procure them shall not he withheld." Eleanor gratefully courtseyed, and with¬ drew; and tying on her hat, proceeded to¬ wards the village. On her first setting out, the church of St. Michael's had crossed her ideas; she almost felt tempted again to enter it; she paused. Should she en¬ counter any fresh horrors, it would only prove a source of fresh misery to lord Arthur; and why should she wish to tor¬ ture his already-harassed mind ? She was tlierefore resolved for that night to avoid
it, and she bent her course towards the village, which was nearly the distance of a mile from the castle. On arriving at the place of her bounty, her approach was witnessed with pleasure;. old and young welcomed her with un¬ feigned delight and gratitude. She re¬ ceived their honest praise, with that mo¬ desty, with that sweetness which so dis¬ tinguished her, and hastened her steps to the schoolhouse, where she found her little nock assembled; their daily tasks were over, and, under the care of their kind mistress, they were indulging in their childish sports. On the entrance of Ele¬ anor, each little heart evinced its joy at her appearance, and all crowded round to display some marks of,their industry. Eleanor applauded their zeal, and turning to their governess, made her inquiries as to their proceedings during her long ab¬ sence. A very good account was rendered to her of their industry,. and Eleanor de¬ clared they should be rewarded for their VOL. I. H
application, and proposed a treat for their good behaviour; it was nearly the third anniversary of her charitable institution, and she signified her intention of giving them on that day a little festival, and in the evening a dance on the green, at which she would herself attend; and de¬ sired that all the young people of tho vil¬ lage would assemble, while the aged should be made comfortable within their own dwellings. This proposal was received with. rapture, and all promised to deserve the intended treat. '* I assure you, madam," cried their go¬ verness, " my little flock is highly fa¬ voured by all around; for, during your absence, we have also had a most charm¬ ing lady frequently to visit them, who has bestowed marks of her favour, by pre¬ senting them with trifling but useful gifts." . ..; : '«.Indeed l'\ replied Eleanor; " and who is this kind visitor?" . "There lies the wonder, madam," re¬ turned the governess; " no one knows
who she is, nor does she reveal herself. She appears, I think, greatly dejected, but a more lovely figure I never beheld, and she is a welcome visitor to our school; but who she is, or what she is, I cannot tell, and there appears such a sort of me¬ lancholy tenderness in her behaviour, as forbids all attempts at rude inquiries. I have been tokl she lives in this village, but it is in so retired a way, that no one knows any thing of her. On her first coming here, she inquired into this insti¬ tution, and expressed her regret that her means would not permit her to add to their stores. I informed her of the bounty of lord and lady Glendinning, and of your liberality, who had first raised the idea. I thought she appeared much agitated as she cried—' Heaven will bless the virtuous Eleanor; she wiil find her reward.' I co¬ incided in her opinion, and she soon after withdrew; since which time she has occa¬ sionally repeated her visits." Eleanor expressed her surprise at this H 2
Strange account, but desired that no idle curiosity should prompt any of them to inquire into her private sorrows, which were, and ought to remain, sacred to her own bosom. She then, telling them all to prepare for the approaching treat, and giving a sum of money for all to appear in a neat new frock, departed, amidst the blessings of the objects of her bounty. As she had been absent some time from the castle, she now hastened her steps, as she was aware that the tea-table would be waiting her presence. She was crossing the high road, in order to turn down a lane which led to the sequestered spot of St, Michael's, when her ears were assailed by violent screams, which were repeated with such rapidity, that Eleanor remained for a minute terrorstruck; yet recovering her alarm, the idea of some accident hav¬ ing happened to a fellow-creature passed her mind, and she instantly returned to the road, and at a little distance beheld a postchaise broken down, from whence it was evident the screams proceeded. Ele-
anor quickly advanced; no one was near save herself, it being a retired part of the road, and no habitation nearer than the castle: as she approached, she saw a dash¬ ing young man, who, between exclama¬ tions of pain, was violently swearing at the postboy for having such a shattered chaise, which, he said, he was sure could not again carry them on their journey. " Oh dear! oh dear!" cried a female voice, " what are we to do ? I am sure I shall be kitted? " Not so bad as that, my dear, neither,'* said the gentleman: " let me assist you out, and we must endeavour to find some abode till we can proceed." " If there's any where that's genteel,"* replied the lady, " I shall be very glad to go; but I know I slialldie" Eleanor now made her inquiries, and tendered her services, at the same time hoping they had met with no serious hurt. « Why no, ma'am," returned the gen¬ tleman—" only the fright, I believe—-ex¬ cepting slight bruise on my arm. But
I should be much obliged to you, if you could inform me of any habitation to which we can repair." i " Ah! do, Miss," cried the lady, who was now released from the broken vehicle —>' do tell us whether there is any place near that is at all genteel, for I can't en¬ dure to go amongst vulgar people," > Eleanor was almost ready to smile at this address, while the gentleman, in more polished language, repeated his inquiries, alleging that his arm grew seriously pain- " At a short distance, sir," replied Eleanor, '« stands the Castle,of St. Mi¬ chael's, at which place I reside; and I am sure lord Arthur Glendinning, its master, will willingly extend his hospitality to persons in distress. If you think tiie lady can walk there, I will conduct you." " Oh yes, Miss;" cried the lady, " I will walk to any where that's genteel; and to be sure, as you say that it's a lord's house, why it must be the height of gentility. Therefore, my dear," she continued, turn-
in<r to her husband, " let us go as quickly as possible." The gentleman, now addressing Elea¬ nor, exclaimed—" I cannot, ma'am, ex¬ press my thanks sufficiently for your kindness, but for which I know not what we should have done; and you must at¬ tribute Mrs. Conway's wild expressions to the agitation of her mind, occasioned by the fright she has sustained. And now may 1 be favoured with the knowledge of our kind preserver's name? , I presume it is a part of lord Arthur's family I have now the honour of addressing ?". *' Glendinning is my name, sir," replied Eleanor; while Mrs. Conway, looking at lier with a smile of complacency, cried— " Well, this is lucky, that we have fallen into such genteel hands." Eleanor now. begged they would pro¬ ceed towards the castle; and directing the postboy to the village, Mr. Conway de¬ sired him to lead his horses ancl find a lodging for himself, at the same time ge¬ nerously putting some money in his hand;
.152
and, telling him to inquire the next day at the castle for him, noAv turned to his lady, who, in a voice of assumed conse¬ quence, cried—" Yes, you will hear of us at lord Arthur GlendinningV As Mr. Conway assisted his lady along, Eleanor took a view of her figure, which was extremely vulgar, inclined to en bon point, and short in stature. Her dress was shewy to the extreme, and had it not consisted entirely of white materials, would have been ridiculously fine. A large hat, ornamented with an immense plume of ostrich feathers, almost concealed her face, on which nature had not set her most lovely stamp. Eleanor looked with some wonder on her companions, whom she thought but ill matched, as Mr. Conway was rather elegant in his person and mmners, though too much the appearance of a dashing buck. He was evidently younger than his lady, and Eleanor could not help thinking he felt ashamed of her behaviour, as, though she kept expressing her wishes
in favour of every thing genteel, Eleanor was convinced she was far from it herself, and that money perhaps alone constituted her consequence. She kept ^complaining of the fright and hurts she had received, and it was with great difficulty that, sup¬ ported between Mr. Conway and Eleanor, she arrived at St, Michael's Castle.
H&
CHAPTER XI. Most potent, grave, and reverend sigiriors, My very noble and npprov'd good masters, That I ha\e ta'en a«ny this old inttn'b daughter, It is most true—•true, I have married her; The very head and front of tny oflbndmg Hath this extent—no moie. Rude am I in speech, And therefore little shall I grace my cause In speaking for myself; yet, by your p^ttetice, I will a rouiui unvaintsh'd tale deliver Of my whole course of lo\e. Shakespeare. On arriving at the castle, Eleanor con¬ ducted her companions to a private room, and then leaving them, repaired to the drawing-room, where she found all the gentlemen assembled: they had joined the ladies, and tea was just announced as Eleanor entered. She immediately in¬ formed lady Glendinning of the scene to which she had been witness, and her hav¬ ing offered Mr. and,Mrs. Conway an asy-
lum in the castle; for which, she hoped, she should have the excuse of lord Arthur and his lady, who had ever readily granted their hospitality to persons in distress. " Undoubtedly so," replied her lady¬ ship ; " I will give orders for a room to, be prepared for them." " Upon my word, Miss," cried lady Le¬ nox, in a sarcastic tone, " you were very fortunate in your excursion to-night, in giving you an opportunity to display your benevolent disposition; but if you were to extend your compassion to all who- meet with travelling accidents, I fancy you would fill even the spacious castle of lord Arthur with objects of distress." " And if she did, madam," interrupted lord Arthur, " I would forgive her; when motives of pure pity and unostentatious compassion direct the heart, Heaven for¬ bid that I should check its divine im¬ pulse!" " Oh, my lord!" cried her ladyship, " I am aware that Eleanor's actions must be right in your eyes; but I certainly should.
think propriety demands the knowledge of who those persons are, thus intruded within my daughter's walls." Poor Eleanor timidly cast her eyes around —" I am very sorry," she ex¬ claimed, -* c that I should have been the cause of this unpleasant discussion; in of¬ fering an asylum to Mr. and Mrs. Con¬ way, I thought J should only have ful¬ filled the wishes of lord and lady Glendin¬ ning; had I known it would have offend¬ ed, I would not have taken the liberty." " You have not offended, Eleanor," cried lady Glendinning, who pitied her confusion. " I will see your new ac¬ quaintance, and then I shall form a better v opinion how to accommodate them." Eleanor gratefully bowed to her lady¬ ship for her unexpected approbation, and led the way to the parlour, where she had left Mr. and Mrs. Conway, and introduced them to lady Glendinning, who in an in¬ stant ran her eyes over the vulgar figure of Mrs. Conway, who making, as she thought, a very profound curtsey, thanked
her ladyship for the genteel treatment with which they had met. Mr. Conway, wishing to stop the torrent of her tongue, gracefully turned to lady Glendinning, and in an elegant manner repeated his thanks, alleging their unpleasant accident as the cause for their intrusion; adding, they were using all expedition to return to London, having lately taken a trip from there. Lady Glendinning had penetration enough immediately to discover the wide difference between this couple i Mr. Con¬ way, she was convinced, was really the gentleman, while his lady was evidently the reverse. Her ladyship recollecting to have met with a sir Henry Conway when she herself had visited England previous to her marriage, now inquired of Mr. Con¬ way if he was any part of that gentleman's family. « I have the honour to be his nephew," he replied; " and it affords me some plea¬ sure in knowing your ladyship is acquaint¬ ed with my family, as that circumstance
may perhaps impel your ladyship the more readily to excuse our unseasonable intru- sion." Lady Glendinning expressed her plea¬ sure in affording any service to sir Henry's relations, from whom, she added, she had received many civilities when in England; and hoped he was still living, and well. Mr. Conway replied in the affirma¬ tive, while his lady exclaimed—" Only to think now, that your ladyship should know any part of our family! But gen¬ teel people always know each other; and it is so pleasant to be amongst those we know!" Lady Glendinning could scarcely refrain from smiling, but Eleanor observed it was the smile of contempt which mantled on her cheek rather than that of approbation; her ladyship, however, politely invited them to join their tea party; to which they assented, Mrs. Conway making a hundred apologies respecting her dress. Lady Glendinning introduced them to the drawing-room, and added her know-
ledge of Mr. Conway's family. Lord and lady Lenox recollected visiting sir Henry when in England; and all much wondered to see his elegant nephew wedded to a woman like his lady. Mr. Conway's arm continuing in pain, they dispatched a servant for a surgeon, who, on arriving, pronounced it a violent bruise, which required much rest. Mrs. Conway also declared one of her fingers was much hurt, ancl that she suffered a martyrdom of pain; though, she added, she .had kept it to herself, as she would not distress her dear Mr. Conway, who, she knew, was distracted on her account. No one, however, beheld any of that con¬ cern she asserted, though Mr. Conway was polite and attentive to her. Lord Arthur and lady Glendinning both desired they would make their house their home until they were recovered; to which they readily agreed, and a room was pre¬ pared for their reception; and after they retired, the giddy Georgina broke into a violent laugh at poor Mrs. Conway's ex-
pence* lady Lenox expressed her utter contempt of her, while lady Glendinning considered her almost below her remarks, though she desired she might be treated with civility while their inmate. The party soon after broke up, and Ele¬ anor retired to her pillow, with the pleas¬ ing reflection of having that day contri¬ buted to the relief and assistance of her fellow-creatures. The next morning Mr. and Mrs. Con- way attended at the breakfast-table, the latter still attired in pure white drapery. Many conjectures had been formed respect¬ ing their journey to> Scotland, unaccompa¬ nied, and even unattended; as they had not explained their motive, lady Glendin¬ ning purposely turned the conversation, during breakfast, to this effect, and in¬ quired if they had been long in Scotland. «' Only a few days," replied Mr. Con¬ way, smiling. " Perhaps your ladyship can guess the motive of our journey." The simpering looks of Mrs. Conway, and her affected confusion, revealed #ie
truth, which had already been suspected; and lady Glendinning, smiling, wished them much joy. " Why, to be sure, my lady," cried Mrs. Conway, " the truth will out; and we needn't mind telling your ladyship the truth, as it would be very ungenteel to keep any thing from you; and now we needn't mind who knows it; besides, these things are done by many genteel people —stolen matches are quite the go." " Our expedition has been a matrimo¬ nial one," exclaimed Mr. Conway, " and I trust our peculiar situation will excuse my not instantly revealing it to your lady¬ ship ; but if it will not intrude too much on your ladyship's patience, I will, in a few words, reveal our little history; and in setting forth my own follies, I shall portray the generous qualifications of Mrs. Conway." . Lady Glendinning replied she should feel much gratified by his communication; and Mr. Conway began his little history. A£ there were, however, some points which
he could not truly discuss, we shall give it in our own words. He was, as he stated, the nephew of sir Henry Conway, who had brought him up -' from a child. ' His father, the younger brother of sir Henry, had been left, as younger brothers frequently are, nearly portionless, and had been obliged to choose a profession for support. He united him¬ self to a lady without fortune, who, in giving birth, to a son, died at an early pe¬ riod. Mr. Conway, who truly loved his wife, never recovered her loss, and a few years consigned him also to the silent tomb. On his deathbed he had begged the pro¬ tection of sir Henry for his helpless- boy, who promised to rear him with his own son, and to provide for him during his life; to-which promise he strictly adhered, by first giving him a most liberal educa¬ tion, and as soon as he arrived at a proper age he gave him his own choice of a pro¬ fession, by which means he might honour* ably support himself, in which he would
assist him all in his power. , Edward thanked his uncle, and immediately .fixed on the study of the law, as most congenial to his mind. ' Sir Henry approved.of his choice; at which he was in some surprise, as he had with uneasiness beheld that his nephew's, disposition was much too^gay, to which he added an extravagance of temper which gave him serious concern. He was therefore no less surprised, than pleased at his making choice of so serious a study as the law-, which, he trusted, wotiiu iOhd i« a great • degree to fix his wildness and curb his extravagance. Sir Henry now sought out for some professional man to whom he could article his nephew, and was soon recommended to Mr. Reynolds, of. Lincoln's Inn, who was in want of a* young student. Sir Henry's application was immediately ac¬ cepted, and Edward Conway was articled to Mr. Reynolds, with a very handsome premium, who was very proud of having such a respectable youth in his chambers;
for Mr. Reynolds, though, at this period, he had realized a largo fortune by his pro¬ fession, had arisen from obscurity, and was consequently the more ambitious in his desires. He had one only daughter, who, on the death of her mother, was placed at a board¬ ing-school in the country, where it unfor¬ tunately happened neither her morals nor her education were much attended to. At the age of sixteen she was recalled to town, for the purpose of residing with her mater¬ nal uncle, who kept a large retail shop in the city, and where it was thought she would be of great use, he being a bachelor; it was well known he was immensely rich, and little doubt remained of his making his niece his heiress. She therefore con¬ sented to living with him; and accord-, ingly Miss Maria was placed behind his counter. Here, amidst ignorance and vul¬ garity, she imbibed all those pernicious errors which such an example gave, yet at the same time looking forward to that
period when she should be able to enjoy her uncle's riches, and launch out as the fine lady. To this family was the young and ele¬ gant Edward placed, which to him then appeared of no consequence, so long as he was ably instructed in his profession; and for a short time, while it had the advan¬ tages of novelty to recommend it, he was most studious in its pursuit. But, alas! the natural gaiety of his temper too soon overcame his serious attention; the law he found was a dry study, and he .soon wished he had made choice of any other. Company was the only relaxation to which he could fly, and Edward was soon consi¬ dered as the most dashing buck about Lincoln's Inn. Sir Henry had made him an allowance equal with his own son, which enabled him to support the charac¬ ter of a gentleman. Here had it stopped, ali might have been well; but his extra¬ vagance increased to such an unbounded height, that it ga\ e his uncle serious alarm, and he threatened to lessen his uicome, if
he did not retrench in his expences. Ed¬ ward promised a reformation, and again attended to the law; with Mr. Reynolds he managed to keep on good terms, who, though frequently obliged to reprimand him on account of his inattention to busi¬ ness, was always won over by his promises of amendment. It was at this period that an alteration took place in Mr. Reynolds's family: the uncle of Maria died, and she soon found herself in-possession of twenty thousand pounds in money, besides many freehold estates. After a residence of above a do¬ zen years, Maria emerged from her obscu¬ rity, with a determination to launch put as the fine lady; and as she had so long been confined to the unwholesome air of the city, she now determined to enjoy the breezes of the country; but as she was to preside at her father's table, a short dis¬ tance was arranged for their residence, in order for Mr. Reynolds to attend daily at Lincoln's Inn. As his town house was now despised by Maria, an elegant cottage
was taken in the beautiful vicinity of Cam¬ berwell Grove; and here Miss Reynolds began her reJgn of grandeur. She sought out the most genteel people, as she called them, of the neighbourhood; but, though they returned her visits, her society was not courted, as her vulgar manners were a continual drawback to all association with the more polite circles. Mr. Reynolds, who was proud of his daughter and his country house, took the first opportunity of inviting Edward Con¬ way there, which was accepted by him, and he repaired there, accompanied by Mr. Reynolds, to dinner. His pleasing person and agreeable manners made a deep impression on the heart of Miss, Reynolds, who thought him a prodigy of elegance; she therefore behaved to him* with the utmost complaisance, and cer¬ tainly gave him indisputable marks of her favour. He saw in a moment the weak and vulgar mind of his new acquaintance, but though he mentally laughed at her ignorance, yet she was a female, and that
alone ensured her his attention; he there¬ fore paid her the most flattering compli¬ ments, which were taken by lier as the sentiments of his heart, and she readily persuaded herself that the same feelings warmed his bosom as her own; and on his retiring at night, she pressed him so warmly to repeat his visit, that he could not do otherwise than express the pleasure he should feel in availing himself of her permission. After his departure she was profuse in his praise, while her father commented on his extravagances, which were again rising to a dangerous height; for, to return to him, he had of late adopted a mode of conduct which had given his uncle the most serious concern; this was, resorting often to the billiard-tables, at which he lost considerable sums; his lawful debts were in consequence unpaid, and his cre¬ ditors grew pressing; sir Henry refused to answer their demands, and young Con¬ way was in a most unpleasing situation; still he did not retrench his expences, but
daily plunged deeper into the vortex of dissipation. The frequent interviews which he had with Miss Reynolds gave rise to many ideas in his mind; he plainly saw the pre¬ ference which she gave him, and he was convinced he might make himself master of hei* fortune, if he chose. Situated as he was, this was } certainly a great inducement, though he Could hardly reconcile himself to marrying a woman of so inferior a mind and education; he, however, behaved to¬ wards her with so much gallantry, that she was satisfied that his affections were her own, and that modesty alone prevented his making an open avowal. Old Reynolds at length fearing that his daughter's partiality increased too far, be- £an to look cool upon Edward when he made his visits to Camberwell, as the idea of his daughter's throwing herself away Upon a ruined spendthrift was not to be borne; and he tock every opportunity of repeating his extravagance to Maria, who VOL. I.' i
inwardly liked him the better for his spi¬ rit, as she styled it. At length Edward became of age; his debts were immense, and sir Henry, with a view to punish his folly, refused all far¬ ther assistance. His son had frequently assisted his cousin Edward out of his own private purse, but sir Henry now insisted on his not advancing him a shilling. Ed¬ ward, seriously alarmed, plunged deeper into scenes of gaiety, in order to drive away his own reflections; his profession was neglected, Mr. Reynolds was enraged, and, with sir Henry, gave him severe chas¬ tisement. At length an impatient creditor actually arrested him, and the elegant Con¬ way had no resource left but going to a lock-up-house, where he remained a few days, in all the horrors of suspense and torment: his uncle was inexorable, ancl no relief appeared attainable. - He now began to wish he had taken advantage of Miss Reynolds's kindness, which might have prevented his present disgrace; but now he supposed she would
also despise him for his conduct. The loss of liberty began to be very irksome- and he felt that even the society of Miss Reynolds would be very acceptable; it was true, he had no violent passion of love for her, but he had of late been much ac¬ customed to her; and habit often does more for us than affection. Thus it was in the present instance: he had paid her so much attention, and said so many pretty things to her, that he almost persuaded himself he had really meant that which had, only a short time since, been the mere dictates of gallantry. These reflections became the stronger as the time of his confinement lengthened, when, towards the close of the fifth day, he was informed a lady wished to see him. He immediately drew but one conclusion as to who was his visitor, and was in no surprise when Miss Reynolds was an¬ nounced. He felt embarrassed at her pre¬ sence under his present disgrace, while, after a short preface, Miss Reynolds began 12
by condoling with him in his misfortunes, and at length congratulating him that the present cause of trouble was removed, and begged he would immediately quit that nasty, vulgar, and ungenteel house, which, she added, was dreadful to her feelings to enter. This speech, of course, excited the sur¬ prise of Conway; he begged for an expla¬ nation, and at length found, from her own lips, that she had generously set him free. Hei* behaviour plainly shewed him the > reward she expected—a reward which he considered almost villanous to offer; yet what was to be done ? He took her hand —he poured forth the effusions of his gra¬ titude—he besought her to accept his love, though, he added, he knew not how to offer his hand in his present embarrassed situation. Miss Reynolds was overjoyed; she loved him to excess, and entered into schemes for their future happiness. She doubted not, she said, that if sir Henry heard of their union, he would doubtless be so well
pleased that he would relent, ancl restore his nephew to his favour. With her father, she added, she should be sure to get into displeasure; but added, she was her own mistress, and at liberty to dispose of her money as she thought proper. Conway was now no longer backward, and it was finally agreed to set of? imme¬ diately to Gretna Green, before it was known he was liberated, as, Miss Rey¬ nolds added, it would cut a dash to make an elopement, as she liked to do things genteelly. Accordingly all was arranged, and the next day the lovers repaired in a post- chaise, unaccompanied by any one, to the land of liberty, without any one suspect¬ ing their flight. Maria betrayed symp¬ toms of great generosity of disposition, which could not fail of inspiring Conway with gratitude, and he firmly resolved ever to treat with kindness the woman who had thus given up all to him. It was on their return from the land of Hymen, where their hands had been irre-
vocably joined, that they had met with the accident from which Eleanor had res¬ cued them, and which gave to the delight¬ ed Mrs. Conway an introduction to the family of lord Arthur Glendinning.
CHAPTER XII.
Love calls for love; not all the piide of beauty— Those eyes that tell us what the sun is made of— Those lips, whoj>e touch is to be bought with life— Those hills of drnen snow, which seen, ate felt— All these posses&'d, are nought hut as they are The proof, tne substance of an inward passion, And the rich plunc'cr of a taken heart. Young.
Heard ye that voice ? Sure 'twas the voice of Heav*n; In mild majestic strains it piere'd my ear. — — — — — — — What ail'd thee, That thou didst tremble ? Ilcy. The foregoing story had been partially related by Mi: Conway, who, however, did justice to the generosity of his lady, while their auditors again congratulated them on their hymeneal excursion. Mrs. Conway, pleased at an opportunity to talk on her greatness, was profuse in her praises of her delightful cottage at Camberwell, at which place she meant to make her
chief residence; and concluded by saying she hoped the present company would some time or other visit London, and honour her, by their making a stay at her cottage; as, she added, she should always be proud to do every thing in her power to return the genteel treatment with which they had met. Lady Glendinning bowed her thanks, while lord Arthur, who was present, re¬ plied, that it was most probable he should never more visit London, unless any thing very particular occurred to induce him to make such a journey. He sighed as he spoke, and Eleanor observed the dejection of his countenance. Mr.. Conway now asked the advice of ,lord Arthur as to what steps it were best to pursue with respect to his uncle and Mr. Reynolds, the latter of whom would no doubt be under great anxiety for his daughter; and to his uncle's favour, he added, he wished to be restored, and he resolved in future to merit it. Lord Arthur, with great kindness, took
upon himself the task of writing to both parties, informing them of the steps taken, and the present residence of Mr. and Mrs. Conway, and begging that each might be received with pardon by sir Henry and Mr. "Reynolds, and requesting, on their arrival in London, alL differences might subside. JMrs. Conway was enraptured at his lordship's condescension, as, she said, she was sure her father would not hesitate a minute,, when he found such great people interested themselves in their welfare. Lord Arthur, therefore, retired after breakfast to write the letters. Lady Glen¬ dinning and her daughter rode out in their carriage, while llobert and Eleanor enter¬ tained Mr. and Mrs. Conway with shew- in tr them the beauties of the castle. Mrs. Conway was quite delighted with Eleanor, and declared she never felt such an affection for any one in her life, and hinted how much she should like her to> return to London with her. 13
Eleanor, who felt no great inclination to leave her native scenes, made a suitable reply; while Robert, alarmed by the men¬ tion of such a proposal, gaily added, that she was too great a treasure to be trusted, without a protector, to the dangerous de¬ lusions of London. He glanced his eyes tenderly on Elea¬ nor, while Mrs. Conway exclaimed—" At least you fear the trial, lest some rude hand should dare to 10b you of your trea¬ sure" " True, madam," he returned; " I ac¬ knowledge those sentiments are mine." " And it is not to be wondered at," in¬ terrupted Mr. Conway, bowing to Elea¬ nor ; " for where we see beauty and mo¬ desty so truly blended as in the present instance, how fearful must its admirers be to place it within the reach of tempta¬ tion !" Eleanor felt confused, while Robert, pressing her hand, gently drew her on¬ ward. The presence of Mi\ and Mrs.
Conway prevented his saying more; but every look, every action, bespoke the pas~ sion of his heart. Eleanor took occasion to speak of her little flock, and asked Mrs. Conway if she would like to visit her schoolhouse; which she, however, declined; adding, she never took any delight in visiting the poor and vulgar; though, she added, it did Eleanor great credit, and that, before she left Scot¬ land, she should beg to add a something towards her institution. Eleanor thanked her, and concluded by informing her of the little treat she was going to give them in a few days. Mrs. Conway again praised her good¬ ness, though, she added, she should take no pleasure at being present on the occa¬ sion, as she could not endure vulgarity and ignorance. " It is to banish both those qualities, madam," returned Eleanor, " that this in¬ stitution has been raised; and I trust our efforts to that effect have not proved fruit¬ less, and that many a little innocent heart
may, in time, acknowledge the advantage of education. Mr. Conway politely complimented her on her benevolence and compassion to¬ wards the offspring of the poor; and in a short time after the party separated, to dress for dinner. Lady Glendinning was engaged* out in the evening, and the task of entertaining Mr. and Mrs. Conway again fell upon Eleanor. Lord Arthur shut himself close in his room, and Eleanor sighed, as she reflected on the melancholy to which he gave himself up. Politeness induced her to exert her utmost powers of pleasing lier guests, though she inwardly regretted being confined to the house, as the wea¬ ther was extremely lovely, and she much wished to visit her school, as she used to do. On the next evening her wishes proved more propitious, as lady Glendinning and all the family remaining at home, she ex¬ pressed her intention of going to the vil¬ lage. With a heart light, and beaming
with benevolence, she bent her steps along", the evening was lovely and serene, and, with a view to extend her walk, she pro¬ ceeded-to the sea-side, and arrived at those tremendous rocks mentioned at the begin¬ ning of this work. She paused to view their stupendous height, and admire the beautiful, yet awful work of nature; she ascended a part which was accessible, men¬ tally supposing it was impossible for hu> man footsteps to attain its summit; the sea glided along serenely, and the pro* spects it afforded were beautifully grand* Eleanor, now turning rounds beheld an¬ other point of the rock wdiich jutted out nearly opposite to where she was, and to her great surprise saw a female figure kneeling; her hands were clasped toge¬ ther, and her eyes were raised, with- the appearance of true devotion. Her features were concealed by a long black veil thrown over a garment of the same colour. Her figure was interesting, and Eleanor felt a degreo-of curiosity for this- unknown ob¬ ject. She continued in her kneeling pos-
ture, and Eleanor, quitting her situation, resolved to try to encounter her; to effect this, she was obliged to strike out in fresh and difficult paths; and on arriving at the spot, the stranger had disappeared; but vain were the efforts of Eleanor to disco¬ ver her, and she was at length obliged to quit the rocks. Dissatisfiedanddisappointedjherthoughts insensibly wandered to this stranger: who she could be, and why she should have chosen such a place as that for devotion, appeared equally surprising. Her mind was now . attuned to awful calmness—a superstitious terror assailed her frame, and in this sort of mood she passed the church of St. Michael's, She hesitated for a mo¬ ment whether she should enter; her feel¬ ings were just suited to the- solemn occa¬ sion/and she passed through the door. An involuntary trembling seized her frame as she approached the tomb where.she had witnessed the mysterious figure; she cast her eyes fearfully;around, in expectation of beholding some new cause of horror;
but all appeared as silent as the marble on which she leaned. •' Poor Frances!" she mentally ex¬ claimed, " thou sleepest in peace, uncon¬ scious of the tear of regret which thy relatives drop on thy silent abode. * Yet, alas! how enviable is thy fate! Escaped from the snares and perilous trials of this deluding world, thy spirit reposes in the bosom of thy God; free from all stain of nature, thou risest in immortality. Oh, enviable state! oh, blest reward of inno¬ cence and virtue P Eleanor paused—she thought she heard a footstep. A figure approached her; she uttered an involuntary shriek, when, rais¬ ing her eyes, she beheld, in the cause of her alarm, Robert Glendinning, who flew towards her, and taking her hand, ten¬ derly inquired the cause of her alarm. Eleanor, ashamed of her weakness, en¬ deavoured to smile off her fears, and re¬ plied, that the solemnity of the place had •filled her mind with terror, which his un¬ expected appearance had increased.
He expressed his sorrow at having so alarmed her; " but," he added, " I left the castle with the intention of meeting you on your return from the village; but, to my surprise, I saw you enter this church; I therefore followed you in. I saw you drop the tear of affection on the tomb of my lamented sister; yes, beloved Eleanor! while ali around are engaged in scenes of gaiety, you, alone and unob¬ served, retire to a scene like this, and with that amiable weakness, that sweetness of disposition, which so truly adorn you, you drop the tear of regret over the sad remains of her whom, living, you loved. Ah, happy Frances! how enviable is thy fate, since an angel mourns thy clay-cold bier, and bestows the tear of regret on thy tomb!—Oh that I could but obtain such an interest in thy tender heart! Yet let me hope that, while you thus lament my sister, you cannot, for her sake, be indif¬ ferent to the happiness of her brother." " What means this language, this seri¬ ous address ?" inquired Eleanor, who felt
greatly agitated. " I scarce know how to answer you." " I will be explicit, my Eleanor," re¬ plied Robert; " the time, the stillness of the place—all conspire * to my feelings; nor doubt my sincerity, when^ at the tomb of my sister, who perhaps is now a guar¬ dian angel hovering over our heads, I, for the first time, at least in speech, avow how much I love you. Do not think the avowal abrupt," he added, as Eleanor dropped her eyes in soft confusion; " but I can no longer conceal the emotions of my soul. You knew not the pang I ex¬ perienced yesterday morning, when Mrs. Conway half-invited you to accompany her to London—I felt I could not bear to lose you* even for a short time: this caused the reflection to arise. «How could I see you <united to another, and thus lose you for ever ? I therefore determined to seek the first opportunity of soliciting your fa¬ vour—your love. Oh! say that no one else is in possession of that inestimable: treasure,"
" Oh, Robert!" cried Eleanor, " why have you made such an avowal as this, so injurious to your peace? Believe me, my heart is entirely free from that delusive passion; and sorry am I that you should have encouraged these feelings for one unworthy of your regard." "Unworthy P re-echoed Robert—"Cruel Eleanor! what a term is that! Oh! where shall I find worth and beauty, if I behold them not in this lovely form ? where can X expect to make a choice equal to you ?" " You forget," cried Eleanor, " the de¬ pendent situation in which I am placed in your family, who will of course demand of you that you should fix your affections on a wealthy and high-born female; ancl I am convinced neither lady Lenox or lady Glendinning would sanction your making choice of a poor unknown being, like myself, whose birth is even myste¬ rious." " You wrong yourself/' replied Robert; ** are you not supposed to be the daughter of my aunt lady Frances, and consequent*
ly your descent high as my own ? while my uncle Charles has ever declared his in¬ tentions of giving you a portion equal to your birth; though this, in my opinion, is too unworthy a consideration to be for a moment thought on, any farther than to ease your scruples—your delicate ob¬ jections. My father loves you, Eleanor, as his daughter, and would, I am sure, gladly acknowledge you as such; there¬ fore, only grant me your esteem-—give me a hope that I am not indifferent to you, and, if a heart devoted to you can procure you happiness, we shall be blessed beyond the common lot of mortals. Oh, Eleanor!" he added, looking passionately in her face, " you know not how much I love you; and a disappointment to my hopes will at once mar my peace for ever. Say then what I am to expect; on your answer now rests my fate." Eleanor was greatly agitated; she knew not what reply to make; she felt convinced that the passion of love had not entered her bosom for Robert; she esteemed him,
but it was as with a sisterly affection; yet when she saw the agitation of his counte- . nance, and beheld his visible emotion, she felt a sentiment of pity arising in her heart, which prevented her giving him a decided answer; and pity is so akin to love that she could hardly define her own sensations. —" I would not willingly inflict a pang in your bosom," she at length, faltering, re¬ plied; " but this declaration is so sudden, so unexpected, I know not how to reply. Heaven is witness I wish you happy, Ro¬ bert, and would almost do any thing to render you so; but I must be candid to say, I fear this avowal of yours will not tend to render you so." " Why not?" interrupted he; " you do not entirely reject me, and to ease all your fears I will seek my father, and acquaint him with my love for you; he knows and appreciates thy virtues, and I am sure of his approbation. Thus sanctioned by a parent, I shall then offer you a heart and hand, accompanied with a father's blessing —yes, my Eleanor, I will this night hasten
to lord Arthur, and implore his consent to our union." "Forbear!" cried a voice, in solemn accents, accompanied by a hollow groan. Eleanor shrieked aloud, while Robert, violently terrified, caught her hand, and gazed wildly around.—" What voice is that?" he cried, " which thus interdicts the sacred purpose of my soul? what hid¬ den form thus intrudes upon my privacy?" " It is the voice of fate," replied the invisible object of their terror, " who,. through me, warns you of your danger. As you hope for peace on earth, and ever¬ lasting bliss in the world to come, think no more of Eleanor; for sooner shall the ravenous kite woo for its mate the gentle dove, than you shall be united—never can Eleanor be yours." " Horrible!" ejaculated Robert. " Oh! why this cruel denunciation ? Oh, Elea¬ nor! Eleanor! why dost thou not speak? Oh! look up. This must be some design¬ ing enemy," he added, " to our peace: I will not believe hi idle superstition."
" Oh* no!" cried Eleanor, " it is no idle chimera; you, Robert, tremble, and be¬ lieve its power, while you endeavour to dissuade me from it. Never can I forget the mandate from heaven; sure it arises from the tomb, and can we dare to disobey a warning- so awfully given ?—Look! oh look!" she added—" Merciful Heaven! savelme from that form." She sunk, fainting, dn the arms of Ro¬ bert, who, casting his eyes around, beheld a figure, in black, retreat from the tomb; it waved its hand, and instantly disap¬ peared. Robert, nearly as terrified as his fainting burthen, gently withdrew Eleanor from the church; and on her inhaling the fresh air she^ began to recover, but her alarm was so great, she could scarce collect her senses. Robert endeavoured to sooth her, and expressed his wretchedness at a scene which had at once deprived him of all hopes of bliss. " Oh! never more renew the fatal sub¬ ject," exclaimed Eleanor, " but forget a
9-
wretched being like myself, born to mys¬ tery and sorrow, which attend my steps, and still pursue me with increasing horror. Oh! let me hasten home, that 1 may in some way endeavour to compose myself." Robert expressed his fears for her health, as, he said, her looks indicated the agony ' of her mind. This remark caused her some apprehension lest lord Arthur should ob¬ serve her looks, and Robert unguardedly reveal the cause. She knew how much lord Arthur had already suffered with the Inysterious scenes at the tomb, and she therefore resolved to spare him the pangs of a recital; and she begged of Robert for ever to conceal within his own bosom the circumstance of that night. To this he willingly consented, as he thought, if it were buried for ever in oblivion, he might in a future time again solicit her love. On their reaching the castle, the pale cheek of Eleanor was instantly noticed; lord Arthur cast a look of scrutiny both on his son and Eleanor, while Mrs. Con¬ way inquired if she was ilL
: Eleanor replied in the affirmative,! add¬ ing, she: had ibeen seized with a 'sudden headache, which-prevented; her■ visiting, the village; * and.; having^ met Robert, she had accepted,.his \ offered; assistance, aiid- returned to tlie castle. >; v ;< ; > ; /;- "And; to be sure^ I .think Mr. Glendin¬ ning looks almost, as bad as..you, -Miss* Eleanor,''; returned 'Mrs. Conway; ■? but I suppose ^ie's: terrified. almost to death about you. But I would recommend you tolay down a bit, and I dare say that will ease your head." ; r ^ -.„■: To this advice Eleanor readily > agreed,. and she instantly retired for ;the';nighty- while lord Arthur anxiously desired she- lnight: have medical advice, if she were not.better.:...;. ■.: ■.,>-,^.- ' J;.- .^. ■■■; The impression made on the mind, of Eleanor was?so great by, this mysterious circumstance, that it continually, preyed qn her peace; and though she strove, on the succeeding day, (to appear cheerful, arid declared herself perfectly recovered, yet her countenance indicated a mind, ill
nt ease.; and as,'she" looked' upon Robert, she beheld the rsamec uneasiness E manifest in his features; ^hoth ^imposed a', silence^ as neither-iyifishedi.tojwpundithe! other with.thc.repetition of r a;scene;whichjhad given ; ihem h,oth so much'pain.-; Eleanor, with assort,of,intuitiye fear, kept close to the castle,, though/ as;,the days rolled on, she recollected that hen presence .was ne¬ cessary at the school house,, to arrange every thing preparatory to the promised festival,, which now drew neary,,and she resolved not to disappoint the hopes she. had raised among the villagers and her little flock. A rural dance was to be given on the green, at which Eleanor had promised to attend, and join with the honest rustics in their innocent gaiety, while all the chil¬ dren were to partake in suitable amuse- ments. While Eleanor was thus arranging a gratification for the poorer sons * of men, the inhabitants of St. Michael's Castle, and the marquis of B------, with lady Cecilia VOL. i. K
GrajVwere making splendid preparations for (the arrival of the young lord Mdntal- bair^who was <Jaily expected. Georgina was'iipon theftiptoe'^bf impatience* to be* hold r her ^intended^husband, 5 and'talked incessantly "of fhis merit and accomplish¬ ments to Mrs. ConWay, who declared that, though Mr, Conway had now meant to return to 1 London, >she would protract her stay, in order tb behold tliis " wonder," as «he styled him; ancl all, with equal impa¬ tience,' longed for<the arrival of lord Fre¬ derick Montalban.«
IHAPTER Xin.
** lie saw the lustre of her eye, Ami modest cheek of roseate damask dyo— lie taw, and sudden felt love's pleasing smart Tlnill through his hreasr, and centre in his heart. A kindred fl.une her tender bosom warms, And .ulds new beauty to her maiden charms. 1 he youth profess'd a passion for the fair, Pare as the thoughts of heaven's mchangels are."
D.d my heart lo\c till now, forswear it, sight— I never snvv true beauty till this night. SuAKESpr,ARC. The encomiums which had been bestowed on lord JMontalban, though warm and ar¬ dent, proved no more than his real due; the marquis of B ------ had tlie felicity of clasping a «onifl^his arms, whose merits and amiable/'qualities entitled him a fit object of regard." ^ Lady Cecilia, on heaiing of his arrival, ___ K 2
hastened to the drawing-room, and gave her darling nephew the most affectionate welcome; with a sentiment of exultation "she gazed on the elegant and manly form of lord Montalban, who, during his ab¬ sence from his family, had improved in every grace of person; his features were lighted up with a pleasing vivacity, which evinced the natural gaiety of his temper, while his feelings were cast in nature's most susceptible mould; and tho meeting with his father and aunt appeared to excite the warmest sensations in his ardent mind. Lord Montalban had been made ac¬ quainted with the motives for which he had been called home, and lady Cecilia soon entered into the subject next her heart; and after extolling the beauty and hiu'h descent of Miss Glendinning, she launched/forth into her own praise in seeking .a i wife so every way suitable for him; adding, she was sure he could not possibly find the least shadow of an objec¬ tion to the alliance. .
Lord Montalban, who knew the failing* of his aunt, inasmuch as related to family pride, humoured her disposition, in gene¬ ral, with much good-nature; in the present instance, he however replied, that though he ever paid the greatest deference to her discernment, and had no possible objection to such an union, yet he hoped, in the important choice of a wife, he should be permitted to judge for himself, as, ho con¬ fessed, if he really gave up his liberty, he should wish to find in return the pure en¬ joyments of domestic happiness. " You will find all you can wish in Miss Glendinning," replied his aunt: " she is handsome and accomplished, and has the most charming spirits imaginable; you cannot be otherwise than gay in her com¬ pany." " If she possesses generosity of heart and temper sufficient to overlook my many faults," returned his lordship, " I shall becontented; believe me, I shall not be fastidiously particular; and if I can at all coincide in your opinion respecting
Miss Glendinning^ I shall be happy to oblige both your ladyship and my father. And now, when am I to be introduced to this peerless damsel, who, by your lady¬ ship's account, is to steal my heart on the first glance ?" '* We will send word of your arrival to St. Michael's Castle,"-, cried her ladyship, ««and to-morrow I wiil introduce you my¬ self." The marquis remained silent, while lady Cecilia was arranging her plans; in this instance his wishes coincided with his sis¬ ter's, he therefore left it all to her; he was by nature a quiet and passive man, and had gradually suffered his more haughty and ruling sister to govern his family and himself; and she reigned with despotic sway over all; the promised obedience of lord Montalban put her into high spirits, and she bestowed on him the highest marks of her favour. The day on which his lordship' had ar¬ rived at his paternal home, was one of those delightful ones which nature, in her
highest ■) hounty, bestows ;* on ; us ; : $nd ori the. conclusion, of dinner,, lord Montalban expressed.his intentionpf taking ; a ramble over his native plains,?;and visitingspme of those scenes where he; passed:his boyish days. .' . : ■■■ -;■ . ■; .^ : h ;i:::' .■.•■i;r.'}j;.'i>*';-r ■;■?;? '*.. ■ Lady Cecilia begged him;4p have the attendance of a footniari,' as he might pos¬ sibly find himself at a'Joss.an many parts. ■" No," cried his lordship; ?■«:it is my in^ ten tion to visit my father's honest tenants, whom I can remember'going to in 1 my boyish days,'and I do notiwish to restrain their rustic ease by iai'proud display; of grandeur; this evening ; at least I am de¬ termined to dispense with it, and gi-atify myself with their i honest simplicity; to¬ morrow I will ^please < your .lordshipi by displaying all the pomp ofmyrank.''/ r>v- ; His lordship bowed,and taking.his hat, instantly bent hisi steps- towards the spot which -he wished; to visit, i The motive which induced: himi was ' that whichi did credit:to his heart; with ( a-generosity of temper found; only ;in; few,l he,. when ; a
boy) had sought out the poorer of his fa¬ ther's tenants/ and from his own purse re¬ lieved the wants of all who happened to be distressed; during his absence, he feared perhaps that' many had drooped for want of his assistance, and he resolved to take the first opportunity after his return to bestow marks of his bounty. With a heart light, and bounding with the most gene¬ rous designs, he hastened to the neigh¬ bouring village, which contained the hum¬ ble tenants of the marquis of B------; the sun was just linking behind the distant hills-and rocks which surrounded the sea, and all nature appeared to put forth her gayest foliage: -with the greatest delight he enjoyed the surprise^of some of the honest rustics, who, on recognizing him, were .profuse in > their Y joy at his return. Lord Montalban proceeded on till he ar¬ rived at the green, where he beheld a scene which at once surprised and delight¬ ed him: a number of young and healthy children were arranged, neatly dressed, the glow of delight mantling in their
countenances; ,at,the farther end of the green was placed a rustic table, *on which various refreshments were spread; a band of music stood near, at a- little distance from which appeared a number of young- females, attired in the dress of their native plain, apparently ready to join in the rus¬ tic fete. Lord Montalban gazed with de¬ light on the pleasing scene, which brought to his mind the , delightful >lines i of Bar- ford's sacred pastoral, where he says— " Ye j;iacefid vii gins, join the febtive train 1 With all the sweet simplicity of diess, And swell the \oti\e song, und joyful brins; Ui.spotted f.uth and innocence of he.ut." Suddenly the band struck up a lively air, and lord Montalban beheld a young and lovely female advance towards the children. His attention was instantly ri¬ vetted to her—the superior elegance of her person excited his wonder. She was elad in pure white drapery, with a silk plaid carelessly thrown, over her shoulder.*, and partially concealing a neck where a K3
thousand beauties lay concealed; a veil was over her head, which she now threw off, and discovered, to the unobserved gaze of lord Montalban, a countenance beaming with beauty and innocence; her luxuriant tresses were simply arrayed with a white rose, and gave to her whole ap¬ pearance a bewitching effect. On her reaching the spot where the children were arranged, the music ceased, and the youth¬ ful tribe evinced their respect by dropping a rustic curtsey. Lord JMontalban, in great surprise as to this lovely figure, advanced still nearer to the object of his admiration, and, unseen by her, heard the enchanting strains of her voice, as in the kindest accents she addressed the little flock—he heard her pour forth a kind but eloquent speech, in which she exhorted them to fill the duties of their station; and concluded by en¬ forcing on their minds the necessity of attending to the dictates of religion and virtue, 'She then gave to each a present,
expressing, her approbation of jtheir.good conduct. Lord Montalban was enraptured—the 1 admiration excited by this lovely female was enthusiastic, and the effect was in¬ stantaneous—she seemed at once to take possession of the noblest feelings of his heart, and he resolved, if possible, to be¬ come acquainted with this charming fe¬ male. For the first time she now turned her head, and beheld his lordship. His evident observation raised a blush > on her face, while lord .Montalban, bowing ..respect¬ fully, walked on, to spare her delicacy. Oiiileaving the green, he hastened into one of the cottages where he was known, and inquired of the gudewife the occasion' of the present festival. * . " It is the anniversary of > my lady's school, my lord," she replied; " and, Hea¬ ven bless her charitable heait for her kind¬ ness to a', baith young and auld! and she has condescended to come oniang, them
hersel' to-night, to share in * their bonny sports." " And pray who is this kind and lovely female?" inquired lord JMontalban. - " Miss Glendinning," replied liis inform¬ er; " and your lordship may well say she is lovely, for a greater beauty I never saw." " Miss Glendinning'" interrupted lord Montalban; " what, from St. Michael's Cabtle?" " Ay, <my lord," she replied, " and a better lassie never lived; why she is the benefactress of the whole village. Your lordship may see her now talking to the children on the green, where fop a' the world she looks like an angel; and if there ever was one upon earth, I think tt> be sure she is..'* " She is indeed," ejaculated lord Mont¬ alban. He coyld not proceed—the sur¬ prise and joy of such a discovery almost overcame him; the sweetest sensation shot across his> heart—a heart which he felt he hadjj even at this transient view,, resigned^;
to find his intended bride such a model of perfection—to see her engaged in such an office, which at once coincided with his own cliaritable hearts—was a source of such delight 1 that he could almost have wept for joy. The band of music at this instant struck up a lively Scotch air, and vibrated on the ear of lord Montalban, when the gudewife informed him that a dance was to be given amang the lads and lassies, and that she dare say Miss Glendinning would conde¬ scend to trip it wi* them. " Indeed!" cried lord Montalban, as a sudden thought came across his mind; " then I will also join in the festive scene." He then requested the good woman to introduce him to Miss Glendinning as a friend of hers lately arrived, when lie would request the favour of her hand; *' and be sure," continued he, " that you do not betray my title to her; and I charge you likewise to caution all those who are acquainted with it, not to call me by it
to-night; I have my reasons for it, and ,1 trust you will oblige me." " To be sure, my lord," she replied; " I am in-duty bound to obey your lordship, as are all the rest who are so indebted to your lordship's bounty; and if you will go along wi* me, I will speak to her." « Lead on," cried his lordship; " I am all .impatience to be introduced to this charming girl, whose (i Bc:.uty Imiigs upon the cheek of itijit, Like a rich jewel m an iEthtop's tar— Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear. So shews a stmvvy dove ti oping with crows> As yonder lady o'er her fellows shews. " The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand, And, touching heis, make happy my rude hand." The woman smiledat his raptures, which she did not understand;. but quickly pro¬ ceeding to the green, advanced towards the object of his admiration, who was ar¬ ranging partners for the rustic dance, and with a respectful curtsey begged leave to present to ber notice a gentleman of her acquaintance, who, taking great delight in
these rustic sports, much wished to join in them. Eleanor, whom doubtless j our readers will have < already ascertained to be the lovely object of lord Montalban's admira¬ tion, turned her head, and on beholding the stranger whom she had seen before, blushed excessively, as lord Montalban, with tlie most graceful and winning man¬ ners, addressed her, and begged the ho¬ nour of her hand in the dance. A soft confusion stole over her lovely face as she replied to the elegant speaker, whose grace¬ ful and prepossessing form hispired her young heart with the most lively emotion; and after some little hesitation she granted him his request. Lord Montalban was enraptured—he should now have an opportunity of con¬ versing with his intended bride, who, in ignorance of his real character, would be¬ have with her native unrestrained man¬ ners : and if he had been struck with the beauty of her person, how was he enrap¬ tured with her on a farther acquaintance!
He congratulated himself on his happy fate, and anticipated the moment when he should unfold himself to her as her in¬ tended husband, and yield himself up a willing votary to her bewitching loveli¬ ness. Alas! he knew not the fatal mis¬ take under which he was .labouring, or that the passion he already too truly felt, was that which was to prove the bane of his peace. He felt he trod on air, as lie led her through the soft mazes of the dance: his behaviour to her was respect¬ ful and tender, and his admiration of her increased to such a height, that he felt his future happiness depended upon her alone: he beheld her in a situation most calculated to please him—in the acts of charity; and where she was dispensing blessings to all around, he heard a thou¬ sand tongues vibrate in her praise, and invoke blessings on her head, while she herself appeared " Piea&'il with all, and happy all to please; Gay without ait, and muuecut with e.ise." Kor was the impression made on his lord-
ship less dangerous than that which his figure and behaviour had raised in the susceptible bosom of Eleanor, who felt that her heart was no longer a stranger to that passion' which had been so vainly implored by Robert Glendinning; lord Montalban had, in a few hours, been able to effect that for which the former had so unsuccessfully pleaded; Eleanor, for the first time, loved, while the behaviour of her delighted partner plainly shewed her that their feelings were reciprocal. Lvery thing that night appeared to conspire to¬ wards their mutual felicity; unobserved by the eyes of greatness or the remarks of their families, each felt at ease, and no¬ thing occurred to discover the fatal mis¬ take in which lord Montalban was delight- ino-; the rustics addressed her as Miss Glendinning, and his lordship could not admit a doubt of her being his intended bride. Eleanor, greatly surprised at the elegant appearance of her partner, much wondered
who, he could : possibly be; she was con¬ vinced he was of high descent, and was astonished at his being introduced by the cottager to her; she could not learn his name, as all .-who. really knew him paid too • much respect to disobey his orders. At length .the, shadows of night began to draw on, and Eleanor, with a sigh, recol r lected she must withdraw. The parting Vfith the stranger caused her a pang, of which she almost felt ashamed; but the idea that she should perhaps never see him again, hurt her more, than she even acknowledged, to herself; but it was un¬ avoidable, for a servant of lord Arthur's now appeared to conduct her home. Ro¬ bert Glendinning had intended to have escorted her on this night, but a severe cold had confined him to the,house, much against his will, which had eventually aid¬ ed the first impression of a passion which would have caused him the bitterest pang tO'knOW./; -: ... ,;-.;; •;,;,.;.. . .■,;.., r .. v ;'-. Eleanor, now gracefully curtseying to
lord Montalban, informed him she must retire, as a servant waited to conduct her to the castle. His lordship took her hand, and fervent- ly pressing it between his own, replied— " I will not be so selfish as to detain vou one minute longer, as in so doing I should expose you to the night air; but, believe me, Miss Glendinning, the pang I feel at parting can only be assuaged by the as¬ surance that xve shall meet again; and be¬ lieve me when I say, that the pleasure afforded to me this evening will ever dwell in my remembrance. Oh! might I in¬ dulge a hope that lovely bosom would also remember a being whom you have thus highly favoured, how great would be my happiness!" Eleanor was agitated—too well she felt he would indeed be ever present to her imagination, but prudence whispered in her ear to conceal her feelings.—" This language, sir," she replied, " suits not with the present time, nor must I listen to it from the lips of a stranger."
Lord Montalban bowed i respectfully— *' I would not for worlds offend your de¬ licacy," he cried; " believe me, Mihs Glen¬ dinning, I admire you more for your charming reproof. 1 am, as you justly observe, a-stranger at present; but the time will come, and shortly too, when, I flatten myself, you will change that title to a friend, at least until you shall be pleased to bestow on me a still dearer than that." He gazed tenderly on her, while Elea¬ nor, more surprised than ever at his ad¬ dress, could hardly conceal her real feel¬ ings. Lord JMontalban re?d the soft con¬ fusion in her intelligent features; she could not reply; he therefore, resigning her hand, wished her farewell, while Ele¬ anor retired amidst the blessings of all around. For the first time their honest effusions were unheeded by her — the stranger alone took possession of her thoughts, and it was with a degree of pleasure she reflected on his assurance that they should meet again.
Meantime lord Montalban also bent his steps to his own home. He found his father and aunt in some surprise as to his long stay.—" And to mc," he cried, uc the time has appeared to fly; for never have I passed such happy hours. Oh, my dear aunt, I am almost mad with joy," " So it should seem," replied the mar¬ quis, " by all this transport. But pray condescend, while you yet retain your senses, to explain the cause of this violent joy." " I have seen her!" he exclaimed, " and she is the most 'lovely, the most bewitch¬ ing girl I ever saw. My heart is so elate that I cannot talk rationally, therefore ask me no more questions this night, for I am so entranced with my own thoughts, that mere w r ords appear too trivial to ex¬ plain my meaning, and cannot sufficiently express my admiration of this charming girl." " For Heaven's sake, Frederick," cried lady Cecilia, 5 " what do you mean by all this rhapsody? And who is this female,
of whom you are so enamoured, when your ideas should alone turn on Miss Glendinning ?" " Then,- for once, madam," said lord Montalban, " I havethe happiness of act¬ ing right, in your ladyship's opinion. It is to Miss Glendinning I am enslaved—it is on her alone my thoughts are fixed; I have this night seen her—conversed with her—and she has captivated my very soul." The countenance of lady Cecilia bright¬ ened up at this declaration, as she inquired how he had seen her ? His lordship mere¬ ly replied that he had seen her at the rural fete, without discovering himself to her. Lady Cecilia knew that lady Glendinning subscribed to the village school, but was unacquainted that Eleanor was its patron¬ ess; she therefore readily believed that it was Miss Glendinning, and entered into warm encomiums on her goodness, in which lord Montalban joined, and ex¬ pressed his impatience for the arrival of | the morning, when he was to; be intro-
duced at St. Michael's Castle; and on re¬ tiring for the night, his dreams realized the lovely visions which his waking thoughts had presented, and he fimcied himself the happiest of human beings.
CHAPTER XIV.
Oh, slipp'ry state of things! U"liat siuldou turns What strange vicissitudes in the first lear" Of man's sad h ; 3tory !—To-day most happy, Ami, ere to-morrow's sun lias set, most abject. How scant the space between these vast e\trcmeo! Br..\ia. The family at St. Michael's Castle having received intimation of the arrival of lord Montalban, were in eager expectation of his visit, Georgina was all impatience to behold her lover, and so filled was her head with the idea of her promised great¬ ness, that she could scarcely obtain any sleep on the night preceding his expected visit; nor was she the only one whose re¬ pose was disturbed within the walls of the castle—Eleanor in solitude and silence passed a night of uneasiness and disquie¬ tude: a half-formed wish arose that she
had never beheld the unknown stranger; yet, when she reflected on his graceful form, she felt she would not forego the pleasure of his acquaintance for worlds, and with a secret anxiety she anticipated the time when, according to his promise, they were to meet again. Alas! how un¬ foreseen are all mortal occurrences! how little did Eleanor imagine that, on seeing him again, she should be plunged into the depth of woe—that his presence would only serve as tlie means of destroying her peace of mind! On joining the family next morning at breakfast, she heard almost with indiffer¬ ence of the expected visit of lord Mont¬ alban, when lord Arthur, who had been retired, on the preceding night, before Eleanor had returned, inquired the parti¬ culars of the rustic fete. She endeavoured to give a description of it, but her voice faltered as she spoke on the pleasure she experienced; nor could she have courage to mention the stranger with whom she VOL. I. L
i danced—a something prompted her to conceal this circumstance, most probably because she could not name him without -betraying the emotion she felt on the oc¬ casion. ' fi Lord Arthur bestowed liis ?usual appro¬ bation on her actions, while Mrs. Conway declared it must have been a pretty sight, and almost wished she had gone to it, a.s no doubt it must have been conducted in a very genteel manner, as Miss Eleanor had had the management of it. " At least, madam," said lord Arthur, " it was no doubt conducted in a way to gratify the feelings of the parties whom it most concerned, as I am convinced Elea¬ nor had no other intention than that of bestowing on the objects of her bounty a few hours of rational delight; and happy should I he if I saw others of my family imitate her praiseworthy example, and in the practice of acts of unostentatious cha¬ rity, find those pure delights which are sought in vain in the vortex of dissipa¬ tion."
. Lady Glendinning cas't a> look full df anger on his lordship—" I understand th& meaning of your allusion/ my lord," she cried; "but possibly those other persons, of your family, though equally inclined to assist the institutiori. may possess ideas- too enlarged to mix with theJdwer order of society, who, though doubtless* very* good sort of people, are - not' fit - compae nions for either lady Glendinnihgi or hen daughter." ' ,! v - M " " By no means," replied his lordship;, " I am a strenuous advocate -for distinc¬ tion amongst the classes of society,, but, on an occasion like the present, the {>i% sence of their kind benefactors must ha\*t\ produced a pleasing sensation in their bo^ nest hearts < and I am confident* were your ladyship to taste the real blessings of charity, you would experience moid pleasure than in nightly wasting youtr hours in dissipation." " Possibly so, my lord," She - cried ;.'<' I will not dispute the point with you ;*;M l a * 5
all have their different ideas respecting the word pleasure —happiness I will not constitute it, r for. that is a gem I never more' expect to possess; pleasure is there¬ fore *>my 'only pursuit, which I seek in scenes of-gaiety. • Eleanor finds it in her schemes of benevolence; while you, my lord, I suppose, enjoy it to tlie utmost extent in resigning yourself to a profound melancholy,-which lias eventually sunk a master, a husband, and a father, into a glddmy misanthrope, from which no power of his family can withdraw him." Xordi Arthur felt rather confused at this address; he could not hut own the truth of hbr reproof* though he felt angry with her speech.—" It is in vain, madam,*' he returned, " you thus reproach me; my melancholy is of a nature past all remedy. I own <it has absorbed me, nor do I wish to'throw, it off; the world has no charms for me—I have long ceased to value it— it is,-at best, but.a delusion, to wreck the happiness of man; and were it not for that hope which teaches us to look for some-
thing ibeyondi the?contemplativeimind could scarce endure the vpriyilege^bf thought;"."^ :•■.•■;■;',■>'''/■; V'tu-,: >:Atirt:rj:\q.i vLady Glendinning was about>to ; reply^ when she was interrupted by the entrance of lady Lenox, who hastened sto the castle, in order to be present at the introduction of lord Montalban, and the ! conversation reverted entirely to him; 'vr.-r.-fixi yAi-"u> Mr. and Mrs, Conway, with Eleanor, retired, as they deemed their presence might be intrusive on i the first introduc¬ tion ; and Georgina also declared she would wait iniier own room! till she was: sent for down, adding, she knew/her. grandma'jwas fond of etiquette and form;! > ~>ws'L will •:■ Lady Lenox entered into a long- /har rangue on the propriety of her behaviour, and then suffered her to retire. ^^-i- :,:hv At a very early hour the arrival oflady Cecilia Gray and lord Montalban was an¬ nounced. Lord Arthur, ever attentive to the rules of good ; breeding, received: him with every mark of respect, as did lady Glendinning, with her. usual dignity; of
IntoeFs, f \ Lord \ Montalban was in the highepti'spirjts imaginable, and his whole appearance and behaviour excited the j\\h$t\ favourable^ impressions oh lord Ar- thurfandJiislady; : :< : ; ;• '-:,v-'. c oI.iLady ^Cecilia Gray now inquired- after thebbealth: of ? Miss Glendinning,' Avhile lojfd;-Montalbaiu /anticipating the i arrival of the moment fpr: which he so panted, jmp^tjlently: requested tp he; introduced to •k(?f^:yq .- : r-/-r. ■:•■.,;•■ ■■. -■ ■>'■■ •■.- :' - ! -'. : - ' :fedy Lenox i desired a; gerva.nt to re r %uest the presence of Miss Glendinning. \\ v vvThe heart ef lord Mbntalbas throbbed rwith emotion.—" What a surprising like¬ ness Miss Glendinning bears towards lord Arthur!" he cried. " Had I previously seen your lordship to; my meeting with your lovely daughter, I should have re¬ quired ho greater introduction than the resemblance she bears." f. :.; VvWh'at then, have.;you already seen myi ^anddaughter;■?*- said- lady Lenox. ^ f>?fIOh yes," replied lad^ Cecilia; " and the effect has proved just what I expected
ELEANOR. —I knew" he must admire Miss Glendin¬ ning." " Or else I were lost to all sense of beauty," he returned; " for to see that lovely form must be to adore; who can be insensible to such fascination ?" r " And pray, my lord," inquired lady Glendinning, *' how and when have you seen Georgina?" " Last night," he replied, " unknown to herself, I saw her, and conversed with her." " Indeed!" said her ladyship. " But where ?" His lordship was about to answer, when the door opened, and Georgina entered, leaning on the mm of Eleanor. . Lady Glendinning advanced, and meet¬ ing them, exclaimed—" Lord Montalban!" Eleanor, on seeing him, uttered an ex¬ clamation of surprise, her cheeks turned pale, and she trembled, as the whole truth flashed upon her mind; while lord Mont¬ alban, passing Georgina, seized the hand of Eleanor, exclaiming—" Lovely Miss
Glendinning! may I hope the pleasure of this hour is reciprocal ? And permit me now to fulfil the promise I last night made you, when I vowed we should meet again; - and thus, in the presence of your parents, I acknowledge the felicity with which your presence inspires me." Eleanor was near fainting with varying sensations, while lady CeciUa and lady Lenox both exclaimed—" What is the meaning of this ? Is your lordship mad, or are you really labouring under a mis¬ take?" "What mistake can there be?" returned his lordship; ** do I not address Miss Glen¬ dinning, the daughter of lord Arthur?" " No, my lord," cried lady Glendinning, who felt provoked at the slight put upon Georgina; " or at least," she added, in a sarcastic tone, " not my daughter, whom I now present to your lordship." Georgina, who felt extremely mortified, bowed very haughtily, while lord Mont¬ alban, in a tone of disappointment • and distress, begged an explanation of the
mystery, and added, having been intro¬ duced to that lady as Miss Glendinning, he had of course concluded it to be the daughter of lord and lady Glendinning. Lady Lenox cast a look of furious anger on the affrighted Eleanor, as she violently exclaimed—" This comes of this girl's in¬ trusion into our family, and being called by a name to which she has no right; thus causing an insult to be offered to my granddaughter, of whose presence lord Montalban hardly appears sensible." " I beg your ladyship's pardon," he re¬ plied ; " no insult, on my part, has been offered to Miss Glendinning, who, I trust, knowing the mistake which has occurred, will pardon an unintentional offence." " None has been offered on your part," cried lord Arthur, who had appeared great¬ ly distressed at the above discovery; " the mistake which has occurred was very na¬ tural; and I must affirm that lady Lenox has greatly forgotten herself; when she expresses herself in a way so insulting to l 3
Eleanor; and I insist that an apology is made to her. You behold in that young lady, iny lord, not my daughter, but my niece, who, in that character, is entitled to as much respect as my own offspring; and I insist, while under my roof, she shall meet with it" Lord Montalban appeared to revive at this declaration—** Your lordship's niece!" he repeated; *' then at least I may be both pardoned and excused for my mistake." " And that is at best but doubtful," in¬ terrupted lady Lenox, who was highly enraged at the speech of lord Arthur; and dancing her eyes at him, she continued— " Although your lordship pleases to assert it, other people may not be inclined to be so credulous; and I must say your folly is n6w very apparent, as in encouraging her arrogance, you have subjected your own daughter to this disrespectful treat¬ ment No doubt Miss Eleanor was high¬ ly 'delighted last night, in passing herself off as the heiress of Glendinning'" Eleanor, who till now had remained si-
lent, hearing herself so falsely accused, re¬ plied—" I beg your ladyship's pardon; the unfortunate mistake which has oc¬ curred was perfectly undesigned on my part; nor am I aware why your ladyship should thus unjustly accuse me. It is true that lord Montalban widely erred in his judgment, when he mistook a poor orphan like myself for the much happier and accomplished Miss Glendinning; I acknowledge my depeiident situation on the bounty of lord and lady Glendinning, to whose kindness I owe every thing; but, notwithstanding this, I feel a sentiment within my bosom, which impels the rising blush to pervade my cheek, as 1 think on the indignity offered to me; let me be whose offspring I may, I trust I am not the object of insult. Lord Montalban," she continued, " will, I have no doubt, soon repair the injury done to Miss Glen¬ dinning, by forgetting the trifling ac¬ quaintance he formed with an unfortunate being like myself." She could not pro¬ ceed, her feelings overcame her, and she
burst into tears. Ashamed of her weak¬ ness, she then begged permission to retire from a scene to which her presence could oniy add fresh embarrassments. , " For your own sake, my dear Eleanor," cried lord Arthur, " I will allow you to leave the room, as your feelings must doubtless be greatly hurt at the treatment you have received, and which, I trust, will never again be repeated, or I shall be compelled to use the authority of my own house, in desiring those who are deficient in the respect due to my family to desist from their visits, and to learn that an in¬ sult offered to you is an indirect one to me; and, depend on it, I shall resent it as such.; And now, my Eleanor, retire, and compose yourself, and be assured you will always find a protector in me." Eleanor curtseyed, and was about to leave the room, when lord Montalban, again rising from his seat, into which he had dejectedly thrown himself, thus ad¬ dressed her:—'* Before you leave the room, Miss Glendinning, permit me to apologise
to 3 r ou for the unpleasant situation into which I have, though unintentionally, thrown you ; believe me, 1 shall ever re¬ gret that I should have been the cause of giving you such uneasiness, be your situa¬ tion in this family what it may; you are the acknowledged niece of lord Arthur, and, as such, you certainly claim every attention and respect on my part. And I must now beg leave to correct an error in your expression, where you say I shall soon forget the acquaintance made with you : on the contrary, I shall ever remem¬ ber with pleasure the meeting with you last night; and I trust that meeting wiil prove favourable to my wishes, in forming a lasting friendship between us. To you, Miss Glendinning," he added, bowing to Georgina, " I am ready to make any apo¬ logy which you think necessary; but I am sure your good nature will prompt you to pardon an error which can in no way derogate from your beauty and merits; and be assured I shall at all times be ready to pay every respect due to the daughter
Of lord Arthur; and I now trust you will generously pronounce my pardon." Georgina haughtily replied that his lordship's excuse was admitted, as the occasion could not possibly affect her in any way whatever. Lord JMontalban turned from her, and bowing to Eleanor with the utmost ten¬ derness, continued to gaze on her till the door closed after her; he then threw him¬ self into his chair, and leaned pensively on his hand. All voices now began to resound in dis¬ cordant tones; lady Lenox, who was dy¬ ing to vent her spleen against fSleanor, continued to throw out invectives, but was restrained by the presence of lord Arthur; while lady Cecilia, who thought and acted in compliance with her, ex¬ pressed her disapprobation of the forego¬ ing scene; adding, she thought lord Mont¬ alban had made himself very ridiculous in the affair, and that she could not see why so much should have been made of a trif¬ ling mistake, which had now been tho-
roughly explained, and the subject might now be altogether dropped. Lady Glendinning had remained tlie most silent of the party; it was evident that she was greatly disconcerted, but she forbore to express her feelings on the oc¬ casion. Lord Arthur looked the > riiost gratified of all—he appeared to be the only one pleased at the above incident; while lord Montalban plainly evinced how much uneasiness he experienced in this cruel disappointment to his hopes: his situation was certainly a most unpleasant one, as he had so openly avowed his ad¬ miration of Eleanor, who he Saw had no friend in any present, save lord Arthur; it was in vain he endeavoured to converse with ease; and all parties found them¬ selves mutually embarrassed. Earl Campbell now entered the room, when the mistake which had occurred was detailed to him. .With his usual policy, he smiled at the trifling incident, which he passed off as a thing of no consequence whatever, though he plainly saw, by the
countenances of all present, that the effect was dangerous; and poor Eleanor was the mental object of his displeasure Lord Montalban as soon as possible shortened the visit, which had so com¬ pletely crushed his hopes of happiness: the ladies took leave of him rather coolly, while the hearty shake of the hand given him by lord Arthur, proved that he at least was his friend; he likewise gave him a general invitation to the castle, which lord Montalban of course accepted. On his entering the carriage with lady Cecilia, she began by pouring out a pro¬ fusion of invectives against his foolish conduct, and vented a torrent of abuse on Eleanor, whose true and doubtful situa¬ tion she now explained to her nephew; adding, that she was a most presumirig, forward girl, who, taking advantage of lord Arthur's folly, intruded herself into their family, much against the inclination of one part of it. Lord Montalban warmly defended the innocent object of her wrath, and openly
avowed his admiration of her; that he had already yielded his heart too far to withdraw it from her; and that Eleanor was the only woman he ever saw who could make an impression on him. At this avowal lady Cecilia was en¬ raged almost to madness; she threatened instantly to discard him from her favour, and also threw out hints that his disobe¬ dience should be extended to his father. This alarmed lord Montalban ; for himself he cared not, but he knew the marquis had been imprudent—his estates were mortgaged, and he in a manner was de- pendent on his wealthy sister, who reigned sole mistress on this account: all her im¬ mense property she had bequeathed, at her decease, to the marquis and his son, and she now threatened to withdraw all favours, if lord Montalban persisted in his folly towards Eleanor. Under these cir¬ cumstances, he endeavoured to pacify her; but on their arrival at home she immedi¬ ately sought the marquis, and acquainted him with the result, and her anger at lord
Montalban's conduct. The marquis, who -lived a slave to her wishes, directly coin¬ cided with her, and joined in threats to¬ wards his son, who at last, wearied with their united persecutions, promised to think no more of Eleanor, but to visit at St. Michael's as the lover of Miss Glen¬ dinning. As soon as possible he retired to his own room, and in an agony of mind reflected on this distressing occurrence. To appease his relatives he had indeed promised to forget Eleanor, but the painful sensation at liis heart told him that was impossible —he had.suffered her to take too deep an impression on his heart to erase her, and her lovely form arose before his eyes with redoubled delight; he thought on the cruel treatment she received from lady Lenox, and her tears pierced him to the soul. Had he been independent, he would instantly have gloried in avowing his love, and joined his hand to hers; but, as it was, he dared not: he felt he could never love another, and a secret motive
induced him to keep on friendly terms at the castle, as it would give him an oppor¬ tunity of frequently seeing her; and he indulged a hope that something might transpire to favour his wishes, as he saw lord Arthur was not displeased at his at¬ tention to Eleanor. How different were liis feelings to what they had been a few short hours since, when he had thought himself at the climax of earthly happiness, in being about to receive the hand and affections of t : he lovely being who had so enslaved his, very soul It- the. contrast was HOW so umresanig max ne coiau t>v«.i*~Wy endure the painful conviction, and he threw himself on a chair, and mentally exclaimed—" I am the most miserable of human beings," .
CHAPTER XV. Thou seest we i,ire not all alone unhappy; '1 his wide and universal theatre Presents more woeful pageants than the scene Wherein we play Shakespeare. Eleanor, on quitting a scene so painful to her feelings, instantly retired to her own room, and there gave vent to those emotions which she could not conceal; never in her life had she felt so truly mi¬ serable—the treatment she had received had stung her to the soul; but even that appeared light, when put in competition with the discovery she had made; to find, in the graceful stranger, lord Montalban, the intended husband of Georgina, was agony to the extreme; she had suffered her young and innocent heart to cherish his fascinating form since they had met on the preceding evening, and she would
have given worlds to have found him any other person in existence than lord Mont¬ alban ; of course she novv considered she must endeavour to forget him, though how difficult would be the task, when she should be continually seeing him! She concluded he would also withdraw his attention from her, now he had found her to be only a dependent on lord Ar¬ thur; her pride was hurt again. She thought on his kind and impassioned be¬ haviour towards her; but that was while he was-under the impression of his mis¬ take; his attention must now be directed to Miss Glendinning, while she was ren¬ dered miserable; yet, be her feelings what¬ ever they might, she was resolved to give no farther encouragement to lord Mont¬ alban, as she saw the indignation of all the family would fall upon her if she were an obstacle to their greatness; she saw her¬ self, by a sudden and unexpected event, plunged into a difficulty, from which she feared there was no resource; she dreaded
•the rage of lady Lenox, whose behaviour filled her with terror, and she pictured to herself future scenes of vexation and dis¬ tress; she mentally raised a prayer to the wise Disposer of ali events, to guide her safe through her perilous situation, and to give her strength to sustain lier present affliction. She had scarce relieved her surcharged heart, when Mrs. Conway tapped at her door; and on entering, expressed her sur¬ prise at the remains of tears which still shone in the eyes of Eleanor. She endea¬ voured to give a trifling excuse; and Mrs. Conway proceeded to say, that having learned she was in her own room, she had come to her to know what she thought of lord Montalban; adding, she had watched him into his carriage, and that she thought he appeared the most genteel and hand¬ some young man she had ever seen. This question raised the embarrassment of poor Eleanor, and as she coincided in the opinion of Mrs. Conway, a deep blush
pervaded her countenance, and a fresh tear chased down her cheek, which had before glistened in her eye. Mrs. Conway now asked her the cause of all this emotion, and begged her to tell her the cause of her grief; adding, if it was in her power to serve her, she might depend on her will. Eleanor thanked her, and partly owned the cause of her agitation, as slie thought it must now reach the ears of all pariiefc— her having met with lord Montalban at the rural fete. Mrs. Conway blessed herself with sur¬ prise, and significantly added, she guessed who would be the future lady Montalban; though, to be sure, in that case, she conti¬ nued, what was to become of poor Mr. Robert Glendinning, who to be sure was dying for her ? Eleanor immediately corrected both her opinions, adding, that it was totally im¬ possible for eitlier of those gentlemen to be any thing farther to her than they
were; and begged her never to mention such a subject again, if she valued her peace. Mrs. Conway of course promised she would not do any thing to vex her, as she should always be most happy to do any thing to serve her; and added, that if any of the family treated her ill through the present mistake, that her house should al¬ ways be an asylum for her. Eleanor sincerely thanked her, and sighed as she reflected that Mrs. Conway's suppo¬ sition might prove real, and her offer ac¬ ceptable to her: Eleanor found her so truly good-natured, that she excused her vulga¬ rity and ignorance, and she felt glad to converse with one who appeared to be¬ friend her. Mrs. Conway staid in her room until it was time to dress for dinner, and Eleanor dreaded almost to meet the family under her embarrassed situation, particularly as she understood lady Lenox was to be pre¬ sent; and had she been aware of what
had transpired during the morning, she would have dreaded still more to have met with her. We have already observed that Eobert was confined to his room with a severe cold, and consequently had not been pre¬ sent at the scene of confusion, which saved him the pangs which it would have in¬ flicted in his bosom. After the departure of lord Montalban, lady Lenox paid a visit to the chamber of her grandson, and on his inquiring respecting lord Montal¬ ban, she immediately related the scene which had passed, with all due exaggera¬ tion, alleging that Eleanor had passed her¬ self off as Georgina, danced with him, and, in short, had so artfully captivated him, that she supposed the consequences would be very pretty indeed. This account greatly distressed llobert; he did not believe a word to the disadvan¬ tage of Eleanor, but that lord Montalban was really in love with her he did not doubt, and* it was also probable that she VOL. i. m
was likewise pleased with his lordship: this idea caused him the greatest pain, and he resolved, let the consequences be what they would, to avow his own love for her, and endeavour to gain her affec¬ tions before they should be irrevocably lost; he therefore defended Eleanor, and said quite enough to convince his enraged grandmother of the state of his heart. This information added to her former vexation, and she left Robert, highly en¬ raged with him also. She considered Ele¬ anor as an object doomed to thwart the hopes of her ambitious plans, as, in the event of lord Montalban fulfilling his en¬ gagement with Georgina, another blow was ready to fall on her head, still worse than that; that the heir of Glendinning should so demean himself, was a dreadful degradation to her pride, and she inwardly resolved to form some plan to get rid of the unfortunate Eleanor. She left llobert, highly displeased; while he, regardless of her disapprobation, resolved to speak to his father on the sub-
ject; and he flattered himself that, in ob¬ taining his consent, he might also gain that of Eleanor. The awful warning at the tomb he now looked upon as some imposition—it might even have been a stratagem of lady Lenox, who had pro¬ bably overheard their conversation; at all events, he resolved to make another effort to gain the hand of Eleanor. Finding himself something better, he joined the party at dinner, where all ap¬ peared dissatisfied ancl ill at ease; lady Lenox never spoke, or took the least no¬ tice of Eleanor, who sat uneasy and sad; Mr. and Mrs. Conway were the only lively ones in company; they mentioned their intention of shortly departing for London, and again begged the present party to favour them with their company at some period or another. This invitation produced in the mind of lady Lenox a plan, which slie was re¬ solved to try to effect, by which means to rid herself of Eleanor, whom she now
m2
really hated; these thoughts she, how¬ ever, kept to herself until another oppor¬ tunity. As soon as possible, she mentioned her design to lady Glendinning,, who made no objection to the proposal, as, she was really hurt at the affront, as she considered it, put upon her family by lord Montalban. Pursuant to her design, lady Lenox now became all of a sudden very civil to Mrs. Conway, and at length hinted how pleasant it would he to her to return to London with a female companion; and that she dare say lady Glendinning would be kind enough to let Eleanor accompany her. This was immediately caught at by Mrs. Conway, who much wished for the society of Eleanor; and thanking lady Lenox, slie said she would ask the per¬ mission of lord Arthur and. his lady. Accordingly, on meeting again at the tea- table, Mrs. Conway openly requested Ele¬ anor to accompany her to London, in which she was joined by Mr. Conway. Though Eleanor had not the least wish for such a journey, yet, under the present
circumstances, she considered it niight possibly be the wisest step she could pur¬ sue, Which would of course remove her from lord Montalban y she hesitated in her reply, und looked fearfully at lady Gleridinning, who, putting on a smile, cned-ii-" If you think you should like &e journey, Eleanor, you have my 'free ^permission and approbation to accompany Mrs. Conway for any time you like." ' « Thank your ladyship," said the de¬ lighted Mrs. Conway. " No\v> Miss Ele¬ anor, you can have no farther excuse; and I am sure I will "do every thing in my power to make you comfortable." " I have no doubt as to that, madam," cried lord Arthur, in a tone of displeasure'; " but Eleanor has yet a very just excuse left for declining your kind invitation—a reason Which puts it entirely Out of her power to &ecept if." " Indeed, my lord," replied Mrs. Con¬ way ; " and what is that ?" " My total disapprobation, madam" he
returned; ^.and I think Eleanor ijwould not wishtodisobeymy commands." ^ v ; :" Certainly not," replied Eleanor; " ,be assured I; would not; think; of it, without -it was sanctioned by ,y ourjlprdship," , *f. And pray, my lord," cried -ladyAGlen- dinning, -,-$. what may your objections -be ? -WhenJ haye given my consent-I <should judge; it quite sufficient: 'oyer,Eleanor's actions;] I have certainly an undoubted right." -h-,,-'. : v . ; : ;v;J,; v:,- : -\::-i,w:-y>: ]" You have so," he replied; ^ but when she was consigned to ^owr care, she. be¬ came, from that moment, an inmate of my family; and 1 no part, of it shall ever quit;this house unaccompanied, either,by yourself or me; and I trust Mrs.. Conway will not deem this avowal as & rude ; orie, hut impute it to its right meaning; and therefore I hope the; request will, not be renewed, as I never will consent to it." ; Mi's.Conway said,'though she was:vast¬ ly disappointed, she coulcT not be so, t un- gentteel ;astOi repeat her ; wish, as his lord-
ship did not like it; and it was now finally settled that they should depart from the castle on the next day. On hearing her plan defeated, lady Le¬ nox was greatly enraged, and she threw out bitter sarcasms'on the behaviour of lord Arthur; and requesting her carriage might be ordered, she left the room, high¬ ly displeased. She requested to speak to lady Glendinning, and, when alone, she incensed the mind of her daughter against lord Arthur, and added fresh fuel to the fire which burned within her bosom; she was indeed greatly vexed with lord Ar¬ thur for counteracting her designs, and for the next succeeding day she behaved towards him with an additional haughti¬ ness, which had no other effect upon him than that of still being more displeased with her than ever. Tn the course of the morning lord Mont- r/lban was announced, having come to pay 3 morning visit. Eleanor, who was pre¬ sent, trembled a3 he entered the room. He addressed her in the most polite man-
uer, and likewise conducted himself the same to lady Glendinning and her daugh¬ ter, though it was evident that his mind was ill at ease; but our readers are ac¬ quainted with the fatal cause of his forced obedience to his aunt, and will not there¬ fore wonder that, to please her, and to save his father, he had consented to visit us the lover of Georgina, though, in his own mind, he was resolved never to wed any other than Eleanor. Robert, who was now present, watched the direction of his lordship's eye, which he saw fixed with tenderness on Eleanor, and gave to his heart a pang which he could scarce conceal. Lord Montalban too truly read in the intelligent countenance of Eleanor that his feelings were reciprocal; he saw the blush of her cheeks, he beheld her down¬ cast eye, with emotions of joy and grief. To be loved by her was the height of his wishes; and yet it was almost madness to hope it, in his present situation. ^Eleanor, who was greatly embarrassed
by his presence, took the first opportunity of retiring with Mrs. Conway, in order fo assist her in arranging her things fdr tra± veiling. She was profuse in her praises of lord Montalban, who, she said, was a fit husband for Eleanor, and that she must forgive her for saying they would make a charming couple. Eleanor reproved her for her observa¬ tions, and begged she would not repeat them, as it greatly distressed her. ' Mrs. Conway staid with Eleanor almost to the last minute of her departure,* till at length Mr. Conway sumrhoned her to the chaise, which was waiting. A very cor¬ dial leave was taken by all the family, arid Mrs. Conway promised to write EleanOr an account of her reception with her fa¬ ther. * ' ' ? ' , Eleanor did not rriakti her appearance in the drawing-room while lord MontaU ban staid, as she resolved to avoid him as much as possible, as his presence was now too painful for her to endure. .MS l( ' ' .-*'< 'i .
The whole family remained at home that day, and after tea, Robert requested pennission to speak to his,father alone. Lord Arthur, who usuaily retired early to his own room to indulge his melancho¬ ly, desired him to follow him ' there, and they left the room together. Eleanor, who' knew her* presence could be dispensed with by the present company, resolved to take a solitary ramble; and accordingly leaving the castle, bent her steps towards the seaside, with the inten¬ tion of again ascending the rocks where her curiosity had been so excited a short time since. She climbed up a craggy point, and gazed with admiration on the beautiful scene around her; suddenly she heard a low murmuring; she thought it was £ human voice; she listened atten¬ tively, and was convinced it was so. She cast her eyes around, and on another part, rather higher than that on which she stood, she beheld the same female whom she had before seen, again kneeling, and apparently raising a prayer to Heaven.
Eleanor was astonished; she left the spot on which she stood, and softly ascend¬ ed the other part of the rock, and arrived close behind the mysterious female. Ele¬ anor paused—she did not wish to interrupt her devotions, and she stood, fearing almost to breathe. The stranger, in an impressive voice, ejaculated a fervent prayer, and then, in supplicating accents, exclaimed—" Do thou, oh Father of mercies! receive my penitence—witness the contrition of my soul, and forgive my manifold errors. Yet, alas! I almost despair that pardon can be granted to a wretch hke me, who, repin¬ ing at thy wise decrees, has meditated the rash act of self-destruction. Yet thou, oh God! knowest my sufferings, and in death alone I seek repose." She paused, while Eleanor, who dis¬ tinctly heard the foregoing speech, trem¬ bled violently; she doubted not but this unhappy female was about to plunge her¬ self into eternity—she shuddered, as she feared lest in one moment she might be-
3352 ELEANOR. hold an act so repugnant to the feelings of * a true Christian; she had ever been brought up in the bright paths of religion, and the enormous Crime of which she thought the stranger now going to be guilty, made her tremble with horror, and she resolved to save her from her dreadful fete; she rushed forward, and catching the arm of the female, she exclaimed—" Rash woman! what art thou about, that thou darest thus to violate all laws, sacred and divine? Thinkest thou such prayers as thine can be acceptable to the Throne of Grace, who has pronounced an everlasting fiat on the suicide, who dares, unbidden, plunge into the presence of an offended God?" She paused, while the stranger, gazing wildly on her, gave a piercing scream, and exclaiming—" Merciful Heaven!" sunk fainting in the arms *of the terror-struck and astonished Eleanor.
CHAPTER XVI.
Then lei thy tongue my fate explain, And I will try to bear my woe. Lord Lyttleton Alns! how oft does goodness wound itself, And bweet affection punc the spring of woe! Home. Lord Arthur, on reaching his own room, turned a look of inquiry On his son, who, however, remained silent, and appeared vainly endeavouring to conquer an em¬ barrassment under which he evidently la¬ boured. After a pause of a few minutes, lord Arthur broke the silence, by exclaim¬ ing—" Now, Robert, I am ready to give you the hearing you wislied, and Wait your communication, Which I suppose to be a subject of consequence, by this pri¬ vacy." " It is indeed, my lord," he replied, «* a
subject on which hangs my future happi¬ ness ; and, in throwing myself upon your mercy and clemency, I trust I shall, as I ever have done, find a kind friend in my father, who will pity and assist me in my wishes." " Speak out," cried lord Arthur; " you have a father willing to promote your hap¬ piness, if in my power; say then what it is you would ask at my hands—what it is you require." *' I will, my lord, unfold all the weak¬ ness of my heart to you," returned Robert —« or rather let me say, my glory; for why should man blush to acknowledge an affection for a lovely, virtuous woman, whose smiles alone have power to capti¬ vate our very soul-—whose beauty, though like the glittering star of heaven, which now shines in majestic splendour in yon spangled sky, is but as a secondary object, when compared to the virtues of her mind —that sweetness of disposition and temper which have irrevocably won my affections? However, my lord, you may think this
picture overdrawn,, it is? realized in the lovely object of my affection, the .idea ,of whom has animated me to this expression." Lord Arthur faintly smiled at the warmth of his son, but a deep sigh escaped his lips as he replied—" If you really love such a woman as this, you cannot fear any disap¬ probation on my part, unless peculiar cir¬ cumstances impel me to it. But reveal the name of this captivating girl, and I shall then judge how to answer you." " Does not your lordship already guess ?" exclaimed Robert. " That I can have seen but one who bears this description,, you, my father, already know; you love her, and will, I am sure, receive her as your daughter. Oh then bless me with your approbation—let me fly to my Eleanor, and tell her that,, sanctioned by the con¬ sent of my father, I lay my hand and for¬ tune at her feet." > « , " Eleanor!" ejaculated lord Arthur, as his face assumed a deadly paleness—;" my worst fears are then realized! Oh, Robert!
rash, mistaken boy! never Can I sanction such an attachment." " Is it possible liiear you aright ?" cried Eobert. " Oh, my father! doom me not to such woe: I never can be happy with* out her. Is she not all you could desire for your son? is she not all I have de¬ scribed her ?" " She is indeed," replied lord Arthur*** " I own her matchless worth. But, mark me, Eobert, if you wish not to blast your own happiness for ever—if you value the peace of your father-—nay, my very rea¬ son—think no more of Eleanor—I so¬ lemnly avow she never can be yours; therefore promise me from this moment to forget her, or at least to view her in the light, as she really is, of a very near relation; speak, my son, and promise me this; oh! you know not what you have occasioned in my already-troubled bosom! then quickly vow obedience to my com¬ mands, and relieve thy agonized father." llobert was surprised at the agony of
his countenance; his heart was ready to break; his filial love prompted him to obey his father, but, in so doing, he lost Eleanor for ever.—" Oh, my fatlier!" he cried, " at least give me your reason for this cruel injunction—tell me what fatal cause exists to prevent our unions sure I am entitled to know why my hopes of happiness are thus crushed." " Must I explain to my son ?" retorted lord Arthur, in an angry voice t " it is my command, sir, that you obey my orders respecting Eleanor; those commands, how¬ ever cruel they may appear to you, are sa¬ cred, and I charge you to fulfil them; for know, should you persist in your purpose, and actually lead Eleanor to the altar, I Would at that moment step forth, and in the face of Heaven forbid your union, by revealing a cause which would at once stop thy impious design." " If such a causae exists then," inter¬ rupted Robert, <* reveal it now, my lord. I am your sori, it is true, and, Heaven is
my witness, I would sacrifice my life to the duty I owe a father; but, my lord, it is not your threats will enforce obedience. I feel I am injured; to affection I would yield any thing, but to your threats I am invulnerable." Lord Arthur took his hand—" Robert," he cried, " I have been too warm, but you know not the agitation of this wretch¬ ed bosom. I cannot reveal w r hat you ask, for, in so doing, your father would consign himself to everlasting shame and disgrace; therefore spare me—it is a father entreats his son—it is a father who thus prostrates himself to his child;" saying which he actually threw himself on his knees before the astonished Robert. " Rise, my lord," he exclaimed—" de¬ base not yourself to me; oh! rather let me assume that posture, and beg for your mercy. Rise, my lord, if you wish not to distract my senses." " Never," replied lord Arthur, " until you promise me to renow >& all thoughts
of Eleanor: oh! say but this, and you will relieve your father from the depth of misery." He appeared convulsed with agony: what a moment was this for a son!—'* My heart will break," cried Robert. " But, oh, my father! nature pleads for thee; rise then, and receive my vows of obedi¬ ence ; and Heaven grant me fortitude to aid me in my resolution! Yes, my father, for you alone I give up all thoughts of Eleanor; and now, my lord, I am again your son, and permit these knees to bend in obedience to your commands; they shall be sacred, though they cost me dear indeed." Lord Arthur started up, and throwing himself on the shoulder of his son, ex¬ claimed— " May the blessing of Heaven, who now witnesses thy filial piety, fall on thy head! Oh, Robert! I know not how to thank you enough; you have relieved my heart from a dreadful weight, for I know you will keep your word with me. Doubtless you think my commands cruel;
but the time may come when you will own that my reasons were decisive; and be assured, in any other choice you may make, yon shall have my entire approba¬ tion ; choose but a lovely, virtuous bride, and, be she ever so lowly, I will with joy receive her as my daughter." Robert shook his head.—" Alas, my father! no other willjiave power to erase Eleanor from my heart. Yet fear me not —I will adhere to my promise to you; but my own private feelings must be acute. And now pray excuse me—per¬ mit me to retire, that I may endeavour to compose my feelings." , . " Do so," replied his lordship, " and the blessing of your father attend you! I must also endeavour to collect my thoughts, for my mind is a perfect chaos." Robert pressed the hand of his father, and rushed from the room; while lord Arthur, throwing himself on a sofa, gave Vent to the feelings of his heart. That his son had thus nobly sacrificed his wishes to his will gave him the greatest satisfaction;
yet, while he applauded his conduct, he felt for his sufferings: to conquer an un¬ fortunate attachment he well knew was a pang almost past endurance; yet there were reasons which compelled such a sacri¬ fice to be made. His thoughts now revert¬ ed towards Eleanor: would she not also be rendered a sufferer by this blow to the hopes of Robert? Were her affections placed on him ? This he could not ascer¬ tain: he was fully aware that she had made an impression on lord Montalban, but he could not decide whether it was mutual; and here again a fresh perplexity arose in his mind. If he favoured the wishes of lord Montalban, he> was in a manner conspiring against Georgina; and could he act in opposition to the welfare of his own child? He knew not what steps to pursue; but he at length resolved to see Eleanor, and question her on the subject of Robert's attachment, and con¬ vince himself of the state of her heart. He endeavoured to compose himself, and then, pursuant to his design, he left his
chamber, and, regardless of the observa¬ tion it would excite, returned to the draw¬ ing-room—a practice of which he had ne¬ ver made use since the fatal time which had consigned him to the gloom and pri¬ vacy of his own chamber. Lady Glendinning and her daughter were now alone, and looked with a coun¬ tenance of surprise on the hasty appear¬ ance of lord Arthur.—" This is a favour, my lord," said her ladyship. " What has induced you to pay us this visit to-night ?" " Where is Eleanor ?" demanded lord Arthur, without paying any attention to his lady's question; " I want to speak with her immediately." Lady Glendinning looked mortified.— " I thought it must be an occasion of great importance, my lord, that could in¬ duce you to leave your chamber; Eleanor is certainly of great consequence, to be thus able to withdraw you from your fa¬ vourite solitude; but you must exert the virtue of patience till her return, for Ele¬ anor is out."
" Out!" re-echoed lord Arthur; '«where should she be, so late, and alone?" " Indeed I know not," replied her lady¬ ship ; *' over her actions you take so much concern and interest, that it scarcely leaves me any room to exert my authority." Lord Arthur appeared incapable of re¬ plying to his lady, and seating himself, merely expressed his intention of awaiting her return. The shades of night drew on fast, and still Eleanor did not appear. Lord Arthur paced the room.— w Does she usually stay out so late as this?" he at length inquired. Her ladyship replied in the negative. Another half-hour passed on, when a sudden thought assailed him.—" Where is Robert ?" he inquired. " He went out, my lord," replied Geor¬ gina, " directly he left you." " Then it is plain," cried lord Arthur. " But I will not be deceived—I will know the truth of this." He then desired that Eleanor might be sent to him, let her return at what time
she might; and leaving lady Glendinning much astonished at his conduct, once more retired to his own room. He there gave way to the most painful suspicions—-he was convinced in idea that Robert was now with Eleanor, and he tormented him¬ self by reflecting that perhaps he was, even now, forgetting his late promise to him, and persuading Eleanor to become his; in all the agony of suspense he re¬ mained for some time, tormenting himself with imaginary evils. Lord, Arthur, once the pride and envy of Scotland, was novv degenerated into the most miserable of his sex—bis fate apparently lying on the conduct of two children, whom he now concluded to be acting in total opposition to his wishes* What a piece of work is man L for ever " ingenious to contrive his own woe," and continually seeking out objects of grief; and, in anticipation of the future, passes over the present good—unmindful of bless¬ ings which are falling; on our heads, ob¬ scured perhaps.by the veil of adversity for
a time, but which eventually leads us to everlasting happiness—if not in this tran¬ sient world, it is revealed to us in that unknown land, where all is bliss without alloy. " Would to Heaven," sighed lord Ar¬ thur, " that this miserable frame were laid in its last peaceful abode! Who would live to be the wretched being I now am— a slave to my own tormenting passions, weighed down to earth by the stings of conscience, and sinking under the afflic¬ tion of a tormenting secret, which renders me a burthen to myself? Oh, Eleanor! Eleanor! where art thou now ?" he con¬ tinued. " Couldst thou but know what are my sufferings, thy gentle heart would pity me." He paused, as a tear dimmed his sunken eye. In a few minutes, as if suddenly re¬ collecting himself, he drew out his watch __the hour of nine was considerably past, and Eleanor not yet returned; his pa¬ tience was exhausted—he resolved to seek vol. I. N
her himself, though unacquainted with the route she had taken; he caught up his hat, when his door suddenly opened, and Ele¬ anor stood before him. " I was just coming to seek you," he cried, in an angry tone. lie cast a scru¬ tinizing glance on her; she appeared in¬ capable of speech, her eyes were red with weeping, and her whole frame trembled with emotion. This increased the alarm of lord Arthur—" Yes," thought he, « it is plain Robert has been with her—he has communicated my sentiments to her, and the result is evident. Oh, miserable father that I am! Yet the task must be com¬ pleted, though an arduous one." He kept his eye fixed upon Eleanor for some time, who seemed near sinking: she raised a glance so expressive on his lord- sliip, that he felt himself agitated,—" Ele¬ anor," he cried, " why have you absented yourself so long to-night? Is this well done, to assist in deceiving me? Nay, start not," he continued; " I am aware of what has been communicated to you this
night—your evident agitation is sufficient proof, and acts as a fresh torment to my mind." " Is it possible that I hear you aright?" said Eleanor, in a tremulous voice, " Can your lordship guess the fatal cause of my grief and horror? Oh! then I am most miserable indeed." " Yes, unhappy girl!" he replied, " I am not to be deceived. Where—where, I say, is your companion, with whom you have been reviling against me? But I solemnly declare that this deception shall be punished as it deserves. -Where have you left this beloved object, for whose sake you have forfeited my esteem ?" " Oh! say not so," exclaimed Eleanor, sinking on her knees before him. " Can you wonder at my grief, my agitation? But, oh! let all your anger fall on me alone; for that loved being, whom you thus unjustly accuse, suffer me to plead. Can your anger sever the affection that exists between us? oh, no-—impossible. Ah! frown not on me—let nature plead N2
at thy heart, and receive your child, your daughter, to your arms." " My daughter!" he re-echoed, as a cold shudder ran over his frame—" oh, Elea¬ nor! you know I already love you as such; but never can you become the wife of Robert." " The wife of Robert!" repeated Elea¬ nor. " Am I really in my senses? or does 1 your lordship mock my misery?— Too surely that is an event impossible to transpire; and I know not why, at such a time as this, you should speak on a sub¬ ject which 1 can only fill me with horror." " Let me rightly understand you," cried lord Arthur, " and tell me candidly, does not this emotion arise from Robert having this night acquainted you with my disap¬ probation of your union ?" " My lord, I know not what you mean. I have not seen your son this evening, nor do I know what has passed between Ro¬ bert and you on a subject of that nature, of which; be assured, 1 am in entire igno¬ rance—a subject which, with my consent,
can never be renewed, as tlie mere idea fills my mind with horror." The features of lord Arthur assumed a more placid appearance at this assertion.— " What then," he cried, " has not your grief proceeded on account of Robert? and have you not been staying out with him this night ?" " On my word, I have not," replied Eleanor; " and be assured, Robert is the last person in existence whom I could think of in the light to which you allude." " Why all this agitation then ?" inquired lord Arthur; " and why did you plead for my mercy on your companion f Did you not avow my frowns could not sever the affection between you and the beloved ob¬ ject? did you not acknowledge, in this, in favour of Robert?" Eleanor cast a glance of surprise— " Was it to him you alluded, my lord ?" she cried. « Certainly," he returned; " but I find I am mistaken." Eleanor clasped her hands together— N3
a smile of satisfaction stole over her love¬ ly features, as his ! lordship proceeded—^ " Though you have removed a weight .from my heart, yet much remains to be explained. Tell mo the meaning of those expressions 1 which burst from your lips as you implored mc to receive you as my daughter, and likewise who has been your companion to-night." Eleanor was evidently confused—she hesitated in her answer.—" My lord, your own behaviour is iny excuse; you ad¬ dressed me with seventy, and, unused to that tone from you, I sunk agitated, and became hardly able to reply. Am I not your child by adoption ? and, as such, a daughter implored the mercy of her father." Lord Arthur was affected—'* My child," lie replied—" my Eleanor, thou art indeed dear to my heart; yes, you shall be my daughter in affection; but still I must take the authority of a parent in asking where you have been to-night, and with whom ?" " My lord," she cried, '* I have been down to the village, and was detained in
conversation by one of the villagers, with whom I feared you were angry; and' it was for her I pleaded." Lord Arthur saw the blush on her coun¬ tenance as she framed this, excuse, for he was convinced it was so. Another suspi¬ cion now crossed his mind: it was very- probable that the companion of her walk was lord Montalban, and this sufficiently accounted for her extreme agitation and self-confession; even this idea appeared as light to^ him, in comparison with his other thoughts respecting Robert; for so great was his secret reason for preventing such an intercourse, that all else appeared as trivial. " Eleanor," he cried, addressing her very seriously, " I will question you no farther on a subject which evidently embarrasses you—1 will shew you what confidence I place in your virtue and integrity, only imploring you never to depart for one moment in future from the paths of sin¬ cerity ; the first deviation is fatal, since to retrieve it is impossible, particularly a young and lovely female, who^e tender
sex exposes them to many persecutions. Eleanor, trust not in man, unless sanc¬ tioned by the approbation of those whose maturer judgment can better discern your chance of happiness; in such a case, select some friend upon whose confidence you can rely, and who will serve you at every risk; make that friend of me,. Eleanor, and be assured I will ever protect you; should love, insidious love, woman's worst, destructive foe, assail your heart and wound your peace, then fly to me, reveal all your wishes, and be assured I will exert every nerve to promote your happiness. And now, Eleanor, though I would willingly, nay proudly, acknowledge you as my daughter, yet are there reasons of the most urgent nature to prevent your union with Robert; therefore, for my peace, once more promise me that you will never listen to his addresses." " Never, my lord," replied Eleanor; " I solemnly promise you, by all my hopes of peace in this world* and eternal happiness in that to come, never to regard him in any other light than I do at 1 present; and
be assured I entertain no other thought of him than I ought. I have ever looked upon him as a near relation, and as such I alone consider him." ' " I take you at your word," returned lord Arthur, " and believe me it is no common motive that thus impels me to act; I have reasons of the most serious nature, which I cannot explain. But I think I need not farther enforce obedience on your part, as, if I mistake not, your wishes point to another channel, but which, I fear, will tend only to embitter your peace of mind. Blush not, my Ele¬ anor," he added, as she averted her eyes in confusion—" love is a passion which, sooner or later, absorbs the noblest facul¬ ties of our souls. You are formed by na¬ ture tender and sensible—alive to all the softer feelings of your sex; this makes me tremble for your future peace. I am fully aware that lord Montalban has already discerned your superiority, and appreci¬ ates your virtue; but I fear his relations will not sanction his wishes, and I confess it would hurt me much to see my Eleanor
drawn into a family who^would scorn her; tlierefore beware how you listen to him, for I know, by sad experience, that a lover will use every argument to gain the object of his wishes; believe me, I have your welfare truly at heart, and, did it rest on me alone, I would promote your union with lord Montalban* who I think deserv¬ ing my Eleanor; and when I say this, I pay him the highest proof of my regard." " My lord," cried the agitated Eleanor, *' I know not how to thank you for your kindness to me; would I could express my gratitude! But, with respect to lord Montalban, though I own his superior qualities, yet I would scorn to enter his family under such circumstances; no, my lord, though a poor, unacknowledged ob¬ ject, I possess as proud a spirit as the haughty lady Cecilia Gray; though, I trust, not the same ungenerous temper to despise a being whom she imagines below her in birth. But the time may come when I shall stand forth and demand the respect due to my birth—my mother may some day stand forth and acknowledge
my rights; I may then probably be en¬ folded in a father's arms, who will bless and own his child. Oh, my mother! when shall I behold that time ?" Lord Arthur was astonished at her warmth—" Thy mother /" he repeated— " oh! would / could behold her! —Ah! why does she so long conceal herself from my view? Yet perhaps she no longer exists—dreadful thought to me!" " I believe, my lord," said Eleanor, gazing earnestly at him, " you once loved her with ardour and affection ?" " Once loved her!" he replied—" oh, Eleanor! I still dote on her—never can her image be effaced from my memory— no time can wash away my tears." " It is strange," v exclaimed Eleanor, " that lady 'Frances should thus have ab¬ sented herself so long from her family." " Lady Frances!" re-echoed lord Ar¬ thur, staring wildly on Eleanor. " Yes, my lord," she replied—" your sister, whom you so truly mourn—my supposed mother." " True, true," he cried; " my head-wan-
ders sadly to-night, I scarce know what I say, so many events press on my mind; I would therefore wish to be alone. Retire, -Eleanor, for to-night you also stand in need of rest; go and compose yourself, and endeavour to obtain some repose early." Eleanor, glad of his permission to retire, wished him a tender good-night, which he returned with affectionate warmth—he pressed her hand fervently. She looked at him earnestly—the starting tear was visible in her eye; she moved towards the door, and then returning, she pressed both the hands of lord Arthur between her own, and, in a voice of great emotion, she cried —« Oh! bless your Eleanor." Lord Arthur was affected at her ad¬ dress ; he cast a smile of delight on her, as he pronounced the words—*' Good¬ night, my dearest Eleanor; may the Al¬ mighty bless you as fervently as I do!— Bless you, my child!" E'SD OF VOL. I.
1'iinted by J. Darling, Lendenhall-Strect, London.
Eleanor: or, The spectre of St. Michael's: a romantic tale
V ELEANOR.
CHAPTER I.
"\Vhen~IIea\eii on man is pleas'djts wealth to shower, Ah! what an envied bliss doth Iluivcn ues'tow ! r To raise pale merit in her hopeless hour, And lead despondence from the tomb of hoc , Flndar. AFTER the departure of Mr. Crosby, all remained for some time silent. Elea¬ nor felt unaccountably interested in his sorrows, which she was convinced were acute; and as she reflected on his beha¬ viour, a pensivehess stole, over her own frame. Mrs. Conway observed the dejection which was fast displaying itself on her .vol. in. t ; b f. ,
face, and exclaimed—" Why, Eleanor, you look as mournful as though something was the matter with yourself. Do not smrer that old man's griefs to make you miserable; it is his way. For my part, I don't mind him, or he would always be making me wretched if he had his will; because he has no relish for the pleasures oP the world, he rails at all who are cap¬ able of enjoying it. But pray who can answer that his youthful days may not have been passed in as much dissipation as those whom he now so much condemns?" (i I am not of that opinion, my dear," returned Mr. Conway. " I have heard him often speak of the very retired life which he has always led ; domestic com- fort&'have alone constituted his felicity, from which, by some cruel blow, he has been torn. But though he has acknow¬ ledged thus much to me, I have never known the true cause of his sorrows, which he cautiously conceals." "' I'Could not help thinking," said Mrs. Conway, " that his behaviour was parti-
cularly strange to-day; he appeared as if the sight of Eleanor revived painful sen¬ sations within his bosom.' ? " It is very possible," cried Mrs. Con¬ way, "Miss Glendinning'may have re¬ minded him of some object who has been dear to him ; perhaps the name of Eleanor has been familiar to his 3 ears; a trifling in¬ cident will often cause great emotion to a mind which carries an unconquerable sor¬ row.* But what is your opinion of him, Miss Glendinning?" " I feel more interested for him, sir, than I can express," was her reply. " It is true his tongue gives utterance to Se¬ verity of language with respect to the follies of the world, but I am certain his heart is the seat of benevolence; his Vener¬ able- countenance is adorned with the stamp of humanity, and all must feel the greatest regret that he is the victim of con¬ cealed sorrow." " You judge him rightly," returned Mr. Conway M "I ( sineerely belieye th?
onlyfhappinessVhe enjoys is that of ;rer ii^ing:^ wants' o^others. Hetias,,:I understand, come into the-possessipn of a .large fortune, -which he applies to the noblestpurposes.,^: v Nq tale of distress ever peaches his >ars s in yain; his life is;,past hi;seeking, out different objects; he is for ever on the alert in. ;the cause of charity* and]; like«the, great Jloward of old, visits all-those places .where poverty,?and even yice^i.dwell; the former he relieves, the latter lie endeavours to suppress, and many are the -objects whom, ; ;his, mild doctrine has led into the ways of truth, who, for;a shprt; time, had departecl from her righ^r pus paths; and when such,a man as this possesses the will, as well as the means,;it is needless to eulogize, upon his actions.";' yf.i? Upon mywordj" exclaimed (Mrs. Con- W ity; : ** you : have really given a more,seri¬ ous^ dissertation [than I thought you ; cap r able of, Edward; reaUy you, T wili in.time beepme quite;a, grave orator." J; $> .«.„■.'"••" '>> 1 : [Mr,;Cqnway. > smiled.—" No, -my; ^lear/ he replied, " I shall>never, I fear, possess
that acquisition; but when I am convers-; ing on, and pourtraying the .merits of a- friend, I cannot be too warm; nor is that man -worthy of such a friend, who would, not exert every effort to,set forth his merits; for, though a young and gay fel¬ low myself, believe me I can admire the noble actions of others, and know how to appreciate them, though'perhaps incap¬ able of imitating, them.-' < . "No one, sir,^ said, Eleanor, "could. desire a more,able eulogist than yourself. It would be well if all were willing to set forth the virtues of others as you have done those, of-Mr. Crosby." . ." Ihave said no more than ;he, deserves," he replied*;," but with all these matchless? qualifications, he oftentimes displeases,,by Jiis bluntness in giving t his, opinions ,oppo- site.to, those with whom he converses; but then. I must add,- that it is only the more trifling and insignificant characters of fhe dav at whom ! he f levels his; shafts;, merit ne*:er pleads imvvain. He. is truly cap¬ able of ^distinguishing beauty and worth,.
as he has this day clearly evinced by hlti decided approbation of MissGlendinning." He^ bowed to Eleanor, who blushed at his compliment, and'the subject changed. ^ As■ i there was no company, Mr. Con?: way accompanied them to the drawing- room, and in pleasing conversation passed the remainder of the day. '■■•-.■ ; 'o;/ Eleanor delighted them: both, by play¬ ing and singing some Scotch:airs, with much sweetness and melody*, and save that some painful [ recollections still obtruded themselves *>n her miudi she would have feltliappy. ; ^r ! --^:.^ o.y;r ;.•'.-, '>■.:/. i'.-.uy. vJVtr. Conway expressed^his intention of cojnmencing his tour 5ft <■# few days, and aaded ; the pleasure ^it gave him in the^ kiiowled^ithat Mis; Conway would kave? so charming^ a } companion during his ab* seii cei ahd'that-he hoped lady Glendinning would permit her tb Continue there-until : hisreturn; ; ' ;: " v: "-' : ' .■•■■•?- !, - ; v-' ■■'.'•'■■■'- '-■' • ^■'• dt .}\> ■ Eleahor^repliedl that she had tio doubt> but her ladyship would give her permis^ sion to'stay there until her own return to
Scotland, as she hoped never more to re¬ side under the roof of lady Cecilia Gray. " That you never shall, depend upon it," cried Mrs. Conway, " while I have a house to offer you. I am sure lord Arthur would never forgive the affront she put upon vou; and after the genteel treatment which we experienced from him, be as¬ sured I will never see a niece of his in¬ sulted without resenting it. Lady Ceci¬ lia may command a title, but I despise her arrogance, and dislike her company ; but 1 can see through her designs. She is fear¬ ful that you will prove the barrier to her favourite designs, and so in a genteel way has removed you from her house, and, as she thinks, from the sight of her nephew-. Rut I hope lord Montalban will justify the opinion that I have formed of his spi¬ rit, and visit my house whenever he likes; I shall always be proud to receive him/' Eleanor blushed excessively at Mrs. Colli. way's allusion—" For Heaven's sake, ma± dam!" she cried, " what is it you mean ?
—what barrier am I to her ladyship's wishes ?" " Ah! Eleanor," replied Mrs. Conway, " that pretty blush which now adorns your countenance, plainly shews you un¬ derstand my meaning. Lady Cecilia, I suppose, sees but with the same eyes as other people, and must doubtless observe the preference given by her nephew to yourself. Take my word, Eleanor, lord Montalban will never marry Georgina; you, I am-convinced, are the object of his affection's. Consider the impression which you made on your first meeting, when he mistook you for his destined bride. Re¬ member I know it all; and I am confi¬ dent he will brave every difficulty to gain you for his own." " Hold, madam !" cried Eleanor, who was sinking with confusion during this painful retrospection, which she could not but acknowledge to be a true one:' " pray forbear such a strain as this; however cir¬ cumstances may at first have arisen, lord Montalban became sensible of his error,
and has, to" my knowledge,- voluntarily pledged his word to unite himself to Geor¬ gina on his return to Scotland, and I must not listen on such a subject even from you.", " Not if it distresses you," replied Mrs.,- Conway, who saw the emotion under which she laboured. " Be assured I would not willingly give you a moment's pain; but you must not.be offended at my still being of opinion that; lord Montalban will never ratify his present engagements," She then changed the conversation, and at an early hour, Eleanor, once more bid¬ ding her friends good-night, sought .the. solitude of her own chamber,. , i ; The remarks of Mrs. Conway had rais¬ ed the strangest sensations within her, bo¬ som. She reflected on the pain it caused her in merely asserting that lord Montal¬ ban would not ratify his engagements; the.busy pulses of her,heart phiuly told her, it was an event which would seal, her misery for ever; yet doubtless it would*
occur, and she should in sorrow and in silence witness an event which would for ever make her wretched. She sat for some time lost in her own reflections—" WheiL their union takes place," she mentally ex¬ claimed, " then shall I be once more, I suppose, restored to dear Scotia's land; there only can I expect to find peace. Yes, there is one who will soften the sor¬ rows of Eleanor, and on whose bosom I can rest my grief,—-Oh! joyful moment, that will reunite ns!—Oh! how tedious. will seem this long separation!" The tears chased each other down her cheeks. She arose, and endeavoured to shake off her depression; she advanced to one of the windows, which looked to the Grove, and opening it, gazed on the unri¬ valled beauty of the sky. The moon rose in majestic splendour; "the bright floor of heaven was richly inlaid with bright patterns cf gold," and all nature appeared to rest. The scene was congenial to her feel¬ ings, and she remained for a few minutes stationed at the window. Suddenly she
ELEANOR. heard a footstep, and beheld, at a small distance, the figure of a man, who was f evidently observing her. She instantly withdrew; the stranger also retreated. But what were the sensations of Eleanor, as she caught a glimpse of his face 1 She thought she beheld the form and features of lord Montalban; but thought washer only evidence, for overcome by his sudden" appearance, she sunk on her chair, incap¬ able of rising; nor was it till after some; time she could gain sufficient courage to 1 look at the window. No one was, how¬ ever, now to be seen; and Eleanor, with, a disturbed imagination, closed the win¬ dow, and retired to her pillow. Rest- was, however, a stranger to her eyes, and- the night was passed in vain surmises and conjectures. One moment she persuaded herself that she must have been mistaken. in supposing it to be lord Montalban, as. why should he be wandering about the house at so late an hour ? Again she felt- convinced that it really was him. Fronv what motive then could he be thus watch-
ing her movements? Her own heart whispered the real reason, and in spite of her resolution to forget him, she exulted in the sweet idea that she was beloved hy him. • In reflections like these she passed near¬ ly the whole of the night; nor was she sorry when the morning arrived; and at an early hour she repaired to the parlour where Mr. and Mrs. Conway soon joined her. They both remarked that she look¬ ed more pale and languid than on the pre¬ ceding day. She alleged a bad headache as her excuse, and cautiously concealed from them the real reason, as she could not arm herself with, courage, enough to say that she had seen lord Montalban.. , Mr. Conway, as usual, departed, as soon as he had breakfasted, for town; and Mrs. Conway proposed remaining at home, as they; expected Miss Clifford to spend the day with them. To this Eleanor readily acquiesced, and they together seated them¬ selves in the drawing-room, and Eleanor offered to read some of her favourite au-
thors. Mrs. Conway gladly accepted of her offer, and was quite delighted with the judicious subjects which she chose. . The thoughts of Eleanor were, however, more in St. James's-square, and at length laying down her book, she ventured to express her wishes to. know how lady Glendinning was by this time, as she had left her evidently labouring under ill health. She had been hurried away so fast by Mrs. Conway, that no arrange¬ ments had been made relative to seeing the family again, and she scarcely knew how to act. On mentioning this to Mrs. Conway, she said she w T ould with pleasure accom¬ pany her any time she liked, to visit her ladyship ; for although she hated lady Ce¬ cilia, yet that was < no .reason why, she should not go and see lady Glendinning*, if she liked.— " t However," said she, "I dare say it will not be long before either some of the family, or perhaps lord Mont¬ alban, will pay us a visit, as doubtless he would wish to see you."
Eleanor blushed, as she recollected the v visit which he had already paid, though she did not choose to reveal it. They were interrupted in their conver¬ sation by the arrival of Miss Cliffo/d, who had ccme, as she expressed it, thus early, purposely to pass a long day with them. Eleanor instantly inquired after Mrs, Clifford, and > hoped. she was recovered from her indisposition of the preceding day. Miss Clifford gracefully thanking her, assured her she was perfectly convalescent; and added, that she begged her kindest regards to Eleanor, and hoped that she would repeat her visit as soon as she pos¬ sibly could. Eleanor expressed the pleasure it would afford her in cultivating-the friendship of Mrs. Clifford; and the lovely Emily, with a warmth that did credit to her heart, ex¬ patiated on the merits and amiable dispo¬ sition of her dear mamma, as she styled Mrs. Clifford. If Eleanor had been pleased with her on
a first sight, how much more delighted' was she on a farther acquaintance with her, as she found her conversation replete with good sense, and her manners so irre¬ sistibly pleasing, that it was impossible to be in her company, and not enraptured with it! Her person and figure were ele¬ gant ; she was evidently the senior of Ele¬ anor, who already felt inclined to look up to her as a friend, on whose advice and counsel she could place implicit reliance; and never since she left Scotland had she found the hours pass so pleasantly. The conversation of Miss Clifford was brilliant and lively, and her mind evidently well cultivated and expanded. Mrs. Conway, who was never so happy as when, to use her own expression, she had " real genteel people with her," was quite delighted, and certainly did all in her power to add to the comforts and pleasure of her guests. At the usual hour of dinner, Mr. Con¬ way returned, and without any further addition to their party, they sat down to
table; but, before they had scarcely dined, Mr. Crosby was announced. Eleanor'involuntarily arose at his en¬ trance ; a trembling seized her, as he ad¬ vanced towards her, and taking her hand, first of all, addressed her in a voice of the .utmost kindness. He appeared more composed than on the preceding day, but deep sighs escaped his lips, as he pronoun¬ ced the name of Eleanor. Mrs, Conway hoped he was better than when they last saw him. " "■ I hope so too, madam," was his reply; " at my time of life, we ought to improve every moment, so as to render us more fit for the awful change of nature." Mrs. Conway, smiling, replied, that it was to his health she alluded, and not the failings of his disposition: - He paid no attention to her reply, but- turning to Miss Clifford, he took her hand.- —" My Emily," he cried, " how glad am, I to see you! I can now once- more fan¬ cy myself surrounded by innocence and' virtue. Yes, thou lovely pair!" he added,
at the same time 'joining the hands of Eleanor and Emily, " thou shalt'be bright: examples of purity; for your sakes, I will believe that truth and goodness still dwell on earth; love then each other, and by encouraging congenial notions of true ho¬ nour and virtue, form the best basis for a. real and lasting friendship*between ye." " That 1 trust we already feel, sir," re¬ plied Miss Clifford; " at least I can truly assert, thai Miss Glendinning, on her first appearance, warmly interested herself iu my favour; I felt for her all the regard of an old friend, which, perhaps you will say, sir, was too sudden a sensation to be last¬ ing, as I know you are no advocate for sud¬ den impressions." . " I am not, I own," he interrupted;, " but, in this instance, J believe I' must yield to your argument, having myself fallen under the same sentiment; for, oh, Miss Clifford! yosi know not how much I felt at first sight of Eleanor." , > ' He paused, and again appeared agitated,
and seating himself in a chair, sunk' ab¬ sorbed in thought. Sirs. Conway smiled, and rising, begged her young friends to follow, her to the drawing-room, and leaving the two gcn- tletrienover the bottle, they entertained themselves with music. Miss Clifford both played and sang very prettily; and, on her finishing a popular ballad, she entreated Eleanor to favour her also. ' ' ' Ever willing to oblige, our heroine be¬ gan a soft and pleasing strain, when the gentlemen entered the room. They mo¬ tioned her to proceed, while Mr. Crosby stationed himself close to her, and, for some few minutes, attentively listened to her. 1 ' ' Suddenly his whole countenance be¬ came agitated, and laying his hand on her shoulder, he interrupted her by exclaim¬ ing-^" Are you sent here to torture, cr to please me ? Oh, that voice! you know not how much it reminds me ------ 1 cannot
bear it!" he continued, at the same time raising his handkerchief to his eyes. '* I am extremely sorry, sir," cried Ele¬ anor, in a voice of concern, though not en¬ tirely free from terror, " that I should be the unfortunate means of distressing you ; but indeed I will never repeat it!" " Oh, 1 do not say so!" he replied; " I will learn to listen to you; it will afford me a melancholy pleasure, and remind me of the strains of one who was once the dearest treasure of my heart! Oh, me¬ mory !" he added; •' why for ever wilt thou thus torture me ? will not lapse o£ years, fortitude, and resignation, strength¬ en my mind? Alas, alas! how vain is the resolution of man!" " J am much concerned, my dear sir," cried Mr. Conway, " to see you thus af¬ flicted. I certainly cannot enter into the^ nature of your sorrows, as the cause of your grief is entirely a secret to me; nor would Is presume to make an inquiry, which might only tend to wound you still further."
" May it ever remain secret," replied Mr. Crosby; " my sorrows are of a nature not to be revealed. I will not betray the author of them; no rude tongue shall ever babble out I her disgrace! no, I will pre¬ serve her honour, though she has robbed me of my peace! suffice it to say, no one action of my own life ever yet sullied my own character! my wrongs have been oc¬ casioned by the hand of another—not my own!" i " I sincerely believe you, sir," returned: Mr. Conway, " and I lament to see you. the victim of unconquerable grief." " I fear," cried Eleanor, in a voice of ti¬ midity and apprehension, " that my pre¬ sence disturbs Mr. Crosby, the thought of ' which'causes me sentiments of the deep¬ est regret,» as it will of course deprive, me of the pleasure of being in his society.", " Oh, do not say so, my dear Eleanor!" he replied, taking her hand; " I feel a me¬ lancholy pleasure in your company, that I would not forego for worlds! Pray .pardon- the weakness of an old man, Emily," he
cried, turning to'Miss Clifford. " I pre¬ sume upon our old friendship, in begging ■you tb plead for my excuse." ' - f [ " Most willingly, Sir," she replied; " but I am confident Miss Glendinning will not admit of any being offered; her looks pro¬ claim the tender commiseration "of her soul."' -, ' " None shall be offered," cried Eleanor. " Think not so meanly of my understand¬ ing, sir, as to suppose I would wish to pre¬ vent the ebullition of your feelings.' Sor¬ row, whatever her shape,' ought to be re- • spected, and when she displays herself in a form whose time of life should be strew¬ ed, at least with calm content, it is parti¬ cularly distressing,, and claims our utmost commiseration. I am myself the child of sorrow—how little do you know the grief that rankles at my heart!" She paused, as if fearing she had said too much ;" f the tears t chased each other down her cheeks, which she,vainly endeavoured to suppress.'' - . \ w > .' - j ■ i, < AH looked tat: .her with astonishment.
Mr. Crosby pressed her hand with warmth. *—"" So young," he cried, " and yet un¬ happy ! What can have disturbed your peace, unless, indeed, the bane of human felicity has crossed your path ? Yes, I see how it is! love, insidious love, has already marked you for its prey! beware the dan¬ gerous delusion ! withdraw yourself from its grasp, while you yet preserve your in¬ nocence—certain destruction awaits you, in yielding to the fascinating allurements of man!" His voice became severe as he spoke. Eleanor trembled, while Mrs. Conway, who had been tired of this harangue, ex¬ claimed—" Mercy on us, Mr. Crosby! you are enough to frighten us ali to death ! By your conversation one would suppose, by your descriptions, that one lived in a land of savages, and that all mankind were bar¬ barous and inhuman."' < ' j i " AndT will maintain, madam,", ho re¬ plied, " though we are not in alandofsa¬ vages, as you please to term it, that many who bear 1 the character 1 of a civilised
Christian, are less deserving of it than those 6bjects to whom you allude; for what action can prove a savage hearfrmore than the man who hurls innocence and vir¬ tue from its greatest climax'; and when satiety has cooled his once-ardent passions, he leaves his victim to perish, to waste its loveliness in penance or prayer; or, what is still worse, leaves it, forced hy desertion, to become the associate of vice in her most wretched garb. Can any thing, I say, prove such an inhuman picture as this ? We condemn the cruel actions of those poor uncivilized beings, and denominate them as savages, while man, in a country like our own, may boast of such scenes as I have been describing, and at worst he is only considered as a gay fellmv, and a man of fashion"' Before any one could make a reply, Mrs. Conway, who had been amusing herself by looking at the window, 1 in order to'avoid the conversation of Mi*. Crosby, suddenly exclaimed—" Here is sh\Henry T S barouche driving up 1 the Grove.-' 'I wondep who he*
■/. hasjgot withhim ;,it.is quite fille^ilsMercy on me, ; Eleanor!"5 she : added, ";lord Mont- alban;is;in it!'V ; ;a n^v'sx-.: .j : ^] i^lM^ ■•)?;■.;':;■' i , ■ • y -iLord ? Montalban ^repeated Eleanor, starting-ufrom.iher, seat ;,f sure ,;you are .mistaken^'r^n^-j'Ui-.' idd ir.;i ; :'t r -j ;■.;.:{■; /jr.!;;;*.- ■".Indeed, my^deariibutilamjno^shjer^r plied, at the^ same t ;time w kissing her hand to the ; party in jhe ; carriage ;^pray, why did you suppose I,was :mistaken ? i: did you think lord ^Montalban; would- not have condescended tp;visit:me,?■" u< ; ;; ■ ; ■: ,*fOh no, madam,"[retHrned Eleanor,." it . w ; ^;npt.thati : but--T^^ :> .; ; '. ; .j;;.,: :i i-.,'; ■, -. She: paused, s as she observed the eyes,of Mr. jCrosby, fixed full upon her. . ;j ; ., ; !',On the first mentioning of his lordship's ■name, ihe,cheek of Eleanor had assumed a deadly paleness, and her agitation was, top^ visible; to escappjthe penetrating glance ofjMr. Crosby, iwho 4 immediately drew his own .conjectures 011 the f subject. •.; . v :Bytliis time the party were announced, whwhiConsistediprsir, Henry Con way and, his spUy an^, -totheir^ great; surprise, ,Geor-
gina Glendfnning r < lord Montalban, and Robert. A mutual introduction of course took place, while lord Montalban flew to the side of Eleanor,^ and taking lier hand, addressed her in terms of tenderness. He felt it tremble beneath his. pressure, nor was his own free from the same emotion. Eleanor was overcome by contending passions; his unexpected appearance" now, and likewise on the preceding evening; all rendered her extremely confused, and she was glad when Georgina' advanced to¬ wards her. ' She extended her hand with great kindness to Eleanor, and inquired if she was not surprised at her appearance. " I trust," cried sir Henry;" it is- an agreeable surprise to all, and as I am in a great degree the occasion' of it;' I shall take upon me to explain it." The information which he' then gave > was briefly this r on the 1 day before he- and his son had called on lady Glendinning in St. James's-square, whom ^they found so ill as scarcely to be able to conversephet ' VOL. III. c '
ladyship had however exerted* herself as much as possible, and Mr.-William Con-' way and Georgina had soon become on very good terms, as their lively ideas and dispositions assimilated; and after paying a long visit, they; departed, with the pro¬ mise of soon renewing it. • On this evening, being extremely warm and lovely, sir Henry proposed to his son a <ride to St. James's-square, with which he readily t agreed; but on their arrival they found lady Glendinning much worse, and confined to her dressing-room. Lady Lenox and lady Cecilia ,were with her/ as also a friend of her ladyship's"; therefore Geor¬ gina, Robert, and lord Montalban, were alone in the drawing-room when sir Hen¬ ry,and his son arrived, who soon proposed a ride to Camberwell, and William Con¬ way used all his entreaties to prevail on Georgina to accompany them, to which she agreed. To lord Montalban and Robert the re¬ quest was particularly agreeable, as it was to the presence of Eleanor they should be
brought. The excursion was therefore com¬ municated to the elderladies, who, though they did not approve of it hi their hearts, could not make any reasonable objection. Lord Montalban made a virtue of es¬ corting Georgina, though in fact Mr. William Conway handed her to the ba¬ rouche, and, lady Cecilia Gray was mor¬ tified beyond measure at her nephew's visit to Camberwell. Part of, this explanation having been given by sir Henry, and mutual compli¬ ments passing, Mrs. Conway telling Geor¬ gina how very genteel she took her visir 9 all appeared now at their ease, and being seated, the conversation became more ge¬ neral
c2
CHAPTER. II.,
If thou rememberest not the slightest folly 'lhnfc ever \o\e did moke thee run into, Thou.hast apt lov'd. Suakespeatie. ^1r.j Crosby ha,d seated himself at some little distance from the group now assem¬ bled, and, as was hi? usual custom, ob- - serving and making comments on the actions of all. He plainly saw, in a ml- nute^ that Eleanor and lord Montalban were labouring under an emotion at the. sight of each other which evinced a mu¬ tual regard, and so much interest had Eleanor excited in his bosom, that he trembled for her peace. His next concern was Miss Clifford, who, on being intro¬ duced, to Georgina and Robert Glendin¬ ning, turned extremely pale; her voice failed her as she endeavoured to speak, and
she remained evidently agitated during the evening. .Robert Glendinning fre¬ quently addressed her; his seat was close to hers, and her fascinating form appeared to rivet his attention. Mrs. Conway was delighted, as she was never so happy as when entertaining a Jarge party, and she looked with pleasure at the genteel assemblage before her. A title had ineffable charms in her eyes, and to her inexpressible satisfaction, her house was now honoured by such noble visitants, and on tea being brought in, she express¬ ed her thanks to sir Henry for the agree¬ able surprise which he had given them, and hoped that the present company would now dispense with all form in future, and repeat their visit as often as possible. Georgina, with unexpected compliance. replied that she should be most happy in doing so, while Robert, bowing with great gallantry, cried—" Indeed, madam, your request has too much pleasure in its ful¬ filment not to be instantly complied with, fox where the seat of hospitality, like
yours, is adorned by the sister graces, who could resist the temptation of being in their company ?" ' He bowed to Eleanor and Miss Clifford, while Mrs. Conway also curtseyed to his compliment. Lord Montalban, seizing a moment, whispered to the ear of Eleanor—" The house of Mrs. Conway must ever prove a delightful resort to me, while it contains a gem whose presence only has the power of allaying my sorrows." Eleanor blushed ; she was about to re¬ ply, when the countenance of Mr; Crosby met her view. She saw his penetrating glance, and she remained in silence. " I perceive, young gentleman," cried Mr. Crosby, addressing Robert, " that you have been trained in the school of flattery: Mrs. Conway's house will, I hope, sir, continue the resort of the graces, which must arise from its remaining, as it is notv, the abode of innocence and virtue, for without those treasures grace cannot be found."
** You do me injustice, siri" replied Ro¬ bert. ," I am no flatterer": ''!■: have ever been accustomed to- speak the sentiments of my-soul without disguise,'which prompt¬ ed mean the present ^instance to utter the dictates of my heart." ; ^ n , i ?.Vln the presence of; so much beauty," cried Mr. William Conway,,,;in a tone of great gaiety, -ff I should be ashamed to own I. possessed a heart, unless it was one given me in- exchange for, my own lost one." :,.t\ ■ • '• ;■• .-:..:.,.■, ;■■. ,,:. -■' .• >;-■ -;', " I suppose youi mean to infer, by; that, sir," ; interrupted ; Mrs. Conway, ."that you have already -suffered that loss."., "Why really, madam," he replied, ?[ I ain .not quite; .certain,: and that; is half an acknowledgment, I think." „;• ^ p : ., ", An4 ; :pray, f sir," .returned Mrs. Con¬ way, [."may, I inquire who is the envied lady that is in the : . possession of; s uch a .noble acquisition s as , your heart s must prove?"; .■..,:/.■■ ..-a.-.,- ,.'..■;/, ;•,; ly^^y.iiu': . : i..;" ^hy,cmadam," he ^returned, IfH must sayf/tie not a-fair question; but, be assured
of .this,' it has not wandered farther than the limits of this room." All the young i ladies blushed at his avowal; but the niost confused in her ap¬ pearance was Georgina, who, replying to the first part of his speech, cried—" I think indeed, sir, it is not a fair question." *' A very pretty investigation of hearts," cried Mr. Crosby; " were we to enter mto a minute scrutiny, I doubt much whether we should find any of your hearts in the right place, or at least not directed to the , object fixed upon by friends." " True, sir," interrupted lord Montal¬ ban, " for as our immortal bard observes, * the course of true love did never yet run smooth,' an observation which strikes me as a most forcible one." > His lordship sighed as he spoke, and fix¬ ed his eyes upon Eleanor, who fully un¬ derstood his meaning. Mr. Crosby was about to reply, but was interrupted by Mrs. Conway, who, rising from the tea-table, proposed to shew the young party her beautiful flower-garden.
All the gentlemen, except sir Henry, Mr. Crosby, and Mr. Conway, immediately arose and offered to attend the ladies. Mr. William Conway, regardless of the pre¬ sence of lord Montalban, presented his hand to Georgina, who smilingly receiv¬ ed it. Lord Montalban instantly took that of Eleanor, and Robert willingly drew the arm of Miss Clifford within his own, who appeared equally pleased with the attentions of the young Scotchman, and Mrs. Conway led the way to the garde;!, which she perfectly idolized. Eleanor and lord Montalban were the most silent of the group; both, appeared equally embarrassed, till at length,, with a view r of breaking a silence painful in itself, Eleanor commented on the beauty of the scene, and the delightful situation of Mrs.. Conway's cottage. " Yes," replied lord Montalban, "• too- well I feel its charms, for to speak in the language of a complete master of the pas¬ sions— c 3
" Here for ever could I stay, Sfld proof how well a lo\er cnn obey !" Eleanor could ,not but understand his allusion, but recollecting that he had vo¬ luntarily promised to unite himself to Georgina, she considered that he was not altogether acting with the dictates of ho¬ nour. Drawing as much reserve as possi- , ble into her countenance, she therefore re¬ plied—" No doubt your lordship fully feels the force of those lines, particularly as Georgina shines conspicuously in the scene, to whom, of course, your lordship's allusion is due." To Georgina he replied—" Oh, Elea¬ nor ! why will you thus cruelly misunder¬ stand me ? Do you not obserye that she is engaged in a way as much congenial to her feelings, and more so to mine, as it gives me this delightful opportunity of conversing with you? and I can also bring proof sufficient to convince you that she is not the magnet of my attractions. This spot contained not Georgina last night.
Ask you. self who was the object of my nightly admiration." v '- s * ; Eleanor 1 blushed excessively—"Then it was your lordship," she cried, *" whom I last night beheld from my window. May I ask why you thus chose so late an hour, when Mrs. Conway would have felt ho¬ noured' by your lordship's visit at an earlier period ?" " I can only answer you, Eleanor,' by saying that it was the result of one of those follies which love makes us run into. I had been out with a party of male friends and' passing the Camberwell road in • our way home, I made an excuse for quitting the carriage, and wishing them good-night, T sauntered down the Grove. The hour; I found, was later than I at first supposed it to be, but I could not resist the opportu¬ nity of gazing on the house which contains -you. ' I easily ascertained it, and by the drawing-room windows being in darkness, I concluded the family had retired to rest; but how was I 'soon gratified by observing a light at another window, which discover-
ed to my >gaze the form of her, whose image is ever present in idea! You, Eleanor,, I thought, also saw me; but'being fearful that my presence might wound your deli¬ cacy, I withdrew, and returned home in high spirits at having obtained a sight of you." ' . ' i , He pressed her hand, while Eleanor, greatly agitated at so warm an avowal, which suited in itself but too well with her own.feelings, replied—" Wherefore, tny lord, this desire to see me, or why should you give yourself this concern after another, when 1 know that your engage¬ ments f forbid such proceedings? Am I not fully aware that you have consented— nay, cheerfully promised to comply with the wishes of your friends on your return to Scotland?" "Ah, Eleanor!" interrupted lord Mont¬ alban, " I see the opinion you have form¬ ed #$ me; you think me insincere and wa- venug** I own I did promise to marry Georgina—I acknowledge, all my folly; but at the moment I did so, I loved you
with increasing passion.—Nay, start )hot," he continued:; " I cannot conquer ii It was madness, it was desperation drove me to that fatal promise. Oh! Eleanor, I believed you engaged to another. If you knew the cruel cause which led me to give assent to the commands of my friends, you'would pity me. But you shall know all; you alone can relieve me; and I will trust to your generosity in explaining those scenes which have induced me to act as I have done." ' Eleanor trembled violently; sheialmost dreaded what would follow; but for the present she was spared, as Mrs. Conway turned towards them, and presenting Eleanor with a bouquet, fell into conver¬ sation, 1 and continued by their side during the remainder of their stay in the garden, much to the mortification of lord Montal¬ ban, who found it impossible to proceed in his conversation with Eleanor; to whom, notwithstanding all his former re¬ solutions, he found himself more and more attached, and- he resolved to acquaint her
with the scene to which he hadbeen'wit¬ ness in the rocks/ and to beg lier to remove his doubts- or to confirm them for ever, as. he felt .this suspense was almost worse than tlie reality.^ He was however oblig¬ ed still longer to continue its victim, and the little party once more entered' the drawing-room, to which they found an¬ other addition in the persons of Mr. and Mrs. Clifford, who Had taken a ride in their. carriage, and' called for Emily in their way home. Mrs.. Clifford arose, and taking the hand of Eleanor, expressed her pleasure at seeing her; but seeing strangers around' her, she curtseyed gracefully to'all. r < Mrs. Conwayfirst introduced lord Mont¬ alban, and then added—" And now, Sirs. Clifford, J can actually present to you the son. and daughter of lord Arthur Glen- dinningi. Miss Georgina Glendinning, Mr; Robert Glendinning," she continued, as she presented them;. ' ' • ," -' ' .. Mrs. Clifford again appeared- agitated. She took each of:, their hands—"You are
no strangers to mei by name? she cried, «* though, till this period, we never met; but I hope this chance introduction wDl afford me the pleasure of commencing a more lasting acquaintance, and that you will favour my house by honouring it .with your company as often as possible." t« Robert assured her of the pleasure he should take in accepting of her kind.invi¬ tation, and Georgina promised to take the first opportunity possible; but *added> be¬ ing so perfect a stranger to London, she qould only avail herself of her friend's kindness in taking her about. . Mr. William Conway instantly replied, that he should always be happy to be her chaperon, and escort her wherever she pleased, as he was both able and willing to shew her all over London. She thanked him for his offer; <md as the hour was now drawing late, she beg¬ ged the favour of sir Henry to order his barouche, as, she added, her mamma being so ill, she would wish to return to her. .- < Eleanor expressed her regret at her la-
dyship's illness, and added, that she Would certainly call and see her, if it would prove agreeable. " Certainly so, M replied Georgina; " I am sure mamma will be very glad to see you, and think it very unkind if you did not." '. '.'Were it her ladyship's own house," replied Eleanor, " I should not hesitate one moment; but I am not certain that I shall prove a welcome visitor to its owner," «' Oh ! you mean to lady Cecilia, I sup¬ pose," returned Georgina,' in a laughing tone. . " But never mind her; all the rest will be glad to see you—wont they, loni Montalban ? I hope you will excuse mc for making so free with the hame of your honoured relation," she added, in a sarcas¬ tic tone. " Oh!, certainly," he replied. "I am sure lady Cecilia will be happy to receive ,the friends of lady "Glendinning'at~ any time," " I make no doubfcof it,",returned Gfeor-
gina., " But I hope, Eleanor, you will make a point cf coming to see ns when¬ ever you can." ,Eleanor assured her she certainly would, -and could not at the same 1 time but men¬ tally observe the visible alteration*in that young lady's manner towards her, which, instead of wearing that haughty reserve which she had formerly adopted to' Elea¬ nor, was now good-humoured and kind; indeed she appeared almost an altered be¬ ing. Sir Henry's barouche now being an¬ nounced, that party took their leave 1 . Lord Montalban could only press the hand of Eleanor in silence; but the expressive glance of his eye spoke volumes to her heart. On'their leaving' the room, Mrs: Con¬ way looked out of the balcony, and with much satisfaction beheld the splendid equipages at her door, and congratulated herself on the idea that her house was as much the resort of fashionables as any in the Grove.
. * After the departure of sir Henry and his little party, Mr. Crosby made-his usual observations and comments on all, and purposely spoke of lord Montalban, to try the effect on Eleanor. She however re¬ mained silent on the subject, when Miss Clifford replying to him, said, she thought his lordship certainly was one of the most handsome men she ever saw, and that every one must be pleased with his com¬ pany. " And do you not also think Mr. Glen¬ dinning very agreeable ?" cried Mr. Cros¬ by. " I am sure you ought to feel sensi¬ ble of his attention, which was evidently directed towards you—nay, blush not, my dear Emily; I think it the greatest proof of his sense, in fixing his attention on au object so every way deserving of his re¬ gard." i , " You will make Emily too vain, my dear sir," cried Mr.Clifford, smiling. "It ,is the custom of young men to be gallant to every young lady with whom they may happen to be in company; and this> I am
-perfectly aware, is often construed by the mistaken female into a declaration of love. I should be sorry to have my Emily fall into this error." ' " Indeed I have no such thoughts," she replied, while her cheeks assumed a crim¬ son blush. " I will answer for the good sense of Emily," exclaimed Mr. Crosby; "but you must acknowledge, Mr. Clifford, I am a close observer of human nature; I can also clearly see the direction of your relation's wishes, Mr. Conway." "What, my cousin William?" return¬ ed that gentleman. " Yes," replied Mr. Crosby. " Miss Glendinning, or I am much mistaken, is the magnet of his attractions." « Oh? said Mrs. Conway, " you must be wrong there, sir, in your surmises, or at least it is to no purpose if she is. Miss Glendinning is engaged to lord Montal¬ ban; that is very shortly to'be a match, I believe." " To lord Montalban!" repeated Mr.
•Crosjby; starting from his chair, and fixing liis eyes full upon Eleanor, whose varying countenance plainly evinced the emotion of her soul; " What motive can induce such a sacrifice ? Oh ! human nature! where can we find thee pure and unen- slaved by passion? Another victim is about to be added to the many instances already on record. Oh! Eleanor, Elea¬ nor! beware of man; you are on the brink of destruction!—Beware, I say——" /' For Heaven's sake! Mr. Crosby," in¬ terrupted Mrs. Conway, " do not let us have any of your dreadful prophecies; you terrify Eleanor by your violence; I de¬ clare she is'quite pale already." . ,f/Lperceive she is," he replied; "but there are many causes to agitate her, and I,will not add .to them. Farewell, Elea¬ nor !" he added, taking her hand, " fare¬ well ; I shall now bid you all adieu for to-night." '.' Why this sudden haste?" inquired Mr. Conway. u I shall set out on my journey to-nlor-
row, and shall not have the pleasure of seeing you for some time again perhaps.'^ " Then, sir," he replied, " I shall now take my leave of you, and wish you all the pleasure such a journey can afford you." He made towards the door; it was in vain they pressed his farther stay; and- taking leave of the Cliffords, he hastily retired, " What a strange being he is !" cried Mrs. Conway. " When he gets into these gloomy fits, I think his absence is better than his presence. As to you, Eleanor, he seems determined to prove a plague to you, always tormenting you about some¬ thing or other." Eleanor sighed—" I know not how it is, madam," she replied, " but Mr. Crosby certainly appears to take great interest in my fate; and let him express what he will, however severe, if seems I'can only re-> ceive it as a proof of his regard. I own U do not, nor cannot, feel offended; there is, something in him that calls forth my re¬ gard and admiration." Mrs. Clifford expressed herself of the
same opinion as Eleanor, adding, that his venerable form always excited a sentiment of respect in her bosom; and although there was certainly a great eccentricity in his character, yet she much valued his friendship. Mr. Clifford now reminded her that the hour was getting late; she therefore arose, and taking the hand of Eleanor, begged she would soon return the visit of Emily, by spending a long day at Brixton; and added, as Mrs. Conway was going to lose Mr. Conway, her wishes that she would visit her whenever she could make it conveni¬ ent to all her other engagements. Mrs. Con way t readily promised compli¬ ance, while Eleanor, still retaining the hand of Mrs. Clifford, expressed her readi¬ ness to comply with her wishes. She could not account for the feelings of her bosom, as she gazed on - the face of Mrs., Clifford; she felt the warm pressure of her hand; she almost involuntarily raised it to her lips. Mrs. Conway looked at her with sentiments of delight and affection;
n tear started in her eye, which she endear voured to conceal; but Eleanor observed it. It increasied her surprise, and raised • an emotion in her heart she could not con¬ quer. "'. ■ ' '■ Mrs. Clifford broke the spell by which they appeared bound, by wishing her good¬ night; and hastily bidding adieu to Mr. and Mrs. Conway, she left the room. Emily also took a tender leave of her, and telling her she hoped soon to see her again, followed her papa to the carriage; while Eleanor remained transfixed to the spot with surprise and wonder—" Strange as¬ similation of interest and feeling!" she mentally exclaimed. "Why should I thus feel for a lady, who, but lately, was so perfect a stranger to me ? Yet so it is, that I already love her, and delight to re¬ ceive her proffered affection ; perhaps it is because she is said to bear so great a like¬ ness to myself; certainly the resemblance is striking. She calls to my mind the form of lord Arthur; just his noble, his com¬ manding countenance. With her sure I
may pass my time in rational delight; for could he have sought for a woman any way suited to his mind, to trust his Eleanor, I am sure he would have acknowledged all in this charming Mrs. Clifford/'
CHAPTER III.
Ye stars! which are the poetty of tlea\en! If in your bright leaves \vc would read the fate Of men and empires, 'tis to be forgiven, That in our aspirations to be great, Our destinies o'erleap their mortal state, And claim a kindred with you,' for yeaie A beauty and a mystery, and create In us such love and reverence from afar, That fortune, fame, power, life, have ttam'd themselves a star; All heaven and earth are still. Lord Byron's Childe Harold. This beautiful quotation was mentally eja¬ culated by Eleanor on her retiring that night to her room. The moon and stars shone with such unrivalled brilliancy, that she gazed on the lovely work of nature with wonder and admiration; a calmness pervaded her mind, and a soft delight stole over her soul. At this hour on the pre- VOL. III. D
ceding night she had beheld lord Montal¬ ban, and the spot appeared now to have double charms for her; he had also in his visit of that day acknowledged the senti¬ ment which prompted him to seek her presence; he had again avowed he loved her, and the sweet idea dwelt in her bo¬ som with pure delight; and but for,the interruption of Mrs. Conway, he would doubtless have explained those reasons which had given her cause to doubt his honour, with regard to his ready promise tb marry Georgina. She could not but observe the pleasure which that young lady appeared to take in the attentions of Mr. William Conway, and her heart beat with delight at the probability of such a circumstance taking place. She was well aware that such an event would cause a universal dissension in the two fa¬ milies; but if Georgina persisted; lord Montalban was free. Por the first time she indulged hope within her bosom, and rais¬ ing her eyes to heaven, almost wished she could read her fate > she knew, it was an
obscure one, and the thought was instant¬ ly banished in the idea, that it is enough for mortals to know their present ills. An all-merciful Providence has wisely placed the veil before our eyes, that each may fill the station allotted them; for were we to know the sorrows and evils which are ready to burst on our heads, we should sink with the apprehension of those woes, which, by meeting unlooked-for and sud¬ denly, cannot have made so deep an im¬ pression as to render us incapable of forti¬ fying our minds to receive with resignation the mandates assigned to us, by the wise decrees of Him who orders all things for the best. With such sentiments as these passing in her mind, she at length closed her window, and retired to rest, and soon fell into a sweet and undisturbed slumber. As the following morning was the time appointed for the departure of Mr. Con¬ way, Eleanor repaired to the breakfast-ta-J ble at an early hour, and found Mr. Con¬ way already equipped for his journey, as he
expected his companions to call for him in a travelling carriage. His cousin, Mr. William Conway, was to have made one of their party, but he had suddenly, with¬ out assigning reason sufficient, declined going. Mrs. Conway was quite out of spirits at her husband's departure, and declared that if it had not been for the kind company of Eleanor, she did not know what she should have done during his absence. Mr. Conway good-humouredly soothed her, and promised not to extend his stay beyond the time appointed, but which was to be at least three months. He beg¬ ged Eleanor, if possible, to remain with her all that time, to which she replied, though she should take great pleasure in so doing, yet that entirely depended on lady Glendinning, whoso intended stay in London she could not ascertain, and she mentally hoped to see her native plains before that period. At length a travelling carnage stopped at their door, and Mr. Conway, taking an
affectionate leave of his lady, and a very kind one of Eleanor, joined the gentlemen who were waiting for him. Eleanor saw that Mrs. Conway's spirits were low, and during the remainder of the morning, she exerted herself to amuse her, and with so much success, that she de¬ clared Eleanor was the best companion alive, and that'if she could but remain with her, she should not feel Mr. Conway's absence near as much as she should other¬ wise have done. Eleanor had taken up a book, in order to amuse her^ at which she appeared much pleased; but being seated at the drawing-room window, eveiy ob¬ ject that passed engrossed her attention, and Eleanor was constantly interrupted by her remarks on such and such persons, who, she observed, had either got on a very genteel bonnet, or an old-fashioned hat, which Mrs. Conway considered as very important observations. At length Eleanor had been suffered to proceed for some time without interruption, when Mrs. Conway suddenly exclaimed- " Look,
Eleanor! make haste! here is the very lady that I told you of! she is riding up the Grove. Is she not a genteel figure ?" Eleanor laid do wn herbopk; and leaning - over the balcony, behead, as Mrs. Conway had asserted, a lady, whose^appearance was, certainly very dashing. She sat her horse with the greatest,eavse, and galloped by so fast, that she could scarce see her face. Two grooms, in rich liveries, followed her, and-denoted the consequence of their mis¬ tress. Her figure was elegant; she was attired in a riding-habit, of pale blue cloth, richly ornamented, a white beaver hat, and a superb plume of ostrich feathers completed her dress, and added, in a great degree, to the elegance of her figure. She was evidently young, and possessing a commanding and noble appearance. ■■? Well," cried Mrs. ^pnway, "what do you, think of her? is she not a very genteel woman?" ; ," She is certainly very attractive in her appearance," replied Eleanor;, " no doubt she is a lady of great gaiety and fashion."
" I dare say she is," returned Mrs; Con¬ way. " I should so like to know who she is; I wish I could get acquainted with her; it is evident she is of very great con¬ sequence by being so attended. Pray, don't you think her very handsome?" " Really, madam," replied Eleanor, " she rode by so very fast, that I could scarcely see her face, though I thought it seemed agreeable." " You'll see her come back presently, my dear," said Mrs. Conway; ", she only rides to the top of the Grove, and returns immediately." " If she keeps the same pace with which She rode by," cried Eleanor, " she will soon pass again. I think we must allow her plenty of courage, for I never saw a fe¬ male ride so fast." . , " That shews what an excellent horse¬ woman she is," returned Mrs. Conway. " I wonder Who she can be." ' Eleanor could not refrain from smiling at the eager curiosity of Mrs. Conway after this unknown lady. The book which she
had been reading to her was now lain down disregarded; nor could she attempt to take it up again, as Mrs. Conway was now Stationed in the balcony, watching the return of the stranger, which, in a short time, she joyfully announced to Eleanor, who was obliged to look at her again to please Mrs. Conway. The lady was now walking her horse slowly along, and on passing the house, she turned her face towards them, and Eleanor beheld that she really was handsome. Her black and piercing eyes seemed at one glance to look you through; her nose was aquiline, and her high forehead was admir¬ ably displayed by the parting of her lux¬ uriant tresses, w T hich shewed to advantage under her hat. As she passed the win¬ dow, she looked at Mrs. Conway. A smile of complaisaney passed over her face; and Eleanor saw Mrs. Conway incline her head with a half-bow. —" So," thought she, " this is a preparatory introduction ; Mrs. Conway will not be easy until she effects an acquaintance with this lady, I
see." Mrs. Conway gazed after.her, un¬ til she turned out of the Grove, and then broke out again in her praises of this stranger, and with much delight spoke of the affability of her manners, " as she was sure," she added, " that she smiled to her as she passed." " Most probably, madam," replied Elea¬ nor, " she has observed you as much as you have her,, and it is her politeness which induces her to notice you in re¬ turn." " Oh, very likely so," returned Mrs. Conway; " perhaps she may wish as much as I do to be introduced to me. I am sure I should like her acquaintance vast¬ ly." Eleanor, though' she could not help owning the ease and elegance of her figure, was not so much taken with her as Mrs. Conway; there was a certain boldness about her that did not quite please Elea¬ nor, but which Mrs. Conway styled only as the effect of grace and fashion. d S
So much did this subject occupy the at¬ tention of Mrs. Conway, that all others were dismissed, and it was not until a few occasional visitors- camein, that the theme was changed, and the remainder of 1 the day spent in entertaining them. The time of Eleanor was now wholly engrossed, and passed on in a variety of amusements, which Mrs. Conway proposed for her gratification; and had not Elea¬ nor been the cherisher' of secret pangs, her hours would have passed on pleasant¬ ly. She frequently visited Mrs. Clifford, in whose society she took increasing de¬ light; she had also-met with Robert Glen¬ dinning there, who-had availed himself of their kind invitation, and was received as a welcome visitor by alh From him Elea¬ nor heard of the increasing indisposition of lady Glendinning; and she atldngth-re- quested that Mrs. Conway wouldtake her to St. James's-square. She immediately assented, though she declared "she w*ould sooner visit any body than lady Cecilia Gray; but as they could not see lady Glen-
dinning without, why of course she must. The carriage was therefore ordered, and Mrs. Conway and Eleanor stepping into it, were soon on their way to St. James's 1 . Varying sensations occupied the mind of Eleanor during their ride: the recep¬ tion which would be given her, and the thoughts of seeing lord Montalban—al! agitated her so much, that Mrs. Conway observed her agitation, and rallied her on the occasion. At length the carriage stopped, and Eleanor inquiring if she could see lady Glendinning, they were shewn into the parlour; and on sending up their names, Georgina came doWn to them her¬ self, and kindly Welcomed both, and in¬ vited them to the drawing-room, where she said lady Glendinning was, who, though very ill indeed, had come down for a short time to see a friend. " Has her ladyship company with her ?" said Eleanor; " perhaps she is engaged at present." " Ohj no," replied Georgina; " mamma
is loo ill to see company; she has only an old acquaintance with her, and will be glad to see you;" saying which, she led the way up stairs to the drawing-room, where Eleanor beheld ladies Cecilia Gray and Lenox, and on a sofa reclined lady Glendinning, whose altered appearance shocked Eleanor extremely. Her cheeks were pale, her eyes had lost their lustre, and her form was wasted. Close by her side sat a gentleman, who was apparently attending upon her ladyship with great tenderness, and to whom they were intro¬ duced by the name of colonel Bellingham. He arose on the entrance of the ladies, and bowed to them %vith much politeness. Lady Cecilia arid lady Lenox coldly spoke to them. Eleanor trembled; she glanced her eyes around; lord Montalban was not in the room ; this gave her more courage, and she hastily advanced towards lady Glendinning, who took her proffered hand, at the same time telling her she w r as glad to see her.
Eleanor expressed her sorrow at her vi¬ sible indisposition, as her looks so plainly indicated. Her ladyship replied, that she was very much out of health, but trusted she should soon recover. ." Perhaps, madam," cried colonel Bel- lingham, addressing Eleanor," you may possess influence enough to persuade her ladyship to have medical advice called in, which she persists -. at present in refusing. Not all my entreaties, nor her friends wishes, can yet have any effect." .-.■■;.. " I hope her ladyship will see the ne¬ cessity of complying- with those wishes," replied Eleanor;, ''most earnestly, sir, would I add my entreaties to that effect, if it will have any avail." , .; , : " There cannot be the least occasion for all this,'! cried lady Lenox; "if lady Glen¬ dinning will not take the advice of .her mother, and the friends:about her, it is pf no avail talking to other people about it." ..." ,;,..;.
Eleanor could not refrain from looking indignantly on her at this rude speech. She saw Mrs. Conway was greatly irritat¬ ed, the colour mounted in her face, as, in a tone of asperity, she exclaimed—" Why, lady Lenox, sometimes we are alpt to take the advice of other people, as you style it; sooner than those near to vis. However, in the present instance, lady Glendinning would be only yielding to the wishes of a very near part of her fa¬ mily. As her ladyship's niece, Miss Ele¬ anor mustof course feel interested in her welfare;-—" " As who would not," interrupted the colonel; " for my part, J own I am parti¬ cularly interested. It really unmans me, to behold so much worth and loveliness a martyr to ill health, brought on, I fear, more by mental sufferings than any other cause!" ' He spoke* this in rather a low key; and rising to the window, appeared as if l hid¬ ing his emotion.
Eleanor observed all this with much surprise; who was this colonel Bellingham, she much wondered. Lady Glendinning looked earnestly at him. A slight colour mantled in her cheek as she exclaimed---" Pray do not make so much serious discussion upon* so trivial a subject. I am not so (obstinate as to decline the entreaties of my friends, and, to oblige all parties, I will certainly see a physician." " There/' cried Mi's. Conway, who was resolved to plague lady Lenox, " there, I thought Eleanor would have influence with her ladyship-rafter all, I am generally right in my conjectures." Lady Glendinning smiled* i A dead pause succeeded, as ladies Ce¬ cilia and Lenox were both too awgryito speak. It was with much astonishment that Eleanor beheld the visible alteration in the whole appearance of lady .Glefldiimircg, who, sinking beneath the pressure of a lingering malady, appeared tfio longer the
same being; the pride and haughtiness of her. character were now lost in a soft lan¬ guor, and those eyes, which, a few months since, had darted scorn and pride around, .were now sunk in mental debility; yet the change appeared for the better, and lady Glendinning, suffering under the effects of indisposition, was now really and irresist¬ ibly fascinating and lovely. The first that broke the long silence was Mrs. Conway, who inquired after lord Montalban and Robert, and was informed they were out together; and Eleanor al¬ most felt glad that they did not return while she staid, as she knew that on see¬ ing lord Montalban, she should feel ex¬ tremely agitated. Mrs. Conway, who hated to be in the presence of the two elder ladies, soon pro¬ posed their departure. Lady Glendinning pressed their stay ; but lady Cecilia, whose real place it was to invite them, remained in perfect silence; they therefore arose in order to depart.. Eleanor thought lady Glendinning look-
ed vexed and disconcerted, as, taking her hand, she expressed her hopes that she would soon come and see her again, and make a longer stay. Eleanor replied, that she should be most happy to comply with her wishes, if it would prove agreeable; and added, if she could in any way be' of service to her lady¬ ship during her indisposition, she would be most ready to attend her night and day —to sit up with her, if she required it, and to add to her comforts. Lady Georgina pressed her hand.— " You are a kind good girl," she cried, "and I thank you; but you are better where you are, for many reasons." She added, in a low voice—" I think you" will be more comfortable with Mrs. Conway than under this roof." She drew Eleanor still nearer to her, and looking cautiously around, as if fearful of being heard by any one else, she continued—" Tell me, Ele¬ anor, if you have heard from lord Arthur yet." Eleanor started, as she replied in the
negative> adding, that as lord Arthur was in ignorance 6f her residing with Mrs. Conway, that his letters would of course be directed there, and begged, that if any came b they might be forwarded to her; at the' same time she inquired if she should Write to lord Arthur, and acquaint him with her ladyship's illness. She hastily shook her head.—" To what purpose Would it be," she replied, " to ac¬ quaint him ?" She stopped, as colonel Bellingham ad^- vanced towards her. Eleanor saw plainly that he was endeavouring to catch their conversation, and she therefore dropped the subject, and, with Mrs. Conway, re- tired'from the room; and entering the car¬ riage, their discourse naturally turned upon the company they had just left. Much wonder was excited by the be¬ haviour of colonel Bellingham, and Mrs. Cortway made many inquiries concerning him, which Eleanor could hot however answer, as she did not recollect even ever hearing his name before; and they
were mutually surprised at his being styl¬ ed as so old a friend of her ladyship's. And, now, supposing our readers are un¬ der the same impression of curiosity, we shall give them some information respect¬ ing him, and throw a light on the subject of his acquaintance with lady Glendinning.
CHAPTER IV.
«< ------ ■ ---------- His demand Springs, not from well-meant honest love, But from deceit bred by necessity." Colonel Belhngham was the descendant of a noble and wealthy family, but being only the second son, the title and estates of his father, of course, devolved upon his elder brother; but, in every other respect, young Bellingham was made ample amends; the most liberal provision was settled upon him, and he had received an education worthy the son of a nobleman. In his early youth he displayed symptoms of an extravagant disposition, and large demands were often made on the purse of his father, who still forgave his follies, and treated him with the greatest kindness; but wishing, if possible, to settle him in some way of life, he informed him it was
necessary to make choice of some profes¬ sion, by which he could maintain himself as a gentleman. Young Bellingham was however of too gay a turn to settle in any thing sedate, and after some little consideration, he made choice of the army ; not because his bosom glowed with ardour in his country's cause, or that he was ambitious of drawing his sword in her defence; on the contrary, the gaiety to which he had been occasion¬ ally witness among young officers of rank, suited his ideas, and the parade of show, mess dinners, &c. were to him induce¬ ments irresistible, and accordingly a com¬ mission was purchased for him. His career of fashionable depravity was now unbounded, and the gay captain Bel¬ lingham was every where the rage. His person and figure were handsome, added to which, he possessed the advantages of a polished education, and could, when he chose, assume manners the most pleasing and fascinating. Many a female heart had been surrendered to the captain, but
he was of too volatile a disposition to make a serious choice; and he at length bore the character of a general lover, as each new face attracted his attention. - At this period it was that lord and lady Lenox visited London with their family; and, as will be remembered, lady Geor¬ gina, previous to her union with lord Ar¬ thur Glendinning, was every where the object of universal attraction, and received many noble offers, all of which she imme¬ diately refused. Captain Bellingham, then in his one- and-twentieth year, was by chance intro¬ duced to her, and on a farther acquaint¬ ance, found himself so captivated with her, that he really felt a ray of that passion, of which he had before only pretended. Lady Georgma was pleased with his agreeable address, and passed much of her time in his company; and it at length be¬ gan to be whispered that it would prove a match. The father of the captain was delighted at the prospect of' his son's settling with
so charming a woman, and- did all in his power to promote it. The qaptain was however artful' enough to arrange plans, in his own mind, for the completion of his wishes, for he really now found his heart enslaved; but he sawi the pride attending on the character of lady Georgina, he had witnessed the instant rejection, on her part, of those lovers who had offered themselves, and he was re¬ solved, as he imagined, not to be treated in the same way; he therefore took every pains to render himself agreeable to her s to pay her the most unbounded attention, and yet never spoke to her on love, re¬ solving thus to ensnare her affections, be^ fore she was aware of it, and eventually, secure himself a favourable compliance on Uer part. His companions rallied him on the sub¬ ject, at the same time telling him he would never succeed, and doubtless share the same fate as her other lovers. This piqued him, and he determined now to gain her, and triumph over the rejected party. Had
he not even loved her, at all, this idea would have proved a sufficient stimulus, as, to gain an object so universally sighed for, was a point too ambitious to be disre¬ garded by hira. The mode of conduct which he had adopted towards lady Georgina was ex¬ tremely agreeable to her, as she did not even suspect that it concealed a warmer sentiment, and it enabled her to pass her time in an agreeable manner, without supposing any mischief would ensue. She knew that the captain was gay, but she believed him honourable at heart, and she granted him her friendship without re¬ serve, and which he now mistook for the most impassioned regard; and at length believing himself perfectly secure as to his object, he took an opportunity of declaring his real sentiments, and laid his hand and fortune at her feet. The surprise of lady Georgina could only be equalled by his own at her beha¬ viour. " The same conduct marked her ac¬ tions as on former similar occasions. She
instantly gave him so decided a refusal, that even he, master as 'he was of all .per¬ suasion, could not urge her any farther on the subject. The same pride and scorn darted from her eyes, as had been describe ed by all her other rejected lovers ; and captain Bellingham found himself reduced to the same situation as those at whom he had laughed, and hoped to triumph over. Mortified, and stung to madness at this unexpected rejection, he instantly quitted the house; and, in a tone of disappoint¬ ment and rage, he acquainted his noble fa¬ ther of the failure of his hopes; who, much vexed at a circumstance from which he had hoped the reformation of his son would arise, resolved to take up the cause, and try what success he could obtain. For this purpose he waited on lord Lenox, and informed him of the wishes of his son. Lady Lenox was of course consulted, and she condescended to approve; fbrcap- tain Bellingham had insinuated himself so VOL. Ill, E
much into her good graces, by a little well-timed flattery, that she would have received him as her son-in-law. Lord and lady Lenox now spoke on the subject to lady Georgina; but the same conduct marked her as before—a positive rejection, without assigning any reason, was all they could get; and, though lady Lenox felt some disappointment, yet she immediately reconciled her mind to it, in the idea that her daughter was certainly entitled to look higher, and of course ought only to be matched with a title. Thus ihe affair dropped; captain Bel¬ lingham avoided meeting with lady Geor¬ gina, and plunged deeper and deeper into the vortex of dissipation. His gay associates soon beheld his non-intercourse with lady Georgina; and he was, as might be ex¬ pected, generally laughed at, as sharing the same fate as the former competitors. Some time after his disappointment, the regiment to which he belonged was quar¬ tered out at some distance from London ; and glad was the captain to quit a spot
where he had been so unsuccessful in love; and, without again seeing lady Georgina, he departed with his regiment Soon after this, lord and lady Lenox re¬ turned to Scotland, and, as will be remem¬ bered by our readers, earl Campbell im¬ mediately laid his proposals before them, and lady Georgina, who had so scornfully rejected all former offers, to their great surprise, unhesitatingly consented to ac¬ cept of the hand of lord Arthur Glendin¬ ning. Previous to their union, he made a tour round England, and at length arrived at the very place where captain Bcllingham was stationed; they were entirely strangers to each other, lord Arthur being unac¬ quainted with his attachment to liis in¬ tended bride; the captain was now in¬ dulging in all licentious excesses, and lord Arthur beheld his vices with abhorrence, and declined all the overtures which the captain made for his acquaintance. At length, finding it impossible to gain B2 '
liis friendship, he resolved to be revenged upon him, and meeting him one night at a tavern, the captain so grossly affronted him, that it was impossible to overlook it. High words ensued, a challenge was the consequence, and the next morning they met at a private spot, armed and alone. They fired together—captain Bellingham missed, but the arm of lord Arthur prov¬ ed triumphant; the ball had entered his an¬ tagonist's breast, and he fell to the ground, bleed ng profusely. Lord Arthur, who had been provoked to this act, felt all the horror of a true Christian at such a sight; rage instantly subsided, and humanity and compassion took its place; he flew to his side, he rais¬ ed him in his arms, and, to his great hor¬ ror, beheld him senseless; he bound his wound with his pocket-handkerchief, and spent some time vainly endeavouring to re¬ store animation. At length two considerations prevailed over his mind, his own personal safety, in case of the captain's death, and the neces-
sity of procuring surgical assistance; he therefore gently• laid him on the grass, and. hasteziing to th$ town, sought out a sur¬ geon, whom he desired to go immediately to the spot where he had left the captain, whom he asserted he had found in that si¬ tuation. He then, as quickly as possible, retreated, without exciting any suspicions, and immediately took measures for his own personal safety. On arriving at the place, the surgeon found the captain lying as had been de¬ scribed to him He saw, however, that life still remained, and that he had only fainted from excess of pain and loss of blood; he therefore had him conveyed by his attendants to his own house, where, in a short time, the captain recovered his senses, and was enabled to explain the nature of his wound. This of course he did with all due exaggeration, making lord Arthur the culpable party. It was soon seen that he was the person who had sent the surgeon to'his assist-
ELEAN0&. ance; and, as he declared the life of his patient to be in great danger, search was made after the unfortunate lord Arthur, of whom, however, no clue could be traced; and captain Bellingham, regardless of the affront he had put upon him, burned with fresh rage against him, at his having proved so triumphant; and he vowed the most im¬ plicit revenge against him, if his life was spared. It pleased Heaven to restore him, the ball was extracted, the surgeon was skilful, and, after a long confinement, the captain was restored. All attempts to find lord Arthur proved ineffectual; no information could be gain¬ ed respecting him, and years'rolled on, without granting captain Bellingham the revenge he wished; and the idea gradual¬ ly subsided in his bosom, until at length he by chance heard of the union' of lord Arthur with lady Georgina. This intel¬ ligence drove him into the most furious rage; that lie should again have triumphed
over him, was distraction, and, in the first moment of rage, he vowed to sacrifice him to his just fury. Lord Arthur, however, being stationed in Scotland, it did not immediately suit the captain to bend his steps thither; he was much taken up with his regiment, and still immerging into deeper follies; through the interest of his father, he had obtained the rank of a colonel, and during his life he was liberally supplied with large sums; but, on the decease of this worthy parent, he found great alteration in his affairs; it was true he was left a li¬ beral provision, but the riches of Peru would scarcely have supplied his extrava¬ gance, and he found his brother's purse not so ready or convenient a one as his late father's: thus his life had rolled away in continual dissipation, he was still the same dangerous character as ever, still pos¬ sessing the most pleasing exterior, and specious address; the years that had rolled on since his youth appeared more as an ornament, and at the period of lady Glen-
dinning arriving in London, with lady Cecilia Gray, the colonel was one of her gayest votaries. He now residing again in the purlieus of St. James's, it soon reached his ears that she had come unaccompanied by loi;d Ar¬ thur; his long dormant revenge now broke forth with redoubled sway, and he was resolved to make lady Glendinning tho instrument, Presuming on his good terms with lady Lenox, he sent his card, and was imme¬ diately admitted ; and* with all the art so inherent to his character, expressed his happiness at seeing her, and inquired after her daughter, alleging how much he wished to see her; and added, all past at¬ tachments had entirely subsided, and that he considered lady Glendinning only in the light of an old friend, to whom it would give him great pleasure to be intro¬ duced. Lady Lenox informed him of the ill state of her ladyship's health, but pro¬ mised he should see her; while the colonel
artfully .questioned her as to the happiness of lady Glendinning in the married state. With all the imprudence of an enraged> woman, lady Lenox openly commented on the ill treatment, as she styled it, of lord^ Arthur, whom she declared she now T al¬ most hated.; . This information was highly advantage-- ous to the colonel, who resolved to make lady Glendinning his prey—to possess him¬ self,of her, and thus revenge her former haughty refusal of him; and what was still more glorious, he should at length amply triumph over lord Arthur, in a way too- the most glorious of all—he should wound his honour, by tearing his wife from the pinnacle of virtue, and lowering her to the rank of the depraved and fallen of her sex, In this short interview, the abandoned. colonel gained sufficient knowledge, from' the imprudent lady Lenox, to lay all his future plans; and thus did this inconsider¬ ate mother, indulging in her spleen, assist in the means of destruction,for her daugh. e3
ter, for whose aggrandizement she was stilLso anxious. On the colonel being admitted to lady Glendinning, she certainly felt some little emotion; but his behaviour was so respect¬ ful, so void of offence, that unsuspecting his real designs, lady Glendinning felt really glad to see him. ' He beheld her no longer the proud'and scornful beauty. She was now suffering under mental and bodily debility, and none but a heart capable of the blackest designs could have marked out so inter¬ esting an object for his prey. Lady Glendinning had parted from lord Arthur under the impression of violent anger. He had neglected her, and wound¬ ed her by his coldness—the colonel w r as all attention and tenderness to her; and, un¬ used to tlie kindness of man, she felt the more grateful for his assiduities, particu¬ larly as he still kept the most proper bounds to his actions. Lady Glendinning daily got worse and
_ worse, yet her illness was not of a nature to confine her more than to her own dress¬ ing-room, to which lady Lenox admitted him, when she herself was present. He still contrived to keep on the best terms with her, and to lady Glendinning he became an amusing companion; he read to her, he conversed with her, and was* constantly by her side. It" was the colo¬ nel who was with her on the day sir Hen¬ ry and his party called at St. James's; and her ladyship at length found the com¬ pany of the colonel the only solace to her Wounded heart. > Thus a dangerous acquaintance was al¬ ready formed between them ; and the co¬ lonel at length dropped expressions of ten¬ derness, which could not but excite the alarm of lady Glendinning; still she did not j udge unfavourably of him. Her own bosom, notwithstanding the many in¬ stances which had appeared agamst her,, was the seat of purity and honour; but at present her virtues were buried in the waters of oblivion, and the unfortunate
lady Glendinning was now exposed to the artful designs of a villain; for such, with truth we must assert, was colonel Belling¬ ham.
CHAPTER V.,
" If you would avoid temptation,- Jly from its fascinating allurements j: Tis «■ lovely stream, Which bears upon its surface Embroidered flowers, crystal fountains, And verdant meads." . - ' On the second day after Mrs. Conway and 1 - Eleanor's visit to St. James's-square, lord Montalban was announced, and after pay¬ ing his compliments, he informed Eleanor that he was the bearer of a letter which lady Glendinning had entrusted to his' care, as he had with pleasure availed him¬ self, he added, of so pleasing an opportu¬ nity to see her. Eleanor turned pale as she took the let¬ ter from his hand, but glancing her eye on the superscription, she appeared relieved from her momentary embarrassment, and exclaimed that it was from lord Arthur.
« So her ladyship informed me," he re¬ plied, «* and as I conclude there may pro¬ bably be some message to his family, I shall, with pleasure, deliver rt to lady Glendinning," Eleanor thanked him, and withdrew to- the window^ to read it, while Mrs. Con¬ way entered into conversation with lord Montalban, as her curiosity had been greatly excited respecting colonel Belling¬ ham. She ventured to make some inqui¬ ries, to which his lordship could make no> other reply than by informing her that he had once been her ladyship's warm ad¬ mirer, but was now her respectful friend. ' Mrs. Conway smiled, and dropped some hints that her ladyship must be careful, as love renewed was sometimes very danger¬ ous, &c. Lord Montalban forbore any remarks on the subject, but proceeded to say, that her ladyship continued very much indis¬ posed, and that she had seen a physician, who pronounced her to be in a very low- and dangerous state. Her complaint was
now a nervous affection, and the doc¬ tor hinted his opinion, that it had been occasioned by mental anxiety, and a mind 1 ill at ease ; though of the truth of this as¬ sertion, he added, they could not vouch, as lady Glendinning persisted in a total si¬ lence on the subject; nor would she own to any one that she had cause for unhap¬ piness. ' ' " Why," replied Mrs. Conway, " I must say, that her ladyship is of so haugh¬ ty a disposition, that she will scarcely con¬ descend to be conversant with any one, much more own her griefs; but to be sure she inherits it from her mother, for lady Lenox I dislike much." " That lady Glendinning possesses what the world calls a proud spirit," returned lord Montalban, " I will allow; but in my humble opinion, it is also a noble one. Her ladyship, I am confident, has qualities, which, if called forth,, would doubtless pro\ e her to be a woman of ai* exalted disposition." " Oh, no doubt," cried Mrs. Conway; "far
be it from me to speak: disrespectfully of her ladyship; after the genteel treatment I experienced in her house, it would bev?ry ungrateful of me; I dare say she is a very good soitf of a lady at heart, as you ob~ serve." By this time Eleanor had finished read¬ ing her letter, which was from lord, Ar¬ thur, in answer to the one which she had written to him. It contained the kindest expressions of regard and apprehensions for her safety, and again warning her as to her conduct and pursuits while in Lon* don; he then concluded by desiring her ta> take upon herself the task of remembering him to his family, whom he hoped would also attend to his wishes and instructions. The language, though fraught with kindness, still bespoke the anguish of mind which evidently marked the whole demea¬ nour of lord Arthur; and Eleanor' again sighed as she reflected on the unhappy- state into which he had plunged. himself, and a thousand ideas respecting him crowd¬ ed upon her imagination; she however
roused herself, and reflecting that most probably lady Glendinning would like ta know the contents of his letter, she took a pen, and addressed a few lines to her lady¬ ship, enclosing lord Arthur's letter for her perusal. With this she troubled lord Mont¬ alban, who expressed himself happy to oblige her. He staid with them great.part of the morning; and though he couldnot openly avow himself to Eleanor in the pre¬ sence of Mrs. Conway, yet every action marked the lover;.and on his departure he promised very soon to repeat his visit. Eleanor found her lime completely oc¬ cupied with Mrs. Conway, who had either company at home, or paying visits almost every day. Mr. Crosby spent a great deal of time with them, and appeared to grow so fond of Eleanor, that he was never so happy as when by her side. He gradually lost his asperity and moroseness, and his behaviour to her was tender and affectionate; while Eleanor^ on her part, felt an affection for,
him almost parental. Mrs. Clifford she, also frequently visited, and each time she saw her, added to the regard which she cherished for her, and which indeed seem¬ ed truly reciprocal, for Mrs. Clifford ap¬ peared never so happy as when she had her with her. Georgina had also com¬ plied with her promise of visiting her, and had, w)th her brother Robert, dined at Brixton on this occasion. Mr. Wil¬ liam Conway had also contrived to call on Mrs. Clifford, and the party appeared mu¬ tually pleased with each other; and while the rest were conversing together, Mrs. Clifford would draw Eleanor aside, and take much delight in talking with her re¬ specting the plains of Scotland, where, she said, in her younger days, she had passed much of her time. Of lord Arthur's fa¬ mily she asked many questions, and at length inquired if Mr. Charles Lenox was still living 3 Eleanor replied in the affirmative^, and commented, in warm terms, on his kindV
ness towards herself, and the interest he had taken in her welfare, supposing her to be the child of lady Frances. Mrs. Clifford appeared to take great in¬ terest in this communication, and again asked if he was single, or whether he had ever entered into the married state ? Eleanor replied in the negative; while Georgina, who had overheard this ques¬ tion, exclaimed—" Who's that you are talking about? is it my uncle Charles ? If so, I can tell you he is a decided old ba¬ chelor. He has always remained single for the sake of lady Frances, and now intends still to continue so for the good of Eleanor, resolving to make her his heiress, for the sake of her mother." " Generous man!" involuntarily cried Mrs. Clifford, while a tear evidently dim* med her eye. They looked at her with surprise, but to avoid further remark, she walked to the other part of the room, and entered into general conversation with the rest of'the company, The more Eleanor saw of her, the more
she was surprised. That Mrs. Clifford took great intei^st in, the family of Glen¬ dinning, w T as evident, and the likeness she bore towards her was a matter of much wonder to Eleanor, who entertained many vague conjectures in her own mind, but which, however,were too obscure to reveal; certain it was, that in this short time she felt as much attached to Mrs. Clifford as if the closest ties had united them; and whenever she could make it agreeable to Mrs. Conway'» engagements, she always passed her time there. Her attention was, however, soon called forth to another ob¬ ject, which at once brought Mrs. Conway to the height of her wishes. One morning, after breakfast, the wea¬ ther being uncommonly beautiful, Mrs. Conway proposed to take a short walk to the top of the Grove, with which Eleanor instantly complied; and tying on her straw hat, and throwing a silk plaid across her shoulders, she took the arm of Mrs. Conway, and they commenced their walk. The beautiful prospect before them
had a thousand charms to the eye of Elea¬ nor, who delighted to behold the works of nature, which, on reaching the top of the Grove, is admirably displayed. Every thing looked lovely around; and Eleanor still lingered in the various walks, point¬ ing out fresh beauties which she discover- ed, until at length Mrs. Conway declared she began to get tired, and the sun was getting so hot that they must return to their house. Eleanor of course assented, and they proceeded down the Grove; and, about half-w r ay up, Mrs. Conway discerned her unknown lady coming on horseback. She joyfully communicated this intelligence to Eleanor, and resolv¬ ed, in her own mind, to make a full curt¬ sey as she passed, which, of course, she thought would be returned. Fortune, how¬ ever, happening to be in a complying hu¬ mour to the votary of folly, caused a tri¬ fling circumstance to occur, which gave to Mrs. Conway the long-wished-for intro¬ duction. Before they had quite met, the lady sud-
denly stopped her horse, and putting her hand to her eye, appeared labouring under some uneasiness. The grooms rode up to her; and Mrsr Conway, hastening her steps, heard one of them, in a respectful manner, inquire if he should procure her some water; to which she replied in the affirmative, but added—" I do not know how you can get any, unless some¬ body would be so kind as to give you some at one of tliere houses." This was enough for the delighted Mrs. Conway, who immediately inquired if the lady was ill, adding, that her house was at her service, if she would honour it. The stranger, looking up, and seeing Mrs. Conway, gracefully thanked her, al¬ leging that the wind had blown some dust into her eye, which gave her so much pain, she could not proceed; she therefore thankfully accepted of her offer; and dis¬ mounting, and resigning her horse to the care of the groom, walked with Mrs. Con¬ way into her house; and being ushered up with great ceremony into the drawing-
room, Mrs. Conway rang for a bason of water. The lady poured out an effusion of thanks for her kindness, and it was evi¬ dent that the pain she had evinced was real, as the drops ran from her eyes in quick succession ; and it was not until af¬ ter some time that she could cleanse away the dust, which had much hurt her sight. Eleanor, ever humane and attentive to any one in distress, had also offered her as¬ sistance ; anci as tiie jaoy recovered from the pain, she addressed Mrs. Conway and Eleanor in the most affable terms, ex¬ pressing her sense of their kindness, which, she added, sh-. N hoped to have the honour of returning, by begging they would con¬ descend to visit her humble roof, with which, if they complied, she should ever rejoice at a trifling disaster, that had given her the pleasure of an introduction for which she had long wished ; " for," added she, " in my morning rides down this de¬ lightful spot, I have always noticed your elegant abode, which so truly evinces the taste of its mistress."
Eleanor bowed; while the delighted Mrs. Conway assured her of the pleasure it would give her in commencing an ac¬ quaintance for which she had long wished* at the same time pouring out an effusion of compliments; while the lady, drawing some cards out of a beautiful little case* presented one to each; and Mrs. Conway, with inward exultation, read—" The ho¬ nourable Miss Hargrave, Woodbine Cot¬ tage, Peckham-llye." Convinced now of the rank of her guest, Mrs. Conway cast a look of exultation on Eleanor, who had also perused her card, and she now became confirmed in the opi¬ nion which she had before formed, name¬ ly, that Miss Hargrave was a lady of great fashion and gaiety; her manners evinced a complete knowledge of the world, and her conversation was certainly easy and graceful. In a short time she and Mrs. Conway appeared as much acquainted as if they had known each other for years; and Mrs.. Conway had soon informed her of the par-.
ticulars of her stolen wedding, her recep¬ tion" at lord Arthur's in Scotland, aud her pleasure at having Miss Glendinning as her guest. Mrs. Conway took great de¬ light in introducing Eleanor as the niece of lord Arthur, and spoke of their visits to St. James's square, asking Miss Har¬ grave if she were acquainted with lady Cecilia Gray, &c &c? thus, as she thought, shewing she was in the habits of visiting with titles, as she considered Miss Har¬ grave now as great as those. Miss Hargrave replied in the negative, adding, that she had passed the greatest part of her life in the country ; but on her coming of age, she had quitted the abode qf lier guardian, andflown to the fascinating amusements of London, for which she owned she had the greatest relish, though at the same time she made her residence away from the noise and bustle of the metropolis, but at so easy a distance, that she could partake of the pleasures of town, and also enjoy the pure air of the country. vol. ill. f
Mrs. Conway, qf course, admired her taste, which, she said, was so similar to her own; and then ventured to inquire if she had lost her parents, as she had mentioned her residence with a guardian ? Miss Hargrave sighed as she replie d she was an orphan, and had no relations in town. . Eleanor'observed a gloom pass over her face as she spoke, and her own feeling heart instantly commiserated her suffer¬ ings, as she concluded the loss she had sus¬ tained affected her too much to conceal. - Miss Hargrave, however, instantly re¬ covered herself: her eyes now reassnmed their lustre, and the most fascinating smile adorned her dimpled chin. There was so penetrating a glance in her piercing eyes, that Eleanor could scarcely bear her gaze; and though she certainly admired the beau¬ ty and elgance of her face and figure, yet there was a something about her, that did not altogether please the pure bosom of Eleanor; while Mrs. Conway seemed ab¬ solutely charmed with her gaiety and fa-
shion. She at length desired that the horses might be called, as she must tear herself away, alleging she had many en¬ gagements, and at night, she added, she was going to a masquerade at the Opera- House, and asked JMrs. Conway if she should be there ? " Dear me! no," she replied; " I did not know there was to be one to-night, or I should have liked it of all things, for I never was at a masquerade in all my life." " Indeed !" returned Miss Hargrave; " they are my delight—I dote on the very name-—I seem to exist, to have a new life in the delights of a mask and disguise. Why, how is it possible, my dear Mrs. Conway, that you have never yet resorted to a scene with which I am sure your taste and spirits, so w ell accord ?!' a « Really I don't know-how it has hap : pened," replied she, " but I never had tickets offered^ me,-1 suppose." , v< And perhaps- then; Miss Glendinning,
you have never partaken of such an amuse¬ ment ?" inquired Miss Hargrave. " No, madam," replied Eleanor, " I ne¬ ver did; I am not a votary of fashion; I have ever led a calm domestic life in Scot¬ land, and have not an inclination for such amusements." ** Astonishing!" cvied Miss Hargrave. " Why I should ha-, e thought your heart would have panted for such a scene. Po¬ sitively you shall go to one; I will cha¬ peron you. What say you, Mrs. Conway ? shall I endeavour to procure you tickets for to-night?" ""Why really," replied Mrs. Conway, " your offer is so kind and genteel, that I hardly know how to refuse it. But I am afraid there will hardly be time to procure dresses." " Oh, yes, there will," she cried. " You can go in dominos; I will send my ser¬ vant to town for two directly." During this conversation, Eleanor had brought 'to mind the advice ;and warning of lord Arthur on her leaving Scotland.
Temptation appeared to be standing before her; she recollected his description of it, and, with a firm mind, she resolved to fly from its allurements—*' Pardon me, madam," she cried, addressing Miss Hargrave, " if I appear guilty of rudeness in refusing your kind offer, hut from, the description which I have heard of a public masque¬ rade, I should not choose to gOj unless lord Arthur were present to sanction it. I , can only thank you, madam, for your po¬ liteness, but I must decline it. Let not? my refusal though have any weight with you, Mrs. Conway," she added, " as you certainly are mistress of your own actions, and I will, with pleasure, remain at home during your absence." Miss Hargrave fixed her penetrating glance upon Eleanor—** You really sur¬ prise me," she cried; w but act as you please, though a little introduction into the fashionable world wiU soon remove those fears from your bosom; and I shall, with pleasure, initiate, you into them." " Never, I hope," mentaUy sighed Elea-
nor, but she forbore io reply; while Miss Hargrave again asked Mrs. Conway, whe¬ ther she would accompany her ? Mrs. ConWay however had prudence sufficient to refuse, as Eleanor was not inclined to go, and pleaded the shortness of the time as her excuse. Miss Hargrave accepted of it, and added, that she would take care to inform her of the next in time, when She hoped that Miss Glendinning would have laid aside her fears, and accompany them also. Mrs. Conway now inquired as to what dress Miss Hargrave intending wearing. She replied, that she had for that even¬ ing chosen a very humble one, as she was going as a ballad-singer. Mrs. Conway told her, that was ac¬ knowledging that she possessed a beauti¬ ful voice, and said how much she should like to see and hear her. She replied, she should be happy to gra¬ tify her, and would certainly exert her ta¬ lents at any time; and as to her dress, she would shew it her the first time she would
honouvher with a visit, which she hoped would be very soon. Mrs. Ccnway replied, that Miss Glen¬ dinning and she would do themselves the pleasure of calling on her the next day, and inquire how she found herself after her fatigue. Miss Hargrave thanked her in the warmest terms, adding, that she took it as a proof jof her promised friendship, and begged they would do her the pleasure of dining with her. Mrs. Conway replied, that they certain¬ ly would at some future opportunity; but as she would doubtless be fatigued after the masquerade, they would only give her a morning call; and that must not be too early, she supposed, or she should not find her risen. » Miss' Hargrave smiled, and said she would give orders to see them, and rise, if she were not up; and once more asked Mrs. Conway if she would allow her to send for a dress for herself as she dare say
she cduld gel/ the friend with whom she was going to get a ticket for her. Mrs. Conway, in rather a reluctant tone, declined, though Eleanor saw she had half a-mind, • i* ' . Miss Hargrave however now took her leave, and once more thanking them for their extreme kindness to her, she left the room; while Mrs. Conway came half way down the stairs with her,- and expatiated 6n the pleasant exercise of riding on horse¬ back, &c. Miss Hargrave replied, that it was her favourite amusement, and that she gene¬ rally made her morning ride from her house down to Camberwell, and up the Grove, and back, as she much admired so charm¬ ing a spot. She then once more bade adieu to Mrs. Conway, who returned to the drawing-room window, time enough to kiss her liahd to Miss Hargrave as she rode down the Grove. " Well," cried Mrs. Conway, " is not this a fortunate introduction ? I told you
she was a person of consequence.' What a charming woman she is! She will prove quite an acquisition during the absence of Mr. Conway, and will be a good compa¬ nion to escort us about." Eleanor smiled, but made no reply, as her sentiments were not quite in unison. " I should much have liked to" have gone to the masquerade to-night," re¬ sumed Mrs. Conway. " It was very po¬ lite of her to offer to send to town for dresses for us; I think I should ruTvebeen tempted, only you seemed so averse to it." " I am sorry, madam," replied Eleanor, " if I have been the means of depriving you of any amusement; but indeed it did not meet the ideas which I have formed respecting the promises I gave to lord Ar¬ thur, who, 1 know, would be angry at my going to such a place without a protector." Mrs. Conway could not refute her ar¬ guments, but added, that all genteel people went to such places*' 'and that she would certainly go some time or other. f S
This circumstance had now so completely engrossed the attention of Mrs. Conway, that she could think nor talk of. nothing else; and Eleanor was 1 glad to make an excuse of writing to lord Arthur, as a means of obtaining a little cessation from the theme; and retiring to her own room, she sat down to write, in order to answer the letter of lord Arthur, in which she in¬ formed him of her present residence, and of the indisposition of lady Glendinning, whom she described as labouring under evident bodily and mental sufferings; she likewise addressed him, in the most affec¬ tionate terms, respecting his own health, and begged he would remember her most grateful regards to Mr. Charles Lenox, whose kindness, she added, she should hope to deserve. She had scarcely time to finish her letter before dinner; and on go¬ ing down, she found Mr. Crosby, who was listening to Mrs. Conway's description of he?* new acquaintance, and exultingly shewed him her card. Mr. Crosby heard her in silence, and al-
most indifference, until she informed him of her inviting, herself and Eleanor u to ac¬ company her to the masquerade, hut that Eleanor t .refused—" She was. right," ex- claimed^r. Crosby; "she would have disappointed rae in my opinion of her if she had gone. Eleanor," he continued, " Eleanor at a masquerade! what should innocence and virtue do there ?" , « Lord! Mr.. Crosby," said Mrs, Con¬ way, "do you mean,to assert that,every body who goes to a masquerade are bad sort of people? A pretty compliment .. indeed you pay to many of our ladies of fashion, who, though truly good and vir¬ tuous, frequent such places!" " I mean to assert, madam," replied he, " that such persons are better away, for a virtuous woman should not expose her¬ self to such scenes of temptation, lest it should eventually tend to lead her mind to the same species of dissipation practised by those whose principles are unfortunate¬ ly perverted by fashion and folly; and at a masquerade, you must allow, charac-
•teifc fere 'to*be found bf ev**ry description; and better,!-say, will it be if Eleanor re¬ mains in -ignorance of such a scene." Mr£ Conway, as i iisual,^cdfttended ihe point; ' and as Mr. Crosby and she seldom agreed on any subject, an argument fol¬ lowed.' r Mr. Crosby condemned Miss Har¬ grave as a mere votary of fashion. From this circumstance, Mrs. Conway was en¬ raged. ' Eleanor endeavoured to draw the medium between both parties, and suc¬ ceeded in restoring amity between them ; and tne day, to Mrs. Conway, slowly ap¬ peared to move on, so impatient was she for the coming of the next, anticipating the pleasure and gratification she should experience in paying a visit to Woodbine Cottage, the charming abode, as she thought it must be, of the elegant and fas¬ cinating Miss Hargrave/
* CHAPTER VI. ^ ■, , Sweet Sohtudo ! thou hast chaims to me ' Unknown to those who court the woild's false gaiety; Thy peaceful joys I seek with eager care, And comfort find, though plung'd m deep despair; Thy charms, oh, Solitude ! still are mine, To thee I yield iny soul, my mind to thee resign. Ihe Authoi. Look ! a here it goes now; even out of the portal. SUAkESPEAUK i j Lord Arthur Glendinning, since the de¬ parture of his family from Scotland, had closely resigned himself to' his favourite solitude, and, if it may be so expressed^ more fully enjoyed it; by not having so many observers on his conduct, he was enabled to take a wider range round the environs of St. Michael's, and freely in¬ dulge in those meditations which absorb¬ ed his soul. The absence of Eleanor was of great grief to him, and could he but
have had her society, he flattered himself he should have been happier; but in this instance iady.Glendinning had proved re¬ solute, and.in consequence of this he had severely reprimanded her; they had part¬ ed in anger, and apparently at variance; he considered that a breach was formed between them, never more perhaps to be closed in amity; she was dpubtless, en¬ gaged in those scenes of dissipation, which he considered as congenial to her mind; he had therefore scarcely any concern about her. It was true-she was his wife, and the mother Of his children, but she had never been exactly the woman of his choice. He had please^ a^father—-he had oteyed his wishes^ and murdered his own happiness. His son and daughter were doubtless well pleased with their excursion; his fears were therefore for Eleanor alone; she, he knew, was the child of sorrow; exposed to the persecutions of her enemies, and taken from his protection, he trembled for her peace. On her departure, every acute sensation appeared to take possession of his breast, as
she entered-iritQ the' carriage zvhich was to conduct her away.i He repaired ( to his window,, and on losing sight of her, he sunk on a seat, overwhelmed t with melan¬ choly sensations, and'remained in that state until the return of Charles * Lenox, who kindly sought to cheer his drooping spirits. He related to him the particulars of her reception at B------ House, and liis own declaration of making her a " bachelor's heiress." Lord Arthur seized his hand, and with a warmth which bespoke the interest he took for Eleanor, poured forth a torrent of thanks. Charles then reverted to lord Montal¬ ban, and with delicacy hinted his opinion, that his lordship's affections were more hers than his niece Georgina's, and asked the advice of lord Arthur under such par¬ ticular > circumstances, as, though he said he certainly felt for the honour of his fa¬ mily, yet it could not conduce tq the hap¬ piness of Georgina to marry a man whose heart was another's.
" liOrd Arthur coincided in this opinion, and candidly acknowledged his wishes in that respect, but at the same time inform- ed J him of lord Montalban's behaviour to 'him, when he had given him so much en¬ couragement to open his real sentiments with regard to Eleanor. Charles Lenox was astonished;' he still believed that he.regarded her with the most ardent affection, and added, he was sorry his lordship should have used such dissimulation. They were, however, partly aware that lord Montalban was under painful restric¬ tions for the sake of his father. Lord Ar¬ thur felt the force of this. He had de¬ voted himself for the sake of a parent; and he rosolved, if possible, to save lord Montalban from becoming another sacri¬ fice ; and though he could not own to Charles the real reason which prompted him to feel so much for lord Montalban, yet he agreed with him, if'possible, to unite him to Eleanor; for that she also regarded him, they were perfectly con-
vinced;- and on their return to Scotland, they resolved to Use their joint- efforts to secure their happiness^ '-i ^ v ; Charles also; endeavoured to divert lord Arthur's melancholy, and frequently, in¬ vited him to join again with society ; but rinding entreaties vain,- he resigned his fruitless efforts, and left him to his only comfbrtof solitude.' He now frequently left the e^stle,:and wandered about unseen^ and his,actions consequently unnoticed,, at least by hu¬ man eyes! In,the calm of the evening,, he would: Wander to the sea-side, or some-: times stroll to the village, Where he would stand and gaze on the spot where the dread¬ ful conflagration had been,- and which was not yet quite repaired. .Often did he in¬ quirei.if tlie female, v/ho had been so mira¬ culously preserved by lord Montalban,. had ever since been heard of ? He was constantly answered in the negative; nor could he ever gain any information, of her. He heard by chance that her name was Mrs. Hamilton; but the people with
whom she had lived at the time of the fire, knew nothing more of her than that she was a woman of the most amiable charac¬ ter, and they regretted her loss extremely. - Lord Arthur sighed as he turned away from his informant, and wandered al¬ most unconsciously to the rocks by the sea-side. The sun was just sinking, and reflected its radiant beams on the waves. Lord. Arthur cast a wistful look over the wide expanse, which now, alas! divided him from Eleaaor. He mentally breath¬ ed a prayer for her safety, and invoked a blessing upon her head from that Power whom he dared to address in her behalf. For his own peace he could scarcely dare to pray; a pang harassed his mind, which, alas! no time could erase; one guilty ac¬ tion had for ever sealed his fate in misery and despair. The hour, the deed, was passed; but memory dipped her barbed arrows deep in the inmost recesses of his heaifc, and marked him as a prey to grief, secret and desponding. He felt his own dereliction from honour, for which he was
severely,punished. He was unworthy of Divine protection; j but for his .Eleanor he prayed with confidence and hope; ,she was innocent, and he fondly traced in imagina¬ tion/the youthful beauties,which adorned her glowing cheek—" All good angels guard her!", he exclaimed aloud,. "and guide her safe to these, arms in,all her native purity and truth! All earth is.still; every breeze seems lulled to peace; and I alone am wan¬ dering and wretched; perhaps my. Elea¬ nor is likewise retiring from the noise and bustle of fashionable riot, and seeking in the silence of night a short respite from her wees ; how applicable," he continued, " are the words of a noble poet * to my feelings! with thee I can exclaim-----. Child of love, though horn in bitterness, Sweet he thy slumbers ! O'er tiie sea, And from tlie mountains where 1 now rospir*, Fain would I waft such blessings, upon rhr.«. As, with « sif-h, T deem thou might'st have been to me. " How congenial ,is solitude to the trou* bled mind!" added lord Arthur; "here * Loid Byp'»n. ' ' "
no eyes are on me, save that One> that aw¬ ful One, from whose glance no human be¬ ing can escape; hidden from all but that, 1 can freely breathe^—here can I acknow¬ ledge the errors of my soul, and give to the passing winds my sorrows; they re¬ gard me not; nor can I seek for pity in the flinty rocks, which hang in massy grandeur o'er my head." He paused, as raising his eyes as he spoke, he beheld a female figure on one of the projections. She was evidently in the attitude of kneeling; her hands were clasped together; her flowing drapery waved carelessly around her, wafted by the evening breeze, and gave her more the appearance of a sylph than of a human being. Slowly she arose; and turning her face full upon where lord Arthur stood, almost transfixed with surprise, her eyes met his; a loud scream burst from her lips as she darted down the precipice, un- heeuful of danger. Before lord Arthur could have power to move from the spot —" Almighty Powers!" he exclaimed,
" it is she Zierselfl That face, that form —it is no longer delusion ! Oh! stay," he cried; "ily me not! in mercy speak to me!" He remained motionless for a few mo¬ ments, as if expecting a reappearance of that form, which had thus evidently agi¬ tated him ; but no sound was to be heard, or a creature seen: in an agony of disap¬ pointment, he rushed from the spot where he had stood, and darted up the various projections of the rock; he searched every aperture, but in vain; the object of his search was no where to be found—'* She has again eluded me," he cried, in a tone of bitter disappointment; *• she baffles every endeavour I make to catch her; yet," he continued, raising his hand dis¬ tractedly to his head, " what is it I would pursue ? a fleeting vision, a phantom, who only appears to torment me; for has not the cold ground long since received her mouldering form, while I, her murderer, alone drag on a wretched existence on earth,? Yes, spirit of an ill-fated being!
thou art revenged; Glendinning is the slave of torture, while thou, released from his grasp, repose in peace, or at least only quit thy heavenly confines to strike the guilty breast of thy destroyer with dismay and horror."* Overcome by the violence of liis own feelings, lord Arthur sunk down exhaust¬ ed, and for some time he lay in a state of stupor. The cold chill ot night seized him; he looked about, and found it was dark ;' a sense of his danger aroused him, at the top nearly of so stupendous a rock, unac¬ quainted with its turns, from which, if he varied, destruction was certain. lie shud¬ dered; and though life, a few moments previous, had seemed a burden, yet the love of it, so natural in the hour of danger, returned with double ardour, and with cautious steps he bent his way, and almost miraculously arrived in safety at the bot¬ tom ; and in a state of mind bordering on distraction, he reached the Castle of St. Michael. ! •■ ' Sad and' heavily passed the succeeding
hours; his mind became more and more disturbed, and in 'his siate he answered the epistle of Eleanor, and in dictating the language of affection to her, he alone de¬ rived comfort. Earl Campbell, almost now sinking with the weight of years, and visibly declining towards the end of all nature, beheld, with anguish at heart, the miserable state of his son—that son whose peace he had sacrificed by his ambitious hopes; and that title, of which he had been so proud, would, on his death, descend to one, now incapable of keeping up its ancient dignity, until years should roll away, and in general succession the young Robert Glendinning might re¬ trieve the fallen grandeur of their house. A general gloom pervaded the Castle of St. Michael's, its two noble masters closely secluding themselves, one on ac¬ count of age and infirmities, the other in¬ capable of partaking in the social delights of society. The rocks were now the constant resort of lord Arthur, hoping, yet dreading to
behold the appearance of that form which had struck such agony to his soul, ,1-lis wishes were not gratified; and when he gazed on the almost-inaccessible points of Mie flinty rock, he persuaded himself that it .must have been his fancy only, and that no female could brave such dangers; and after gazing in contemplative awe, he would return melancholy and dejected to St. Michael's. But here, alas! fresh per¬ plexities awaited him. The general gloom which prevailed around the walls at length disturbed the minds of.the domestics; su¬ perstitious terror began to .steal over their senses, and every fancied noise was con¬ strued into the most fearful causes. Ap¬ paritions were now declared to walk in so¬ lemn silence along the gloomy corridors of .the castle, and mouldering forms, which had lpng:since slept in peace, were now, by the, imagination of the servants^oused from their eternal slumbers, tOvdisturb the peace of the living. One female domestic declared dbhat shejhad seen, with her.awn eye^a >figure,iul in.w ( hite, &it jalong/ihe
dismal gallery, in tlie dusk of the evening, and vanish she knew hot how; and the terror which beamed in her countenance, as she vouched for the truth of her asser¬ tion, left very little room for doubt in the minds of her auditors, who were likewise most willing to believe it. These accounts at length reached the ear of lord Arthur, who was of course much displeased at such reports. But, while he blamed the silly domestics for their cre¬ dulity, he mentally asked himself if he were quite free from the terrors of super¬ stition ? It was his duty however to check such idle reports, and, upon pain of dismission, he forbad the repetition of such accounts. For a while the trembling domestics obeyed, consoling themselves with inform¬ ing each other of the dreadful signs, omens, &c. which they daily heard, and which at length-were duly explained by the most able, as warnings of the approaching death of the old earl; and not a female servant vol. ni. g
but had planned hi what manner they should proceed on the solemn occasion. Meantime lord Arthur, who vainly imagined he had quieted the minds of his household, remained in his own state of uninterrupted solitude, from which no¬ thing appeared to have power to rouse him. ' He would sit Whole evenings in his own room, buried in reflections, and lost to all around. In such a mood as this he had remained one aiight, Urtheedfui of the darkness which was encompassing the earth, when he was startled by a violent scream, which sounded at no great distance. Much alarm¬ ed, he rushed to his door, which he open¬ ed ; the screams were repeated, ac'compa- nie'd by a noise which was immediately succeeded 'by a silence as calm as death. He looked about, unable to jascertain the cause; the gallery in Which-he *■ stood'was long and' dreary, the end in which he was contained 'his own arid other < habitable apartments; the other end, he knew, led to the church of St. Michael's, by whichfthere
w<is a private entrance, but which had never>been used of late years. He shuddered, as the screams had evi¬ dently proceeded from that direction, and ringing his bell for lights, he determined alone to seek the cause. Snatching a lighted taper from the hands of his man, he rushed down the gallery, and soon be¬ held a female form lying prostrate on the ground. He paused for a moment—ago¬ nizing sensations assailed him, as, with a trembling hand, he raised her, and gazing on her face, he beheld, to his great sur¬ prise, one of liis own domestics in a strong fainting fit. He raised her in his arms, and bore her towards his own room, with (the intention of a-inging for assistance; but, on reaching that end of the gallery, he saw a number of his other-servants, evidently in an atti¬ tude of listening, and peeping over each other's heads, with marks of the greatest terror on' their countenances. i In a peremptory tone he demanded an
explanation of the present scene, when, after great hesitation, they owned they were anxiously waiting the return of the housemaid, who uoav lay insenoible before them ; that she having laughed at the re¬ port of a ghost haunting the gallery, she had declared her resolution of going, at the dusk of the evening, when it was said to appear, by herself to the spot, and that no doubt she had paid the forfeit of her pre¬ sumption, as her present situation proved. Lord Arthur listened to this account with varying sensations; anger assailed him,, but he could not confute the truth. She had doubtless been frightened by some cause, and glad was he when she began to display symptoms of returning animation. He dismissed the rest of the domestics, re¬ solving to question her alone. . It was some time before her senses were collected enough to make a reply, which she at length did, by owning the same story- as the other servants had told, with the addition, that, after remaining in the passage a few minutes, she beheld a form,
in long white drapery, advancing towards 1 her with slow and solemn steps; though greatly terrified, she called to it, when it instantly turned round, and vanished, she knew not how—that her fears then over¬ came her, and screaming violently, she sunk insensible. This account greatly agitated lord Ar¬ thur, and he dismissed his trembling ser¬ vant from his presence, in nearly as dis¬ tressed a state. Concealment was now im¬ possible, and it was universally believed- that the castle was haunted. Some assert-' cd that it was the spirit of the lost lady Frances, wandering over her native place; and this report reaching the ears of the old earl, it awakened all the father in his bosom, and most truly did he repent his" severity towards her. To lord Arthur he expressed his anguish, who was far more wretched than himself, and he determined, if possible, to fathom the mystery which surrounded them. At the end of the gallery he was aware that a large pair of folding doors opened
to the church of St. Michael's, which hfcd been, formerly used for the convenience of; the family, but which,' of later years^ had never* even been opened. Lord Artlmr was determined" to explore, these, and-as¬ certain whether any being* could gain, ac¬ cess to the castle this way; but, on a> close- examination, he found it was iinpracti- cablo> for so crusted were the bolts with rust, that it was impossible to draw them, in their present state, and perfectly convinced liimthat the dours, had remained closed, since their own family had ceased to pass through, them. StlU more perplexed than ever, he was resolved to make one more desperate effort, and this was,,to watch every evening.at. the appointed spot,, and ascertain whether a>human or supernatuval, being did make its i appearance. The earl' applauded his resolution ; but begged,,for his own safety,.that he would have attendance, and suffer his own man tabebyhissideu This however, he positively refused ;
and, with a beating heart, he awaited the approach of that hour, in which it was said that the graves, yawning, yielded up their dead, and their embodied spirits wandered in slow and majestic solemnity over the Castle of St. Michael's.
CHAPTER VIL
J could n tale uufuld, whobc lightest word Would hiiriow up thy sou I, freeze thy young blootf,. I^Itike thy two eyes, like stars, sunt from their spheies,. Thy knotty and combined locks to part, And tach jiarticul.iv Iwir to stand on end, Like qtiilis upon the fretful porcupine. Suakespeaue. We left Mrs. Conway in eager anticipa¬ tion of her promised visit, and, after break¬ fast, she declared to Eleanor that she must do something to pass away the morning, as it would seem so long before she could visit Miss Hargrave, as they must not dis¬ turb her too soon, after her fatigue of the preceding night. Eleanor smiled at her impatience; but as she wished to inquire after the health of lady Glendinning, she requested Mrs. Conway would take a ride to St, James's, which would sufficiently delay the time.
Mrs. Conway assented ; and, as soon as the carriage could be got ready, they re¬ paired to lady Cecilia's. . , So full was Mrs. Conway of her new acquaintance, that she could think nor talk of nothing else; and the idea of the honourable Miss Hargrave appeared to have superseded all her other acquaintance from her memory; and, during their ride, she was the subject of her conversation 1 . • On arriving at St. James's they found the whole of the family assembled, with the exception of lady Glendinning, who was still too ill to leave her room thus early. Lady Cecilia, as usual, received them very coldly, while lord Montalban ex¬ pressed tlie pleasure it gave him to see them; and the fervent pressure of his hand, as he took that of Eleanor, and the joy that danced in his eyes, sufficiently corro¬ borated the truth cf his assertion. A slight agitation pervaded the frame of Eleanor, as his lordship's presence always created a degree of emotion, which she vainly endeavoured to conquer. G 3
Georgina and- Robert both expressed themselves in terms of kindness; and, on Eleanor inquiring for lady Glendinning, Georgina offered to inform her mamma that she was there, as she- knew, she said,. that her ladyship would be glad to see her. Eleanor thanked her, and Georgina quitted the room for that purpose. Robert now inquired of Eleanor when she had seen Mrs. and Miss Clifford, and expressed himself highly delighted with their charming society. This was a theme on which she could converse with pleasure ; and she entered into a warm eulogy on her favourite friends. In a short time Georgina re-entered the room, and begged that Eleanor would go to her mamma, who would be very glad to see her. She instantly obeyed the summons, and found her ladyship still in bed. She kind¬ ly extended her hand to Eleanor, and re¬ quested her to sit by her. Her ladyship ptill appeared very weak and languid, and Eleanor endeavoured to
raise, by a lively conversation^ her evident dejected spirits. - ' • Lady. Glendinning appeared sensible of her kindness, and conversed with her with as much composure as she could assume. She inquired how she passed her time with Mrs. Conway, and if she were not more happy there than she should be with them ? Eleanor assured her of her willingness to remain with Mrs. Conway, until their return to Scotland, which, she added, in a tremulous tone, she hoped would not be far distant, as she much longed to behold her peaceful home. " Not more so than I do,"- replied her ladyship; " yet, Eleanor, I fear St. Mi¬ chael's will never more prove the seat of peace or happiness—at least to me.?" Eleanor sighed.—" I trust your lady¬ ship will yet find it otherwise," she cried; " and that you will there- regain your health and spirits, of which, I am much afraid, London has deprived you." Her ladyship shook her head,—" Alas!"
she replied, " it is not change of residence alone which has thus shaken me! Know you not, Eleanor, what the poet says— 1 To no •'pot confined is hajiji'iicsa sinceie, Tis ho w here to be found, or every where." "It is a very true assertion," returned Eleanor, " and yet I am confident it would add to my happiness, could I return to Scotland." " Ah, Eleanor," cried her .ladyship, " that happiness would greatly meet with its alloy, so closely would it be allied to sorrow; for are you not aware of an event which is to take place on our return, and which, if I am not mistaken, will cause you much grief at heart?" *■ To what does your ladyship allude?" falteringly inquired Eleanor. " The long-intended union of lord Mont¬ alban and Georgina," she replied, casting her eyes full upon Eleanor, who, unpre¬ pared for such a conversation, became ex¬ tremely embarrassed—her cheeks assumed a deadly paleness, while her ladyship pro-
ceeded—" Believe me, Eleanor, I have not chosen this subject for the purpose of idly tormenting you, but I cannot be blind to the unfortunate attachment, formed, I fear, between lord Montalban and yourself, which, alas ! can only terminate in misery. I would save you, Eleanor, if possible, from the pangs of hopeless love. Conquer your feelings while yet in your power,; save yourself from everlasting sorrow, by seriously reflecting on the-impossibility of accomplishing your wishes. Lord Mont¬ alban has pledged his word of honour to unite himself to my daughter. Can he, as a gentleman, break that, unless circum¬ stances warranted such a forfeiture on his part? But, above all, relations on both sides are decisive, and, unhappily on his lordship's part, certain destruction must ensue if he refuses to fulfil his engagement; therefore, Eleanor, save yourself from fur¬ ther misery, plunge not yourself into a gulph of sorrow, which must inevitably consume your days in fruitless repentance." The feelings of Eleanor during this ad-
dress, can better be conceived than de¬ scribed; soiiserious> so unexpected,' that she scarcely knew how to make a reply. She was aware that lady Glendinning was net a character to be trifled' with ; slie es¬ sayed to speak, when the door opened, and lady Lenox entered the room. Lady Glendinning looked disconcerted, as in a low T voice she cried—" Be silent." Eleanor bowed, and, for the first time, felt indebted to the interruption of lady Lenox, whose motive for thus breaking upon them was to prevent much conver¬ sation between lady Glendinning and Elea¬ nor, for so envious was she that the latter • should gain the favour of her daughter, that she determined to prevent all commu¬ nication between them; she therefore seat¬ ed herself, and remained in the room dur¬ ing the stay of Eleanor, who at length took her leave of lady Glendinning, as she knew Mrs. Conway would be impatient, as the morning was now fast advancing. On entering the drawing-room, she found Mrs. Conway conversing, with gieat
volubility, on her intended visit to the ho¬ nourable Miss Hargrave, and enumerating her various engagements;. and added, that she meant, on the following evening, to take Eleanor to the th ?atrc, as she knew she would much like it. Lord Montalban replied, that it was an amusement of which he was particularly fond, and that very likely he might have the pleasure of seeing them there on the same night '* I have taken a box," cried Mrs. Con¬ way, "and if your lordship will honour me so far, I shall be happy to accommo* date you with a seat." 13is lordship expressed the pleasure it would give him, and promised to be there; hut on casting a look towards lady Cecilia, he saw anger darting from her eyes; she appeared as if ready to pour forth a torrent of rage ; but suddenly, as if commanding her passions, her features assumed a more placid appearance;, and,, to the surprise of all, she turned to Mrs. Conway, to whom she hardly ever condescended to speak,
and with* a smile, which but ill concealed the malice rankling at her heart, informed" her, that she should, also feel much obliged by a seat in her box, as she should very much like to accompany her nephew. Although Mrs. Conway hated lady Ce¬ cilia, she was'highly gratified at her offer, not aware of the true motive which prompted it, which, in fact, was only that of preventing the attention of lord Montal¬ ban to Eleanor, and to be a watch upon their actions. Of this Mrs. Conway had not the least idea, and she took it for grant¬ ed that it was out of respect to her, and she felt proud at the idea of accommodat¬ ing lady Cecilia Gray, whose title was of sufficient consequence to raise her in the eyes of tlie world; she therefore expressed the pleasure she should feel in lier lady¬ ship's company; while lord Montalban was mortified beyond measure, and Eleanor quite disconcerted. Georgina was then invited, but she pleaded the indisposition of her mamma as an excuse for staying at home; and Robert asserted an engage-
ment at Mr. Clifford's; lady Cecilia and lord Montalban were therefore to join Mrs. 1 Conway and Eleanor at the theatre.' Mrs. Conway now ordered her carriage i and bidding adieu to the family at St. James's, ordered her coachman 1 to Peckam- Rye; and though the horses flew with the utmost speed, the ride seemed long and tedious, so impatient was she to behold her new acquaintance. On reaching the place of their destina¬ tion, she looked at her watch," artd found it was turned of three ; she therefore ob¬ served to Eleanor, that she should suppose they should not disturb, the lady, as the hour was so late. Eleanor, who was not initiated into tho ways of fashionable folly, smiled at the idea of disturbing her at so late an hour; while Mrs. Conway beheld, with great satisfac¬ tion, the beautiful cottage at which the carriage stopped. Its exterior was the picture of elegance; the drawing-room windows opened into a balcony, where the hand of nature hac}
been most 'luxuriant*, and: spread ;a most delicious, odour around., While Mrs. Conway was taking this survey, and'before lier,footman could ap¬ proach, the door opened* and a,gentleman came- out, dressed in a large loose great¬ coat; His appearance was:extremely fop¬ pish, or, in the more; appropriate phrase of the present-, day?,,,he > looked an. exquisite dandy.* He made a. pause* as the, footman inquired for Miss.- Hargrave;; and, after staring at. f V carriage, he.made. a. slight how> andi passed; on» Tjh,e* servant who, opened the* door,re^ plied y that Miss Hargrave- was. at home, but that she was not yet visible* having been,out very latelast-night. . Mrs. Conway desired her. card might be taken to her, when a female servant ap¬ peared, and'begged that the ladies would alight, as Miss Uargrave.would.be happy to receive them in her dressing-roQm, as shehad 1 given orders for that purpose. v Mrs. Conway and Eleanor- now entered the house, and>\vere-conducted up stairs to
a; chamber, wheref every luxury seemed to- prevail. The most beautiful vases and' plants* adovned the room-, which was deco¬ rated in a> style of elegance. ' The prevail¬ ing colour was a delicate- blftOj relieved by drapery of white muslin; 1 On a* couch, which stood on dne side of >the room, re¬ clined Miss Hargrave, most elegantly at¬ tired in a morning robe, but' which, for it* beauty, might have^ graced '■ a ball-room, being composed of white-lace, relieved- by^ satin of the same purity; a. 1 cap of similar materials- adorned 1 ' Her head ! ;and Ji had' & limner'wanted acopyfdra-Madona-, Miss Hargrave- might have- been L his model. 1 Temptation< here, appeared'to spread' her allurements around r it was here she seem¬ ed to dwell'; and on this* view, onedialf the world might have pronounced the- object before tliem as a subject of envy, 1 as well as of admiration, so deceitful are appear¬ ances. How little do we know the heart- corroding pan g& which are concealed be¬ neath the smiling face; or the vice which
dwells under a countenance .adorned with^ the smile of innocence and virtue! . Miss Hargrave arose from her reclining posture, and taking a r hand of each,, ex¬ pressed her, pleasure at seeing them ; and apologized for being so lazy, adding, she> had just risen previous to,.their coming, and finding, herselftoo fatigued to go down stairs, she had* ordered breakfast .in her dressing-room, and hoped they would par¬ take of some with, her., , , , Mrs. Conway, who was delighted-with, everything she saw, assented, in order that Miss Hargrave might not be deprived of her beverage .by ; their'presence; and, on its being brought in, they found it was all of a piece with the res r t:of the luxuries, as it consisted of every; dainty, which could -please,the palate, and might be styled more' as a cold collation than a breakfast. Mrs„Conway now inquired how she had been entertained on the preceding night j. and casting her.eyes to another part of the room, 1 where lay. some* articles ofapparel^ presumed it was her masquerade attire^
Miss Hargrave replied in the affirmative, and desired her maid, who was in waiting, to bring them forward—" I had a most de¬ lightful night!" she exclaimed. " I much wished you had accompanied me; I am sure you would have been delighted; and to you, Miss Glendinning, who are yet a novice in fashionable life, it would have been a most delightful introduction. We had characters of all sorts and descriptions, ancl a vast number of persons of the first rank." Mrs. Conway was now busily examine ing the dress of the ballad-singer, and smil¬ ing at its humble appearance, which con¬ sisted of a plain gown, but made in such a way as to shew the shape to great advan¬ tage, over which was>thrown a red cloak; a large straw hat, tied down with white riband, • completed the dress, which had evidently well cbntrasted the beauty and elegance of Miss Hargrave. After she had taken a little refreshment, she arose, and with the utmost gaiety of manners, .cried—" Come, Mrs. Conway,* J
will keep the promise I made you of she v- r - ing you my dress, as I know you expressed a wish to that purpose, and so now for my humble-costume;" saying which, she threw on the things; and tying on her hat, the fine lady was lost in the robe of humble attire. " What a metamorphosis!" exclaimed Mrs. Conway; " yet how truly does it be¬ come you! your face looks beautiful dn that hat. I am sure you must have excited uni¬ versal admiration among the gentlemen." Miss Hargrave bowed at her compli- 3v>ent, and smiling, replied—" Oh, madam, thore was very little'fear of'that, 'for thus 1 hid my humble countenance;" saying which, she placed the mask before her face, and taking up a piece of music from some others, she began singing a most beautiful <.air, in a voice and >tone which ! exceeded the expectation of Mrs. Conway and Elea¬ nor. Miss Hargrave possessed indeed a most lovely voie£<; added to which, her'science Un music qualified 1 her ibr-afirst^rateisinger.
'Eic&nor was much delighted with lier song; and on its conclusion &h*, thitnjked hei for,tbe pleasure she had conferred on them. ^ Miss Hargrave gracefully replied, she ' should be heppy at any t .ne to repent it to them, and to add, m her best manner, to their amusement- She was interrupted by a loud knock at the'outward door, and in a few moments a gentle f ap sounded at her own. She -de¬ sired her maid to see who was there, Who, on obeying her orders, informed lier that it was Mr. Nugent, who begged to know if he might be admitted. Miss Hargrave appeared confused; her cheek turned pale, as turning to Mrs. Con¬ way, she cried—" It is a most particular friend of mine, with whom I went to the masquerade. I suppose we must admit him." " I beg our presence may not prove any hindrance to your wishes," replied Mrs. Conway. , . .Miss.Hai'grave 'bow^d, 3 and-desired hex
maid to let Mr. Nugent in, who, as he en¬ tered, exclaimed, in a drawling tone— w Upon my word, Eliza, you are as diffi¬ cult of access as a prime minister, or an eastern sultana." " Why," replied Miss Hargrave, "you ought to think it a favour to be admitted at all to a lady's dressing-room, and wait her pleasure without repining. But give me leave to introduce you to these ladies, who have done me the honour of a visit __Mrs. Conway and Miss Glendinning." Mr. Nugent bowed—" I am extremely happy to see them," he replied, at the same time casting a rude stare on Eleanor, who, unused to the familiar gaze of fashion, felt abashed. In Mr. Nugent, Mrs. Conway and Elea¬ nor recognised the same gentleman whom they had seen quitting the house as they entered, and whose appearance was not very prepossessing. He was young, and rather personable, but there was an expres¬ sion in his countenance of great haughti¬ ness, and a something in his tout-ensemble
which, to the pure ideas of Eleanor, was particularly disagreeable, while, on the contrary, Mrs. Conway was so delighted with all she saw, that it would have been impossible for her' to have found any thing wrong. Miss Hargrave had been throwing off her ballad-singer's dress, which she had not accomplished, when Mr. Nugent came in, who cried—" What! still masquerad¬ ing, Eliza ? I should have thought you would have been tired of that abominable dress; do pray throw it off, and let me see you look yourself once more." Miss Hargrave complied, while Airs. Conway informed him of Miss Hargrave's kindness in putting it on to shew them, and added, how well she became it! Mr. Nugent replied, that he differed in opinion with her there, as he thought he never saw her look worse. This was spoken in a tone of some as¬ perity. Miss Hargrave looked mortified, and vol, III. H
in an embarrassed manner asked him if he would take some breakfast ? " Yes," he replied, " I came on purpose, and indeed I have been here before; I went away just as these ladies came up to the door, being told you w r ere not risen from your slumbers." Miss Hargrave smiled, and replied that he had been rightly informed—" And,'' continued she, " when I say I did not leave the Opera House until six this morn¬ ing, and consequently it was nearly eight when I got to bed, I shall be excused for lying until three. Do you not think so, Mrs. Conway ?" To this, of course, Mrs. Conway assent¬ ed, adding also her opinion that Miss Har¬ grave had really risen very early, consi¬ dering her fatigue; for so delighted was she with her new acquaintance, that no¬ thing she did could have appeared wrong to her. Eleanor, on the contrary, was not so well pleased. Mr. Nugent she disliked even upon this shore acquaintance, and
the whole scene appeared to partake of so much luxury and fashionable dissipation, that it suited not with her pure and unso¬ phisticated ideas of morality. Mrs. Conway was absolutely in her glory; every thing was the height of gentility, and she was quite loth to quit it. Mr. Nugent partook of a very heaity breakfast, but found fault with every thing, while Miss Hargrave, it was evident, studied every look, and made every effort to please him. At length Airs. Conway, finding that the hour was past her own dinner-time, unwillingly arose to go, but first made a request that Miss Hargrave would return her visit as soon as possible, ancl likewise extended her invitation to Mr. Nugent, as she considered him, no doubt, to be the favoured lover of Miss Hargrave. Before her departure, she likewise tocV care to speak of her intended visit to the theatre, and that she expected lady Cecilia to be there, and requested that Miss Plargrave H2
would also favour her with her company, as there would be plenty of room for her and Mr. Nugent also. Miss Hargrave partly promised she would, and that she would likewise make a point of visiting the Grove very soon again. A very friendly leave was now taken between the ladies, and Mr. Nugent attended them to the carriage, which, when they entered, Mrs. Conway began in high praises and panegyric of th/; beautiful and accomplished Miss Hargrave, who, .she declared, was the most elegant and genteel woman she ever saw. Eleanor acknowledged the external qua¬ lities of Miss Hargrave; but as she was not quite so enraptured with all she had seen as Mrs. Conway, she was not quite so profuse in her praises. On their arrival at home, they found Mr Crosby waiting their return with some' degree of impatience, as he declared him¬ self alarmed for the welfare of Eleanor, whom, he added, he supposed was being drawn in to mix with the fashionable world.
Mrs. Conway, who could think nor talk of no other subject than Miss Hargrave, related to him the account of their visit, and the elegance and style in which she lived, and her decided opinion that she must possess an immense fortune* " The question is, does she make a good use of it?" cried Mr. Crosby. " That inquiry is already answered, I should think," replied Mrs. Conway. " Have I not been describing to you the elegant manner in which she lives; her liberality and hospitality appear evident enough, and is not this making a good use of fortune?" " Certainly^" answered Mr. Crosby* "they are two good qualities in themselves, but they are often misapplied. For in¬ stance, this lady may delight in feasting the wealthy, and in pouring luxuries into the lap of the great, while the wretched and the unfortunate might beg in vain for a fnOrsel of food to keep them from famish¬ ing." u You always draw such dismal conclu¬ sions/' cried Mrs. Conway, " that there is
no talking with you. I dare say Miss Hargrave is as charitable as most people; but in this short time I could not expect to hear her sound her own praise. I am quite satisfied with what I saw of her, and I am sure even you would allow her to he a very charming woman, and were you to hear her sing, you must be delighted. I could have listened to her whole hours, for slie was so obliging to us, that she sang a song this morning. I wish yon had heard her, Mr. Crosby; I think your heart would have been softened?' " No doubt, madam," he replied, " but it would; " but I was also entertained with a song this morning, which gratified me as much as yours; and I will venture to assert, though I give the lady all due credit, that the strain I heard was sweeter to my ears than all the soft cadence of her notes." " It must have been delightfully sung then," interrupted Mrs. Conway; "and pray, sir, who was this divine singer ?" " A poor widow, madam," he replied,
in a tone of warmth, " who, with four helpless children, I - have had the happi¬ ness of saving from starving. Chance con¬ ducted me to their abode, I saw their misery—I relieved their wants, and on— again calling this morning, I found them all comfortable and full of joy. The chil¬ dren gathered round mc, and joined in their innocent exclamations of gratitude, while the widow's heart sung with joy, and as she uttered forth expressions of thankfulness, I felt no music could prove so sweet to the ears—no sound so gratify¬ ing to the mind; and nozv, Mrs. Conway, which song, think you, was the best, yours-* or mine?" " Why, sir," replied Mrs. Conway, " they are of a very different nature ; but to you, who are such a philanthropist, yours was, of course, the greatest treat. The charities of Mr. Crosby are already well known." " And, I should hope, universally ad¬ mired and copied," cried Eleanor, who had attentively listened to his narration,
while the tear of sympathy adorned her eye; " oh, sir, how I envy your feelings, and how I respect yosr principles! Permit me, sir," she continued, "to have the heart¬ felt satisfaction of contributing a small share towards the relief of the distressed widow and her helpless babes.' r She put her purse into his hands, which he received, and taking both hers, he gazed on her with tender delight.—" Noble, ge¬ nerous Eleatioiv" he exclaimed," thy wishes shall be gratified; tlie offering of an angel shall be acceptable to the widow and the fatherless. Charity still exists on earth r her true copy stands before me; meekness, humility, pity, love, and energy, adorn your countenance, and the form of Elea¬ nor shall henceforth be my care. Yes, dear girl! be assured, that for the least part of what you have done for this poor widow, shall be doubly returned unto yourself; and when I am no longer an actor upon this mortal world, you will find that my assertion was not confined, to words alone."
Eleanor was greatly affected; she could not misunderstand his meaning; the tears streamed from her eyes as she endeavoured to speak. He strained her to his heart, and bestowing a paternal blessing on her head, he retired from the room for a short time, in order to recover his composure; and after some tittle while he returned to them, and passed the remainder of the evening in their society, while Eleanor each moment felt more and more attached to the venerable and benevolent Mr. Crosby, whose virtues shone conspicuous, even among his peculiarities, and proved him to move in the highest state of man, name¬ ly, a true Christian.
H 3
CHAPTER VIII. " Heftven lins no pa c sions like Iu>e to hntied ttnnM, N'jr hell \\ fury, liko n hoih m scorn'd." The next morning Mrs. Conway and Eleanor paid a short visit to Mrs. Clifford, who always received our heroine with the most fiattering marks of affection, and would have had her entirely take up her abode with them, if Mrs. Conway would have parted with her; but as she declared she should be quite r liserable without the society of Eleanor curing the absence of Mr. Conway, Mrs. Clifford could not, in politeness, urge the subject farther. Towards the amiable Emily, Eleanor felt a sisterly affection, and she could have been happy to have passed the whole of lier time with them. She found that Ro-
bert Glendinning passed much of his time there, and by the blushes which adorned the cheeks of the lovely Emily, as his name was mentioned, she concluded that he was not indifferent to her heart; and most truly did Eleanor rejoice at such a prospect, as, in that Ci«se, lus unfortunate attachment towards herself must of course subside; for she did not doubt a moment but that the attachment was reciprocal, as she was sen¬ sible that Robert had been much prepos¬ sessed on his first interview with Emily, which a farther acquaintance had evidently increased, and she saw no obstacles betv\ sen them and happiness, save the one of fa¬ mily pride, which might prompt the elders of the family to seek a higher alliance for its heir. Miss Clifford was however no mean choice; her fortune, it was true, was but small, but her beauty and accomplishment* rendered her an object cf admiration, and fit to adorn the highest station, consequent¬ ly she was adequate to grace the proud family of Glendinning. These thouglits
fully occupied the mind of Eleanor during their stay, as she had plenty of time for reflection. While Mrs. Conway was conversing en her favourite theme, namely, Miss Har¬ grave, Mr. Clifford, who was present, said, he had heard her name mentioned as being- a very gay- lady, who had lately come to reside at Peckham, of which place she was the universal talk and envy. Mrs. Conway replied that she did not wonder at her being the envy of any one, as her beauty alone was sufficient to cause that in the hearts of her own sex, and ad¬ miration in that of the gentlemen. Mr. Clifford smiled, but made no far¬ ther reply, and Mrs, Conway now arose, and with Eleanor bid them adieu for that day. After paying a few other morning visits, they returned home, as Mrs. Conway de¬ clared they should now have enough to oc¬ cupy them for the remainder of the day, until the time of dressing for the theatre. On entering the house, the servant in-
formed Mrs. Conway that Miss Hargrave was in the drawing-room waiting their re¬ turn. Delighted beyond measure at this> intelligence, she hastily ascended the stairs,, and found Miss Hargrave seated at the piano, from which she instantly arose, and. making an apology- for using so much freedom at her house, proceeded to say, that finding herself perfectly disengaged for that day, and Mr. Nugent also being to dine out with some friends, she had done herself the pleasure of coming thus eariy to spend the day with them, and to- accept of Mrs. Conway's kind invitation to accompany them to the theatre in the evening. Mrs. Conway expressed herself highly obliged by her visit, and begged that Miss Hargrave would wave all ceremony, and give them as much of her company as her other engagements would admit. MissHar- grave indeed appeared perfectly at her ease; she sung to them, and certainly did all in her power to render her^lf agreeable; and
even Eleanor, though no advocate for fa¬ shionable life, could not but acknowledge the pleasing elegance of her manner. , She likewise conducted herself towards Elea¬ nor with so much good-humour and kind¬ ness, that she.could not but return it; yet she knew not why, but she felt a repug¬ nance steal over her at the idea of calling Miss Hargrave her friend. Once or twice she had observed her fixing her eyes full on her face, while her own features would assume a deep melancholy; a sigh escaped her bosom., but it was instantly banished. She would force her countenance instantly to reassume its former vivacity,, and enter upon the most lively subjects, while a common observer would have ranked her as one of the happiest of mankind. This was not however the opinion of Eleanor, and she felt convinced that Miss Hargrave was not exactly the character she assumed. The ladies sat down to dinner by them¬ selves, from which they arose- early, in order to equip themselves for the theatre. Miss Hargrave, though dressed extreme-
ly elegant, displayed another dress with superb ornaments* which her maid had brought with her, in order that she might also make a change for the evening. Mrs. Conway, of course, applauded her thought, and the important business of dress was begun. Eleanor, arrayed in pure white drapery, but, most of all, " adorned in her own na¬ tive lovelines," was the first who entered the drawing-room, where she found Mr. Crosby. He took her hand, and bestowed on her the greatest marks of his approba¬ tion ; the simplicity of her dress,, the light elegance and symmetry of her figure, ap¬ peared to give him evident satisfaction, and he entered into a pleasing eonversa>- tion with her. Eleanor listened to his remarks with real pleasure, until she heard the steps of Mrs. Conway and her new friend on the stairs. She informed him of their approach. " So," he cried, " then I shall behold this fine lady who has so enraptured the weak heart of Mrs. Conway. I expect to
behold a complete contrast; for now," con¬ tinued he; looking tenderly on Eleanor, " I view the pleasing resemblance of inno¬ cence and virtue, unsophisticated, nature, and native-purity,from which I shall turn to behold the lady of fashion." He paused as the door opened; and Mrs. Conway entered with Miss Hargrave, who- was indeed dressed in n style of elegance not easily to be surpassed. Three large ostrich feathers,, which waved gracefully on her head, added to the nobleness of her figure, and even Mr. Crosby thought she looked lovely. Mrs. Conway-exultingly introduced her to-him, and returning the low curtsey she made him with a vener¬ able bow, he seated himself without speak- in o*. Tea was now brought in, in order that ' they might be in readiness for their in¬ tended pleasure;: and Mrs. Conway order- ,ed her carriage to be at the door by the time they had finished, though, she added, she did not wish to be too soon, as it was 'not genteel to go too.early.
Miss Hargrave coincided in her opinion, and amused her auditors by again exerting her vocal talents. Mr. Crosby owned her powers were veiy great, but added, that the sofl strains of Eleanor had made so deep an impression on his heart, that no others could ever remove. Miss Hargrave smiled, but it was a smile which seemed to denote the consciousness of her own su¬ perior abilities. At length Mrs. Conway arose, and say* ing it was time to depart, half-jestingly invited Mr. Crosby to accompany them. This he of course refused, adding, after having handed them to the carriage, he should return to his own house. He press* ed the hand of Eleanor as he bade her adieu, at the same time whispering a friendly caution in her eaiy warning her from entering into too much gaiety with her companions. The heart of Eleanor sunk as the car- riage moved on. She was going to meet lord Montalban, hut in the presence of lady Cecilia Gray, who,, she knew, would.
treat her with incivility bordering'on rude¬ ness. Besides, she had still another task to contend with; each interview; she had with lord Montalban appeared to strength¬ en the affection she felt for himy and after the conversation she had had with lady Glendinning, how could she dare to en¬ courage such thoughts ? She saw the bar¬ rier placed between them, and she ! shud¬ dered; and when the carriage stopped at the theatre, she felt as if she were going to a scene of misery, rather than that of gaiety and splendour. On entering the house, the music, which was playing, and the brilliant appearance of the scene, tended to raise her depressed spirits, and on being conducted to their box, she endeavoured to force a smile into her face. Lady Cecilia and lord Montal¬ ban were not yet arrived, which gave her time, in some measure, to recover her spirits. Mrs. Conway seated herself be¬ tween Miss Hargrave and Eleanor, and never did she feel more in her element. They had not been long seated, when.
the door opened, and lady Cecilia Gray was announced. All rose to testify their respect to their noble visitors. Lord Mont¬ alban followed his aunt, Mrs. Conway begged lady Cecilia to take a seat in the front row, alleging plenty of room. She complied with her request, adding, she would take a seat by Miss Glendinning, and immediately placed herself by Eleanor at the end of the row. Lord Montalban seated himself behind Eleanor, to whom he spoke in terms of kindness; but on casting a timid glance in his face, she beheld dejection and sor¬ row stamped upon it. His manners were evidently abstracted, and grief appeared to dwell upon his mind. Lady Cecilia alone was happy; she ex¬ ulted in the visible sorrow of which she knew she had been the cause, and she con,- gratulated herself upon her quick thought in accompanying her nephew to the thea¬ tre, and thus preventing his having so glorious an opportunity with Eleanor dur* ing their ride. < She had succeeded in ren-
dering lord Montalban cbrnpletely wretch¬ ed. She had again attacked him respect¬ ing his attachment to Eleanor, and again threatened the destruction of his lather oh his refusal to unite himself to Georgina^ Until, working upon his fecfings, she made him give a half-;eohsent to comply With her wishes. She hinted that their return to Scotland would hot he far distant^ though she would not satisfy-him as to the appointed time, but told him it Would be suddeh whenever it Was. This intelligence^ of course, gave him the deepest sorrow, and when he entered 1 the theatre, his heart was almost'bursting ■between contending passionsi The mo¬ ment he beheld Eleanor, and Saw the be¬ witching beauty of her face and. figure,, I love assailed >hi$ heatt • with redoubled ar- | t(6m\ and he almost resolved to welcome- ruin with her^ rather than marry another*. Miss Hargrave, who had been intro^ £iiced to him,, displayed all her powers of lively conversation to attract his notice; hut^ though he answered her with all due
politeness, yet he was evidently so en¬ grossed in thought as scarcely to heed any remark made at all; and she at length whispered to Mrs. Conway that he was certainly a very elegant and handsome young man, but extreme dull company. Lady Cecilia, with a heart exulting at her own.machinations, sat with a smile of satisfaction on her envious cheek; but not of long duration was her triumph, Fate had ordained that at the very moment she was exulting in her own schemes, she should meet with a blow which at once put an end to her fancied satisfaction. Before the end of the first piece, Eleanor had observed a gentleman in a naval uni¬ form enter the next box, and at length finding there was room, he advanced, and seated himself on a line with lady Cecilia Gray. Eleanor had been led to notice him by the noble appearance of his figure; he was evidently rather past the prime of life; but; his countenance was extremely prepossessing. A sort of instinctive* me¬ lancholy appeared to have taken.possession
of'his features, and rendered him an ob¬ ject of interest to his beholders. He ap¬ peared to be paying great attention to the stage; but on the dropping of the curtain, he took a survey round the house. Eleanor at length turning towards lady Cecilia, was astonished to behold her in a state almost beyond description; her cheeks were pale as death—her eyes appeared al¬ most'starting from their sockets, and her whole frame trembling with agony. Her glance was rivetted on the before-mention¬ ed gentleman, who did not as yet seem to observe her, Eleanor, greatly astonished, exclaimed __« Are yon not well, lady Cecilia,?" This sentence was overheard by the gentleman, who, leaning over the box, gazed earnestly at her. His own face be¬ trayed great agitation, as, in a voice of great emotion, he cried-—" Lady Cecilia! 'tis indeed so! Well may you tremble," he continued, looking sternly at her; "well may you thus shrink at the sight of a man whom you have so grossly injured!"
'" Forbear your insults, sir," she replied, in a voice scarcely audible ; " this is not a place for your invectives." " All places," he exclaimed, " are open to my just indignation, though, no doubt, the voice of truth sounds hateful in your ear." " Captain St. John," cried lord Mont¬ alban, advancing towards him, " I am not, I believe, mistaken, although some years have elapsed since last I saw you." " You aie right," he replied, at the same time extending his hand. " Towards your lordship I bear no enmity. You greatly resemble her, for whose loss I incessantly mourn, and her counterpart cannot be otherwise than good," " For your own sake, sir," cried lord Montalban, " endeavour to banish this strain at present! the time, the place, are ill calculated; captain St. John, I know your wrongs are great—but your suspi¬ cions may perhaps be ill founded." " Can I want greater proof?" he quick¬ ly replied. si Look at the terror, the guil-
ty countenance of your wretched aunt! Inhuman woman!" he continued, darting a look of fury on lady Cecilia, * where is my Amelia? say, does she yet exist? or have your cruel arts entirely destroyed the loveliest form that ever breathed?" »- By this time the eyes of all, were turn¬ ed upon this distressing scene,. Miss Har¬ grave and Mrs. Conway whispered each 6ther it was very strange, while lord Mont¬ alban, evidently much distressed, again implored the captain, to forbear, as they should attract universal attention, particu¬ larly as lady Cecilia Gray had now sunk back, nearly insensible. Eleanor felt much distressed at this strange scene. Lord Montalban looked at her with a countenance of sorrow and vex¬ ation, and most sincerely did she sympa¬ thize with him in his,feelings. She held a smelling-bottle to the nose of lady Cecilia,, and,, iu tremulous accents, begged lord Montalban to, be composed. He seized her- hand, and passionately exclaimed:-*" Composed!' ah, dearest Ele-
anor, my feelings are racked, are tortured— they are past even assuming composure!" Captain St. John turned towards him. —" For your sake, Frederick." he cried, " I will be silent; but if you could know the agony I endure, you would not won¬ der at my conduct. Behold this cruel wo¬ man," he added, pointing to the insensible form of lady Cecilia; " see how conscience has reduced her; self-conviction acts upon her frame, and convinces me my suspi¬ cions are but too true, although I cannot prove them, Montalban, be cautious ; if that treasure be yours," he continued, mo¬ tioning with his finger towards Eleanor, whose hand lord Montalban yet retained, " be cautious, lest lady Cecilia Gray should tear it from you, and leave you, as I was left, a prey to hopeless despair; youth and beauty are her prey; therefore I warn you to be careful how you trust your treasure to her. Farewell, Montalban, for to-night —but you I should like to see again, if you will favour me." VOL. III. i
He then placed a card in the hand of lord Montalban, and wringing it in expres¬ sive silence, bowed to the ladies, and im¬ mediately quitted the box. . > i ' Lord Montalban pressed the hand of Eleanor.—" How well captain St. John appreciates my feelings !" he cried; •' oh, would I could indeed call this treasure my own!" Eleanor blushed, her eyes fell in soft confusion; but their expression was not lost upon lord Montalban, who read a con¬ firmation of his hopes and fears. All was now, of course, bustle and con¬ fusion ; Miss Hargrave, Mrs. Conway, and Eleanor, attending upon lady Cecilia, and all highly surprised af the preceding scene, for which we shall now endeavour to ac¬ count. It was after the period of the marriage of the marquis of B ------ to his amiable la¬ dy, that lady Cecilia Gray accompanied them to London, where they spent some time in partaking of its pleasures and amusements.
, Lady Cecilia was at this time nearly in her thirtieth year, possessing the advantage of a fine person, with many showy accom¬ plishments ; still she had as yet passed ott, without having had a single matrimonial offer, or having felt the slightest effecfc of that passion which directs the heart to¬ wards the opposite sex. The truth was, that lady Cecilia, notwithstanding all the advantages of birth and fortune,, was an object rather shunned by society than sought; her pride and temper were vio¬ lent, and her passions once roused, knew no bounds. St was at- this eventful period that cap¬ tain St. John, a young and gallant officer, came on shore. He had been the early friend of the marquis, and now yielded to his pressing invitation of passing some time with him, at his own house, while in London. Captain St. John, therefore, took up his quarters, and, as his ship was expected to set sail again in the course of a few months, he promised to° remain en- I2T ■ ' . .
tirely with his friend during that time. The captain was then only in his two- and-twentieth year, handbome, gay, and spirited. His time was spent chiefly with lady Cecilia, towards whom*he behaved W,ith the greatest politeness, which he con¬ sidered only as her due, as the sister of his friend, and as a female of rank and fortune. As they partook of much fashionable amusement, captain St. John was of course her attendant; and it was soon universally whispered, that an union between the par¬ ties would be the result. These ideas were encouraged b) r lady Cecilia, whose own hopes centered in the same point. The captain had, indeed, without designing it, made himself com¬ plete master of her affections; and so se¬ cure was she of her own power, that she did not suffer herself for one moment, to doubt its being mutual; and she was in daily expectation of hearing him make an avowal to that effect. t Alas! poor lady Cecilia was much mis¬ taken. Captain St. John admired her as he
would have done anv fine woman; but the softer sensation of love never entered his bosom ; nor, had he any desigiu upon the heart of lady Cecilia, At this period Amelia Cleveland, a cou¬ sin of lady Cecilia's, who was an orphan, and in the possession of a very small for¬ tune, came also to pay them a visit. She was in her eighteenth year, beautiful as an angel, with a mind adorned with charms to grace a female. The tenderness of her disposition, the softness of her manners, soon displayed themselves upon the warm-hearted cap¬ tain ; and never was. a conquest > sooner made. The blushing cheek of Amelia, the downcast eyes, soon conveyed the in¬ telligence, to his heart, that the language of his soul was understood by its mistress, and a mutual acknowledgment soon took place. No obstacles appeared between them and happiness, and Amelia only lamented that a short time must again inevitably
consign the object of her affections to the watery element. Meantime lady Cecilia began to won¬ der that the captain did not openly avow his affection for herself. She saw his at¬ tention towards Amelia with a jealous eye, still she had too great an opinion of herself to suppose that she could rival her; and she concluded that the captain was too diffident to declare himself, lest it should be deemed as presumption. She therefore determined to bring him to an avowal; and* on the first private opportunity* she threw out such plain hints, that it was impossible to nlieuhflet- stahd hen It was now, for the first time, he felt the awkwardness of his situation; but his soul was above mean disguise, and he candidly owned the true state of his heart towards Amelia. But who shall describe the rage of lady Cecilia,! 'she vowed the most implacable revenge^ and, hastening to the room of
Amelia, she poured forth a torrent of a- buse; nor was she content with words alone, but even directed blows towards the unhappy girl, who sunk appalled at her feet. All was now confusion. Amelia left the house immediately, and of course captain St. John declared his intention of quitting it also. It was in vain the marquis and marchio¬ ness interfered, and endeavoured to pro¬ mote a reconciliation between the parties; lady Cecilia, with the malice of a fiend, de¬ clared her intention of pursuing revenge, which she avowed should be ample to her sufferings, and from that moment vowed the destruction of the innocent Amelia. Meantime captain St. John pursued the steps of the unfortunate object of his love, who, overwhelmed with grief and trouble, had retired to a small cottage at a little distance from London. Here the captain found her, and vowed no power on earth should part them.
Amelia received his vows of constancy with pure delight, and in a short time they were united in marriage. Thus secure, as they thought them¬ selves, from the revenge of lady Cecilia, they enjoyed, for a few short months, per¬ fect happiness. But, alas ! too soon their woes began. Captain St. John was oblig¬ ed to take the command of his ship, which had orders to set sail immediately. The parting was agony, but the idea that his Amelia was his wife, consoled him, and he looked forward to the period of his return with hope and pleasure. He wrote to her at every possible op¬ portunity, but as he never obtained an an¬ swer, he began to feel uneasy; but still he considered it might be owing to the un¬ certain element on which he was, and judged that her letters had miscarried. At length, after a cruise of two years, he returned in safety to his native shore, and, with a heart agitated with various feelings, he hastened to the cottage where he had
left his treasure. But who shall describe Jiis feelings, at finding it inhabited by strangers, who could not give him the least intelligence of his Amelia! Distracted with apprehension, he re¬ paired to the house of a neighbour, with whom she had been intimate; and here he heard the dreadful news which awaited him. He was informed that, in about s?x months after his departure, his wife was suddenly missed from her cottage—that the most serious alarm had been raised for her own personal safety, as she had doubt¬ less been forced away by some unknown hands. The servant, who was the only one in the house with her, had given the alarm, when she arose in the morning, that her mistress was missing; and since that pe¬ riod, although every pursuit had been made, and great rewards offered, no clue had ever been obtained respecting her mysterious flight. This account quite overwhelmed the un- 13
fortunaie St.'John, and, for a few minutes, the brave feelings of the tar gave way to the softer sensations of grief. He wept for the loss of his Amelia, when suddenly the image bf lady Cecilia crossed his mind. Tie doubted not she was the cruel con¬ triver 6f this dreadful scheme, and, with feelings little short 6f distraction, he has¬ tened to London, and once more threw himself in the presence of lady Cecilia, whom he openly accused of having de¬ prived him of his wife. " tleVengeful as he knew her to be, still he could not form an idea of the extent of her malice until her present behaviour. She laughed at his agony, insulted his grief, and defied him to charge her with the crime, as he had no proof, but merely his own suspicions; and her high rank in life raised her above his power. ' Astonished'at her unparallelled cruelty, captain St. John left her in disgust. He was fully convinced that she was the au- thbr of his wrongs; but, as she had assert¬ ed, he had no proof, and he could not act
upon suspicion only. : Of course they were now decided enemies, and whenever they met, he always accused her with his woes and injuries. The marquis of B------was much dis¬ tressed at the circumstance, and sincerely hoped that his sister had not had any con¬ cern in so dreadful a piece of business. The wretched captain spent whole years in endeavouring to find his lamented wife, but in vain, and he sank a prey to melan¬ choly and despair. With the marquis he kept a correspond¬ ence; and he had frequently seen lord Montalban, whom he much esteemed, as he bore a great resemblance to the lost Amelia. Owing however to the residence of the marquis, of late years, in Scotland, he had not seen lady Cecilia for some lapse of time, until his rencounter with her at the theatre; and at the unexpected sight of his dreaded enemy,his noble heart shrunk with horror. The scene that followed has been related, and our readers will no longer feel sur-
prised at the emotion displayed by the much-injured and unfortunate captain St. John.
CHAPTER IX.
Alas, the love of women ! it is known To be a lovely and a fearful tiling! For all of theirs upon that die is thrown, And, if 'tis lost, life hath no more to bring . To them, but mockeries, of the past alone; And their revenue is us the tiger's spring, Deadly, and quick, and crushing; yet as real Torture is theirs—what they inflict they feel. Lono Byron. After the departure of captain St. John from the theatre, all remained in confusion, until lady Cecilia recovered her senses. A lady having a fainting fit is too common an occurrence to happen in a playhouse, to excite any surprise in the minds of the bystanders; therefore none but her own party had heard or attended to the excla¬ mations which passed between the captain and lady Cecilia.
Lord Montalban of course felt greatly distressed at this unpleasant rencounter, and he blushed at the conduct of his aunt, which had given rise to such a con¬ versation; for though, like the rest, he could not prove lady Cecilia to have been concerned in the strange disappearance of the unfortunate Amelia, yet he doubted not her vindictive spirit had occasioned the dreadful calamity. Lady Cecilia, on opening her eyes, look¬ ed fearfully round her; her countenance exhibited the most horrid expression—ter¬ ror, rage, and malice, were all there de¬ picted ; and Eleanor involuntarily turned her head from her w r ith horror. Mrs. COnway and Miss Hargrave both inquired how she found herself? She answered them, in a tremulous voice, that she was perfectly recovered; and turn¬ ing to lord Montalban, asked him if that foe to her peace had retired ? * ' k ' 1 «* If you tnean captain St. John, ma¬ dam," lie replied, "he has left the house: nor will he intrude himself on your pre
sence again, as,' I am convinced, it is as obnoxious to him as it is disagreeable to you." Lady Cecilia, on being convinced he was really gone, appeared to recover her¬ self quickly. Her face soon resumed its wonted haughtiness and scorn, and, as the curtain was now rising for the after-piece, she arose, asserting that she would no long¬ er engage their attention towards herself; adding, she would sit in the lobby, while lord Montalban found their footman, as she had ordered her carriage to be in rea¬ diness, as slie seldom ever stopped late. She then turned towards Mrs. Conway, Miss Hargrave, and Eleanor,' whom she thus addressed—" No doubt, ladies, but you must have formed some very strange conjectures on my indisposition to-night, atid at the conversation which passed be¬ tween captain St. John and myself. This* is not,'If'am aware^a fit place for an ex¬ planation; but as Pdo not-choose'to enter into any particulars at all, not considering
my actions are ,to be called in question, I shall say now all I intend to assert: that gentleman, who has just left the box, was, in early life, upon the most intimate terms with me; I admitted him to my confi¬ dence, which he abused. He formed a con¬ nexion with another part of my family; misfortunes were the result of it, with which, with the most daring effrontery, he has this night accused me. ,But, however his sudden appearance might have affected me at the moment, I laugh at his puerile assertions, and defy him to prove the truth.. I am above all mean suspicions, and this, I trust, is now quite sufficient for me to explain, as I shall not trouble my¬ self with any further account, as the opi¬ nion entertained by the present company cannot be of any moment to me; nor will I suffer any inquiries to be made hereafter inconsequence." r - She bowed very haughtily, and told lord Montalban she was ready.,- . r . , His lordship, in great agitation, pressed
the hand of Eleanor; and softly whispered —" Be at home to-morrow—I will call on you at Camberwell." > ' ' He then conducted his haughty aunt from the box, whose steps were yet totter¬ ing and unsteady. Mrs. Conway, highly provoked at her haughty apology, broke out into the most bitter invectives. She was ' highly cha¬ grined at Miss Hargrave witnessing such treatment, particularly as she had boasted so much of the acquaintance of lady Ceci¬ lia, who now, in her 'haughty speech, evinced the contempt she felt for all pre¬ sent. Miss Hargrave laughed at the bustle which had been occasioned, and declared there was more between her and the cap¬ tain than she chose to acknowledge. Of this opinion was Eleanor also. She knew not why, but she felt an unusual sensation at her heart. -'• Lady Cecilia was to her an object of dread and terror; a sick¬ ness stole over her frame, and her face be¬ came pallid. The last words of lord Mont-
alban still sounded in her ear; he had pro¬ mised to see her on the morrow, and she doubted not but it was to explain to her the nature of this strange scene. ' Miss Hargrave observed the paleness of her cheek, and rallied her on the occasion, asserting, that the abrupt departure of lord Montalban was the occasion.—" Upon my word," she cried, " I think our party has proved particularly agreeable to-night; there is only Mrs. Conway and I who yet retain our composure—two ladies faint¬ ing, and our only beau the greatest pic¬ ture of melancholy I ever saw. His lord¬ ship has, I suppose, some cause for unhap¬ piness rankling at his heart, for despair dwells in his countenance. Pray is it the cruelty of Miss Glendinning," she added, in a sarcastic voice, " which has reduced him to this dejected state ?" * ",Why I don't know but what it is," cried Mrs. Conway, in a laughing tone, but. was checked by Eleanor, who, turn¬ ing her pallid icheek, and casting a look of reproach,.exclaimed—" This is not a fit
time^maddm^for raillery; mysspirits are not equal to the task." * ■ The tears actually arose in her eyes. She felt much displeased with Miss Har¬ grave, who again attacked her on her agi¬ tation, when the box-door opened, and, to the great surprise of all, Mr. Nugent made his appearance. f i The countenance of Miss Hargrave as¬ sumed a graver aspect, as she inquired why he had joined them, as he was engaged elsewhere. " So I was," he replied; " but I could not resist the pleasure of your company>" he cried; " you see, Eliza,*what power you have over me." . • He burst into a loud laugh as he spoke this. He was evidently inebriated, as he staggered down On the seat. Miss Hargrave now, in her turn, looked disconcerted; but, pretending to laugh it off, appeared to be paying great attention to the stage. ■ ' * Mrs. Conway now inquired of Eleanor if she felt better? upon hearing which 1 ,
Mr. Nugent seated himself close to her, exclaiming—" Is the divine Miss Glen¬ dinning indisposed? permit me to offer you some assistance." Eleanor, provoked at his free address, answered him very coldly, and endea¬ voured to rid herself of his importuni¬ ties ; but in vain, as lie kept paying her the most fulsome compliments, to which she attributed his evident intoxication as the cause ; and truly rejoiced was she when Mrs. Conway proposed to retire, as she said all the genteel people had left the theatre. 1 Mr. Nugent, who was as noisy as he was troublesome, loudly expressed his readiness to attend them to the carriage, and, to the great annoyance of Eleanor, insisted upon having the superlative felicity of conduct¬ ing her. Nor could she release her hand from his grasp. His conduct, she thought, appeared very questionable, after his first assertion, on coming into the box, respecting the power which Miss Hargrave had over him, as he now so evidently slighted her,
and she felt fearful of exciting that lady's resentment towards herself, though shewas innocent of any intention of that kind. On finding the carriage, Mrs. Conway of course invited Mr. Nugent to accompa^- ny Miss Hargrave, with which he instant¬ ly complied; in consequence of which the ride proved very disagreeable to Elea¬ nor^ whose mind was attuned to melan¬ choly reflections, ill suited to the company in which she was. On arriving at her home, Mrs. Conway invited Miss Hargrave and Mr. Nugent to take some refreshment, with which they complied ; though Miss Hargrave actually now appeared to wish to hasten her de¬ parture, as Mr. Nugent was not in a state fit to be in the company of ladies. She apologized to Mrs. Conway and Eleanor for him, and trusted they would place it to his having made too free with the bottle. Her apology was accepted, and Mrs. Conway insisting upon her carriage con-
ducting her home, she accepted it, and with Mi*. Hugent left the house. On their departure Eleanor commented on the folly of the latter, to which Mrs. Conway could' not but assent; but added, for the r sake of Miss Hargrave, she should not feel offended at it, as she was so charn> ing a woman; but she thought certainly his behaviour towards her was very inex¬ cusable, as she demanded every attention at his hands. Eleanor, who really felt very ill, gladly availed herself of the lateness of the hour to retire to her room; rest she doubted whether she could obtain, as her mind was a prey to varying sensations. The figure of lord Montalban was continually before her eyes—the dejection of his countenance, and his evident distress, all arose upon her recollection; his happiness was indeed dear to her heart; she would, if in her power, have gladly contributed to it; but, alas! Iiow was she to act? She dreaded her promised juiteryiew^with Mm, leather own weakness should prompt her to listen to his
avowals of love. She remembered the' conversation of lady Glendinning on the subject, in which she had fuDy set forth the'obstacles which subsisted between lord Montalban and herself. Most heartily did she wish herself in the peaceful retirement of St. Michael's; yet again thatwish was embittered by the conviction that, on their return to that spot, the union of his lord¬ ship with Georgina was to take place. From this introspection she turned with, agony, for to meditate calmly on this event was totally impossible. In such reflections as these she passed the night; and, with a mind ill at ease, she joined Mrs. Conway in the morning, who noticed her depression of spirits, and, with a view to raise them, she invited her, after breakfast, to take a ride. Eleanor felt embarrassed. Lord Mont¬ alban had requested her to remain at home, to)receive his visit, and slie felt unwilling to leave the house, ^as he might very prob¬ ably call the while, she therefore made an excuse to Mrs. Conway ibr not accepting
her>offeiytOiWhom however she could not fee.1 courage;, to assert the real .reason,, no,t daring to trust herself *to repeat the name of- Montalban, which t ever cost her too _much emotion to escape observation., > 3 Mrs. Conway^ replied, S1 that as she had a> letter, to write to u Mr, Conway, she should : like t to .remain at home best, only she had thought the air would,have been of service to her; and also ^added, that it was veryjikely that Miss Hargrave would give, them a call, and jthat she should vbe sorry to be out in that case. . * .Eleanor could scarcely help smiling at the infatuation which had taken possession of her bosom for this Miss /Hargrave, of whom' she, as -yet, knew ,nothing; >but whose shining appendages were/quite suf¬ ficient, in her eyes, to constitute her as every thing great and good. '. On Mrs. Conway seating herself at her writing-desk, Eleanor took up a book, with a view to divert her thoughts/, but she felt it >was "impossible to 'read, and as the mornings advanced,;she, unconsciously fix-
ed hen eyes Jtowards) : theowindo:Wi*i>vjuch commanded a view of the Gfove^ ift^ppe^ she might behold lord Montalhari} .?Slpw- lyi however, passed bmth'e\ houf s/ and still he didruot appear.^ She felt disappointed and urieasyi-when aloudknockfsounded at the door. Her hopesi arose, herf;;heart beat, the colour fled her cheeks,,, When f Mr. Crosby was announced. r;:fM '}K<:>:t: ; 'ini<i- v; For/the first time she felt /ever* hisfpre- sence was unwelcome.v> Her emotipnwas too visible t6 escape ihis- observation, as, while faking her; hand, .?.he closely;scrutii nized^ her countenanceV;andi tendevlyiinr quired if she were not well? ' : . .-•.«*.. o| •: l ■Eleanor replied,; that she iwasiratherhi- disposedi which Mrs. rConwayrcpnfirmed*, by asserting that? she- looked; very unwell and ; pale;^ ■:'.-■.& i^ •;■-. vin M ir.djh r if ;; ■ • *^ How;can you expect her to look others wisev madam ?1" he replied; '5 are ^ou-^pt; contributing to her indisposition bylaun,ehh ing her into continual scenes ;pf<gaiefyv? dissipation;.and^ late: hoiirsswill soon erase. the^^ roses from her cheeks for ! ever^whidi vol. in. k
1<)4 ELEANOR." can'foutiirbe supplied by art, 1 , the only re- sort J l r eft^for the vain land-thoughtless ";„vy> -'/'Mrs. ConHvay replied rather sharply.,to • this speech, adding, that she r had; merely taken 'Eleanor '■ to a rational] amusement, which'ought-not)to be construed-by him in'such a severe light, . /* . ..wi/L-i, :■ 'Mr. Crosby of course defended his,opi¬ nion ; while Eleanor endeavoured tp* soft* en ! tlie argument; of which she was. sorry to have been the'cause.». * j ./• ^ J , Mrs. Conway exultingly asked him what he thought of Miss Hargrave, and if\s}ie wereUidt as beautiful as she had described her to be? ^ i! ■' • '• - -•< *-• ' u n . "Beauty " he replied, '5 is but a poor ex¬ ternal'acquis! tion, and isa sorry compensa? tion for internal endowments." ,.*- \ r "Well, but, my good sir," cried 4l Mrs ( Conway,' .<«-youi cannot say.) surely i that Miss ! Hargrave is wanting in sense or un¬ derstanding—will you (not allow that* she is.amiost accomplished woman?". ;.,- .. j -vA*.:Invill allow that she is a,very gay la- tfyfhe .replied; -'.« and, no? doubt, in' your
eyes, a prodigy. For my part/ madam, I am old, and cannot be caught only by glitter." te Well, but you can certainly do justice to her qualifications, Mr. 'Crosby," cried Mrs. Conway, s highly provoked* at his in¬ difference to her favourite. *' Come, now, you must acknowledge that she looked uncommonly lovely last night—was f she not most elegantly dressed?" <l D?*essed, madam!" he re-echoed, 1 " ra¬ ther say elegantly undressed, for this fa¬ shion 'the lady had evidently studied to attain ; and though I own myself a lover of nature, unadorned by art, yet I am still more an advocate for the gem of modesty, which/I am inclined to think, is not much the study of your new friend, by the thin- iiess of her garment." Mrs. Conway was now quite enraged.— " I see you are determined, sir,"'she cried, " to contradict me in every* thing I say; therefore, for the future, I shall be silent - on the subject, contenting myself with the } t \ > .,' k2 * %: "' )
sweet enjoyment of Miss Hargrave's soei^ ety, which will afford-me the highest gra¬ tification." f ° " You are perfectly right, madam," M he replied, *' to enjoy your own opinion; and I only hope that you will" find Miss Har¬ grave deserving the regard you have form- e;d : forher." Mrs. Conway contemptuously smiled at this'half-formed hint, but forbore to, reply, and the conversation dropped. • , Mrs. Conway resumed her writing; and during the remainder of his stay, he con¬ versed with Eleanor, for whom he was all anxiety, as he considered her quite indis¬ posed ; and under this plea Eleanor con¬ cealed the true cause, which was, in fact, a mind ill at case. She wished for the ar¬ rival of lord Montalban, yet dreaded his appearing before Mr, Crosby, whose pene¬ trating glance she^ knew would read her heart; and though he was a man whom she esteemed and venerated, yet, on 1 this occasion* she was even glad when he arose to depart. With sincere affection he begged
her to take great care of her health, and taking a kind leave of her, left the house. On finishing her letter, Mrs. Conway looked 'at her w T atch, and found the hour for dinner was drawing near; she therefore declared they must make haste to dress, adding, she supposed Miss Hargrave would not give them a call now, as it was too late for armorning visit, and concluded she felt too fatigued to take a ride, in consequence of being so iate the night before.—" I ful¬ ly expected she would," continued Mrs. Conway; " it is so lovely a morning, and it is so tiresome to be disappointed when you are wishing for any body to come." " It is indeed, madam," replied Eleanor, who felt what she said, although Mrs. Con¬ way was not aware of the real reason which prompted her quick reply. They sat down to dinner with uo other company than Mr. Reynolds, who had called in to see his daughter, and yielded to, her invitation of stopping the remain¬ der of the day. Eleanor could scarcely eat a'morsel; her
mind } dwelt: upon- * the:proirase^ of fiord Montalban 1 , whom she had expected would have arrived long • before.' thi§ time. £$he dreaded; lest any family fracas should have 1 . taken; place y and eyentually^preyent his, coming-^,again, she consoled ,herself• with- tl ie ithpughts, that he: might; possibly take. a ride:hi the- evening, and she ehdeayouiv ed to recruit her nearly; exhaustted patience^ iShe was that day doomed-to : suffer he^ tween hope and disappointment, as.a great number of Mrs^Conway's friends occasion— ally called in; and, on each fresh arrival, her heart beat with the hope that it was his-.lordship. With a degree of vexation she beheld quite a large party ready for the tea-table,, as she considered, even; if he really anivedV she could have no opportu¬ nity to converse with him before so many- people. :•■•', ■'.: ; 4 : Mrs. Conway was in the highest spirits imaginable, and noticed the visible dejec¬ tion of Eleanor with much concern. This drew upon her the remarks of all the com¬ pany, which ill-suited with her present
j feelings, as she would gladly have escaped J from observation. At length the tea was brought upon ta¬ ble, and Eleanor began to give up her ex¬ pectations, when a loud knock once more broke upon their ears. Eleanor trembled violently ; the colour, fled her cheeks, and scarcely cbuld she have the courage to look towards the (1 door, which now opened—a gentleman entered, and she actually heard the servant announce lord Montalban.
CHAPTER X. i r ' Tl*w h>vst r,i^ tdl j my throbbing hen rt i3 faf) With thee aioiie; I've thought of nothing else, Nor shall (I from my 1 soul believfe) till death. h thfltthe ftice of cm&M Hypocrisy ? , Jf she is guili y, stars are made of darkness, And beauty shall noinoie belong to heaven. Young. Mits. Conway arose on the entrance of lord Montalban, and most cordially welcomed him—" This is an unexpected pleasure," she exclaimed; " but I hope your lord¬ ship will enhance it by favouring us with your company for the remainder of the evening." " Most certainly, madam," he replied; « I came on purpose, and am happy to find I have not been the means of keeping you in suspense as to my arrival, which has been protracted beyond my intentions."
He looked towards Eleanor, who felt greatly confused, as she had kept his in¬ tended visit so secret to herself. Mrs. Conway, too much engaged with her company to observe the cause, again seated herself at the table, of which she be¬ gan to do the honours; while lord Montal¬ ban had advanced towards Eleanor, by whom he seated himself, and, in a voice of irreat tenderness, inquired as to her health, adding, that he was sorry to pay her so ill a compliment, but he could not avoid re¬ marking that the glow of health had left her cheek, and the lily supplied its place. The roses again revisited her face for a minute, as she met the tender gaze of his lordship. She replied, that she had been suffering with a headache all day, which would probably not leave her until she obtained some rest. " I have been persuading her to take a little air," cried Mrs. Conway; " but I fear she is really worse than she will ac¬ knowledge, as I could not prevail on her to stir out to-day at all. w k3
Lord Montalban, who guessed'the cause, cast a look of such tender expressionuiporu Eleanor, that she sunk in soft* confusion beneath his gaze ; she felt self-convicted— the eyes of the company were all upon her r she therefore endeavoured to rally< her spi¬ rits; and 1 turning to Mrs. Conway, she- cried—f^Really, madam, I am much obliged to you for your kind concern! on myaccount;. but I canassure you, my in- disposition is not' so serious as tyou ima-. gine; nor would I have, been so obstinate as to'have refused your kind offer in tak¬ ing the air, had I really thought it would have been of service to me." " Why, my dear,"' returned Mrs. Con¬ way, "> air is often very beneficial for, the headache, which made me recommend,it to you ; the weather is now very, warm, and may affect you." < . ,"* u • ■ " It is not too late for you to try its ef¬ fects,"' cried lord Montalban, turning a look of entreaty on Eleanor,; who fully comprehended his meaning; "the evening is lovely to the extreme, and I should be
most happy, to. accompany .yonin a short walk, if you would allow me the. pleasure." Mrs. Conway immediately seconded lord Montalban's proposal,, and begged hereto comply—"lYou cantake a turn to the top: of the'Grove,'! she criedj. " and-perhaps you will find great-relief." w~ : - • .a Eleanor could, not' refuse, I without ap¬ pearing either obstinate or fastidious; she therefore assented; and on the tea equi-i page being removed, she attired herself. for a walk.- ■ - ■' Sl " M Mrs. Conway laughingly desired .they would not stay s too long, as she should' wish for their company. Lord Montalbanreplied, that he would- not detain Miss. Glendinning, a minute longer than was agreeable to herself; and- taking her.hand, .they left the house. On entering the Grove, he drew the^ arm of-Eleanor .within, his own, and ex¬ pressed his hopes -that the gentle,breezes of the evening would remove'the pain- in her head. She trembled'as they pro- ceeded .along, jand lord, -Montalban • oh- -
served > the f emotion of her whole frames With a view to give her time to recover herself, he delicately forbore to speak on any* particular subject, confining <■ himself to mere cursory remarks, until they reach¬ ed the top of the Grove, when, striking into a retired path, the scene became so congenial to his feelings, that he broke out into the most'lively expressions of admi¬ ration. The birds were heard to chant their melodious strains, which no sound disturbed; all was calm and serene; it was tranquil as if i " 1 he general puUe Of life stoo 1 s*titl,.i»d tnture }\u\<\e n p.uisc " " How truly beautiful is this lovely spot f " he exclaimed, " and how well it accords with my 1 present disposition! ' '1 Ims could Imlc carelcsbh aw.ij 1 lie milder e\einng ot hle's i luiidless d.ny, From business and the world's instruction free. With huoks.with love, with friendship, and .viUi thee; No tartiitr WMitf no wu>h ytt unpossebt, Could e'er disturb my unambitious bitiist." His lordship pressed her hand fervently
as he ejaculated this, and gazed- tenderly in her face. She felt incapable of reply¬ ing; the most bewitching expression stole over her lovely countenancej and increased the admiration of lord Montalban; a thou¬ sand agonizing sensations crossed his mind j all his doubts, his fears, assailed his bosom respecting the supposed falsehood of Elea¬ nor ; he was determined, if possible, to have an explanation. He looked earnest¬ ly in her face, which displayed the strik¬ ing features of truth and virtue; and he mentally reflected that she could not be guilty of dissimulation — " How much obliged I feel," he cried, "by your kind, acquiescence to my wish, in accompany¬ ing me in this delightful walk, where, un-, restrained by the presence of others, I can : openly converse on those subjects which at present torment my aching breast, aiyl. to which 1 beg your most serious atten¬ tion !" Eleanor bowed, and he thus proceeded. " It is painful in the extreme to the in¬ genuous mind, to suffer under any appear-
som of those we hold'most dean*' 'Thus it- is^vith'me; so anxious am I for your good opinion, that I fear lest any circumstance should'injure me in'your estimation; I mean with regard to the unpleasant scene which occurred last night- at tho theatre with my 'aunt, lady Cecilia, and which I r now wi sir to explain to you." » « I hold myself much obliged to your- lordship," she replied, "for your confi¬ dence; but 1 indeed I'would not wish to dive into any family affairs, which cannot' concern me. 'All of us have some secret causes,' which may perhaps give rise to < strange suspicions, which, however inno¬ cent, cannot be explained, and leave us the'unfortunate object of doubt— 1 -"" " But those doubts must, and can be re¬ moved," quickly interrupted lord Montal¬ ban, " and X will put in pratf ice thte theory I am preaching, by revealing to you the cause of those expressions you heard made use of*by captain St. John." He then fully related to Eleanor the.
particulars of the history, with -which we have already' acquainted our readers, re^ spectingi lady Cecilia and the unfortunates Amelia. * y "■ i ut Eleanor was much shocked afrthe reci¬ tal, and sincerely sympathized with lord- jMontalban at his feelings on the occasion^ '• M?ny causes," continuedhis lordship^ " combine to depress my mind; i but tliere* is one which predominates above all'the rest, and which I am resolved no longer to^ conceal. It is in your power, Eleanor, lo>* relieve me'from this pang, and which, I trust, yon will no longer refuse."' > Eleanor was greatly agitated; she dread¬ ed the subject on which he was about to speak—"* My lord," she cried, ** I do not understand you. How is it possible for me to relieve you from the burden that oppresses.you?" / "Byexplainingtome," he replied, "those' suspicious* circumstances* which-have dri¬ ven me almost to madness, in the thought of my having a rival in your affections*.
