TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 



Printed by J. Darllug, LcadenhaJI-Street, Lojidou. 



TRADITION OF the Ci^TLE ; 

OR, ^ 

SCENES IN THE EMERALD ISLE. 
IN FOUR VOLUMES. 



BY 

REGINA MARIA ROCHE, 

AUTHOn OP 

THE CHILDREN OF THE ABBEY, VICAR OF LANSDOWN, MAID OF THK 
HAMLKT, Vc 



" Oh Erin, Boy coantry ! thoagfa sad and foreakeOj 

In dreams I revisit thy sea-beaten shore; 

Bot, alas ! in a far foreigu land I awaken. 

And aigh for the friends who can meet me no mor«.' 



VOL. I. 



LONDON: 

PRINTED FOR 

A. K. NEWMAN AND CO. LEADENHALL-STREET. 



1824. 



1k£»^ 



V. I 



THE 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE 



CHAPTER I. 



h 



** Sunk are thy bowers in shapeless ruin all, 
And the long grass o'ertops the mould' ring wall ; 
And, trembling, shrinking from the spoiler's hand, 
Far, far away, thy children leave the land.' 



JL HE trampling of horses in the court- 
yard of the castle, drew the attention of 
Mrs. O'Brien from a new publication she 
^was engaged with at the moment; she 
^^esigerly ran to a window, in the hope that 
^it was Mr. O'Brien's arrival from the 
" grand city" that was thus announced ; 
nor was she disappointed in the hope — he 
:^was alighting at the instant, and ere she 

VOL. I. B 



2 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

could meet him in the hall, was already at 
the head of the stairs. 

Mutual greetings over — " Well, my 
love," said Mrs. O'Brien, " I am happy to 
see you looking so ^rell, after the fatigue 
you must, doubtless, have gone through 
from this long, and, alas for poor Ireland ! 
last session of parliament." , noiriw 

" Fatigue indeed, you may well say, Mrs. 
O'Brien ; it was warm work — warm work, 
indeed, to the very last moment ; but I 
am richly repaid for all, as are doubtless 
otliers, by the result — ^by the bill, the glo- 
rious bill, that is to render this now dis- 
tracted country a second paradise, having 
passed, in spite of all the opposition that 
was made to it — opposition, as if in fram- 
ing it, it was for the purpose of ha\'ing us 
given up to be devoured by England, in- 
stead of beng taken under her paternal 
wing, as I observed to my friend, Dick 

M •, who was on the right side^f the 

question, from his perfect knowledge of 

" Well, my love, I hope neither he nor 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 3 

you, or any others concerned in the affair, 
will yet have reason to think, that in your 
view of politics, in this instance, you were 
mistaken." 

" Oh ! pooh ! that is next to impossible, 
Mrs. O'Brien ; and really I could not 
help being astonished at the astonishment 
which many of my friends and neighbours 
evinced at my advocating and supporting 
the bill with all my might and main, as I 
did ; but when people allow themselves to 
be violently prejudiced, their understand- 
ings are of very little use to them." 

" Very little indeed," assented the lady; 
" but now, my dear, that this^rand affair 
of the union is irrevocably settled, I pre- 
sume " 

" Irrevocably ! Heaven forbid it should 
be otherwise !" 

" 1 claim to know, what you have hi- 
therto declined telling me, what are the 
advantages you deem likely to be derived 
from it?" 

" Advantages ! oh, innumerable ! incal- 



4 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

culable ! such as I have not ability either 
to explain or enumerate ; but time, time, 
my dear, will do this — time will better 
display and unfold to your view, than I 
could possibly do, the benefits resulting 
from it. When you see every man sitting 
at peace under the shade of his own fig- 
tree — when you behold the now-barren 
waste converted into a busy scene of po- 
pulation, through the active exertions of 
emulous industry " 

" I should indeed to see this, as the 
consequences of the union, be led to think 
it a blessed measure for the country ; but 
I have my apprehensions that what you 
have predicted will not exactly be the re- 
sult of it ; for from the rank, and fortune, 
and fashion, that must now be drawn from 
the kingdom, it strikes me that there will 
be a great check given to industry, from 
the want of proper encouragement which 
this circumstance must occasion.^ 

" There you are out, my dear — the very 
circumstance that you conceive must ope- 
rate as a discouragement to industry, must 



TRADITION OF THE CASTI.E. 5 

operate as an incentive to it, for in pro- 
portion as a man wants, he is generally 
supposed to be stimulated to exertion ; and 
when the lower classes here find they have 
no longer indulgent landlords to fly to in 
all their necessities, they will naturally 
betake themselves to labour, and by being, 
as one may say, actually forced to it, for 
the relief of those wants, they will then 
have no one to turn to for the purpose but 
themselves — have no time for that plot- 
ting, and planning, and scheming, which 
has so long been the means of distracting 
this unhappy country ; thus, as petted 
children, when they have no longer those 
at hand who helped to spoil them, become 

-but, speaking of children, whei'e is 

that rogue Donaghue, my dear ?" 

" Out with his playfellow Terence — 
had I been certain of your arrival, this 
morning, I should have kept him at home." 

" Oh ! I am glad you didn't — I shall see 
the rogue time enough ; I hate to have chil- 
dren cooped up in a house more than is ab- 
, solutely necessary. Exercise and air are 



6 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

every thing for them— our boy wouldn't 
have been the fellow he is, if we hadn*t 
brought him up in the hardy manner we 
have done; but indeed, in bringing him up, 
I always had in my eye the way in which 
the great Henry was brought up ; and in- 
deed, when I see him racing about the 
rocks, or boxing his companion, he often 
brings him to my recollection." 

" As to that, my dear, he is not the 
only child that in this way might recall 
him to your mind; but I hope it will not 
always be merely through racing about 
the rocks, or boxing his playfellow, that 
he will recall him to your recollection." 

" Oh, I have no fear of that — Dona- 
ghue is a child of promise, I assure you ; 
I have great expectations both of and for 
him, for do you not perceive how atten- 
tive he is even already to me, when I am 
reading a newspaper ?" 

" Yes, especially if it is a horrible story 
you are reading, so much so, that his sleep 
has been more than once prevented by his 
fears of thieves breaking in, or ruffians 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLB. 7 

stealing from the closet in his chamber — 

but to revert to our subject- " 

" Excuse me, my dear; but really I 
have had so much of argument lately, that 
I must have a little rest ere I can enter 
upon any thing of the kind again; yet to 
try and satisfy your mind, if no other com- 
fort were derived from the union, would it 
not be one, the pretext it will furnish the 
landlord with for absenting himself, from 
time to time, from the craving, wrangling, 
troublesome set of beings, that,in the persons 
of bis own tenantry, are continually ham- 
pering him, while he is within their reach. 
You must know, my love, the unhappy 
life I have, for some years past, led through 
mine— through their being convinced, while 
they had me on the spot to fly to, with 
their tale of pretended distress, I would 
never permit any thing to be done to 
them ; so that you cannot wonder I should 
wish occasionally to be out of the way of 
hearkening to them, which I shall now, 
by being obhged to attend to my parlia- 
mentary duties in the other kingdom ; and 



S TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

which, when I once am, you'll find things 
will go on very differently ; there will then 
be no excuses about rent, nor refusals to 
do the work they were bound to perform. 
As, for instance, if I wanted a little extra 
work done in a hurry, and sent that worthy 
attentive creature, who has my interest so 
much at heart, to get it done — you know 
who I mean, my dear?" 

" I do," replied Mrs. O'Brien, with a 
sigh—" O'Callaghan." 

" You are right, my dear ; it was — 
' they'd be hang'd before they'd do any 
thing by the orders of such a spalpeen 
fellow' — that was the watchword amongst 
them— merely because the master being on 
the spot, as they call me, they would not 
pay attention to any one but him ; thus 
frequently obliging me to take the trouble 
of mounting my horse, and riding amongst 
them, to enforce obedience in person to 
what I had commanded : but all this will 
be remedied when I am away, for then, 
from there being no one superior on the 
estate to order and direct them, they will 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 9 

pay proper attention to my representative: 
and then, as a magistrate, how have I been 
tormented with their rigmarole complaints 
and nonsensical quarrels, often originating 
in disputes as to who was the best jig- 
dancer or hurler ; and, by-the-by e, what 
will you say to that impudent foster-bro- 
ther of yours, INIr. Maurice Shaughnessey, 
obtrudinor himself on me, with a tenant 
of Mr. O'Reilly's, just as I got within 
sight of the castle, notwithstanding the 
tired state he saw I was in, after so long 
a journey, under the pretext, to be sure, 
of welcoming me back to Altoir-na-Gre- 
nie, but, as it proved, from a very differ- 
ent motive ? — * Faith, and I am glad your 
honour is come back,' he cried, * for I 
wanted very badly to spake to your ho- 
nour.' — * Well, not now,' I said, endea- 
vouring to get Swiftfoot on, but which he 
prevented by laying hold of the bridle; 
* I can hearken to no one now, or attend 
to any thing till I get home.' — * Troth, 
and it wont make the difference of a mi- 
B 3 



10 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

nute, your honour's stopping to listen to 
me,' was the reply ; * and not to be keep- 
ing your honour waiting — last night ' 

— ' You mean the night before, Maurice,' 
interrupted his companion ; and, by-the- 
bye, my love, I really seem to be a mark- 
ed man among these people, never going 
to their own landlords for law, but always 
coming to me, which makes my case more 
deplorable than it might otherwise be. — 
' Faith and troth but you are right, Pat,' 
resumed Mr. O'Shaughnessey ; * I was go- 
ing down the little boreen, your honour, 
the night before last, as Pat has said.' — 
* Yes, I have marks to make me remem- 
ber that,' said Pat, laughing, and scratch- 
ing his shoulder. — ' When who slwuld I 
meet,' went on O'Shaughnessey — ' but first 
I must tell your honour that it was the 
little boreen that runs between the ould 
barn and your honour's garden — not the 
ould barn that fell down last winter, and 
a-top of which you built up the little new 

creatshure, but ' 

* Why, what the devil signifies,' I 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 11 

cried, out of all patience, * which of the 
boreens, or what bam it was, if I must 
be stopped to listen to your nonsense? — 
come to the point at once, you rascal !' 
' Yes, your honour, that's what I want to 
do,' said he ; * so as I was going down the 
boreen,' he went on, * who should come 
up to me but Pat O'Sullivan there ; and — 
"How are you, Maurice?" says he. — 
" Troth, I thank you kindly, but mid- 
dling, Pat," says I — " And where are 
you going?" says he. — " Why then, upon 
my conscience, Pat," says I, " if you were 
after giving me a tinpenny, I couldn't be 
telling you, because I don't know myself" 
— " Oh ho ! is that the way with you ?" 
says he ; " maybe I could guess — any how, 
what's that creeping along the hedge 
there?" — " One of Peter Finnerty's goats," 
says I. — " Ah I then Maurice," says he, 
" upon your conscience and sowl now, did 
you pass Norah's door to-night, without 
casting a sheep's eye at her ?" — " Norah !'' 
says I ; " why then, Mr. Pat O'Sullivan, 
I think it might be Miss Norah in your 



12 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

mouth."—" The devil you do!" says he; and 
so with that he up and gives me a thump 
in the cheek ; upon which — " Is that what 
you are about ?" cries I ; and saying which 
I just gave him, your honour, the least 
taste of a tap in the world on the head, so 
how he managed to fall flat on the ground 
I can't tell, for I'll take my book oath 

' — * Ah I then be asy, Maurice, jewel, 

and don't be running away with the story 
all at one side, like the handle of a can,' 
here interrupted his antagonist ; * is it be- 
cause the master's your landlord, and so 
you think you have him at your side, you 
are doing so? why, then, though I'm not 
his tenant, but squire Reilly's, I don't 
fear his doing me justice too; and so, your 
honour, to begin with my story,' proceed- 
ed Mr. Pat * Tell me,' said I, now 

really no longer able to command myself, 
* in one word, what is it you both want ? 
or ril give you both something for an ad- 
dition to your stories, that you won't hke,' 
— ' Why, please your honour,' said that 
sly rascal, your brother, Mrs. O'Brien, as 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 13 

I understand, from O'Callaghan, he takes 
the liberty of frequently styling himself, 
* to send Pat here to gaol !' — ' Modest 
request enough, Mr. Shaughnessey !' re- 
plied I ; ' and pray, Mr. O'SuUivan, in what 
way may I have the pleasure of serving 
you ?' — ' By letting it alone, please your 
honour,' said he ; ' for, faith, I've had e- 
nough of the business, as my lift side will 
bear token for many a day.' — * Why then, 
faith and troth,' cried the other, with evi- 
dent delight at the thought, ' that's no 
lie, I believe, Pat. Well, after this, you'll 
remember it will be Miss Norah in your 
mouth !' — * If you don't get out of my 
way, this instant,' I now said, ' you two 
impudent rascals, the length, breadth, and 
weight of this horsewhip you shall imme- 
diately be made to know.' So off they 
both scampered; and I soon discovered, 
that the amusement afforded by putting 
his honour in a passion had made them 
make up their quarrel. But this is only 
one instance out of a thousand, of the way 
in which I am continually teazed and tor- 



14 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

merited, and should continue to be so, if I 
were to remain here for ever." 

" But why allow yourself to be detain- 
ed in this manner ?" 

" Allow myself! when one rascal had 
hold of my bridle at one side, and the 
other at the other, and whenever I strove 
to get Swiftfoot forward in spite of them, 
Mr. Maurice kept stroking his nose, and 
crying — *Ah, then, Swiftfoot, boy! sure 
you wouldn't be galloping off, and leaving 
us in the lurch, before his honour has 
done us justice !" 

" Their conduct was highly indecorous ; 
but, (pardon the observation) — but really, 
my dear Mr. O'Brien, I cannot avoid 
thinking sometimes, that a greater reserve, 
a greater appearance of dignity, at your 
side, would prevent what you so justly 
complain of as unwarrantable libeities." 

" As to that, my dear, no one gives it 
to them oftener than I." 

" Yes, I know you frequently get into 
a passion with them, and that's what they 
exactly like, and wish, of course, to pro- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 15 

voke you to, because the result is always 
advantageous to them; but if you were 
to be more steady, you must excuse the 

suggestion, and less violent " 

" My dear, I readily excuse any sug- 
gestion of yours, because I know you ne- 
ver say any thing that you do not con- 
ceive to be for the best, and believe to be 
the case ; but Job himself could not re- 
tain his coolness amongst such people. 
Scarce had I freed myself from Mr, Mau- 
rice and his companion, when, as I was 
passing the house of Dempsey — Dempsey 
the schoolmaster, you know, my dear — out 
he bolted, with a shout resembling an In- 
dian war-whoop, followed by his whole 
train of ragged colts, that, if a little older, 
would certainly have almost tempted one 
to imagine there had been a resurrection 
of Falstaflfs regiment; and placing him- 
self exactly before my horse, under the 
pretence of wanting to know something 
more about the union than the papers had 
given him to understand, intercepted me 
just in the same way the others had done. 



16 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

— * Well, Mr. Dempsey,' I said, striving 
to bridle my temper, because learning, 
like age, claims respect, * I am happy to 
see you well, but really cannot give you 
the particulars you require now, as I am 
greatly fatigued with my journey, and 
impatient besides to get home, after so 
long an absence.' Upon which the truth 
came out — it was to ask a little favour in- 
deed he took the liberty of stopping me 
— ' But first, to explain to your honour 
what has obligated me to ask it,' he began ; 
* the last time I was going to market, just 
as I got within sight of the shabeen house 
I frequent, I met an ould acquaintance ; at 
least so I thought, and so it proved, for I 
was not sure at first; but, afler looking 
him full in the face for a minute, says I — 
" If Ned Haven is alive, you are the man." 
— " Why, upon my word, you may say 
that, Mr. Dempsey," cries he ; " and right 
glad am I to have lived to have the pleasure 
of seeing you again." — " Ah, then, Ned," 
says I, shaking hands with him, " where, 
in the name of St. Patrick, have you 



TRADITiOJJ OF THE CASTLE. 17 

been hiding yourself these hundred years?" 
— " Why then, indeed, Mr. Derapsey," 
says he, " that's more nor I could be after 
telling you ; for, I don't suppose, that, for 
these last three years, I have ever slept 
two nights together in the same place." — 
' I suspect, your honour — for Ned is a 
clever fellow — * Yes, clever enough, I 
dare say,' I cried, * to have got his neck 
into a halter, if it could be discovered 
what he has been shifting his quarters 
about in this manner. But pray proceed 
with your story, Mr. Dempsey, for really I 
cannot be kept on the road in this manner*' 
— ' Well, your honour, I won't delay you 
another minute. So, as I was saying, or 
going to say,' he resumed, * for ould ac- 
quaintance sake, Ned and I agreed to go 
into the shabeen house, and take a glass 
of poteen together; and, to be sure, the 
very best poteen in the whole county is 
got in that same house; and there we sat 
and drank — talked, I mean — till I got quite 
light-headed ; for talking much always 
makes me light-headed ; and so, to be 



18 TRADI-tlON OF THE CASTLl^. 

sure, it was owing to that I lost all the 
money I had about me ; for when I got 
to the market, the devil a farthing had I 
in pocket or fob ; so I was obliged to re- 
turn as I went, without the turnip seed 
I went to buy, for the little morsel of 
ground I have behind the cabin. I made 
up my mind to wait for it till your ho- 
nour came back, and gave me an order to 
get it from the steward.' — * Why, then, 
upon my word, Mr. Dempsey,' says I, 
* I believe you'll wait long enough for 
that order, after what you have told me. 
A pretty thing for me, a magistrate, to 
be told that my tenants are running about 
the country, in quest of illicit spirits, 
and thus defrauding the king of his just 
revenue ! Now do you know how I could 
serve you and your friend, that keeps 
the shabeen house?' — 'Faith and troth, 
your honour,' he replied, with the greats 
est confidence, * I am sure if you couldn't 
serve us, you'd scorn to hurt us.' — * Now 
don't be so sure of that, Mr. Demp- 
sey,' I resumed; * pleage to recollect^ 



TKADITION OF THE CASTLE. 19 

that I am bound upon oath, as a ma- 
gistrate, to render fair play to his majesty, 
as well as his subjects ; and that, therefore, 
if I were now to do my duty, I would 
lodge an information against the owner of 
the shabeen house, and oblige you, and 
your friend, Mr. Haven, to prove the fact 
of the poteen !' — ' Oh, botheration /' ex- 
claimed the impudent rascal, ' if a de- 
scendant of the great king, Brian Boru, 
goes against the freedom of the subject, 
there's an end to every thing! But,' 
softening his tone a little, ' 1 am not to 
get the turnip seed then, your honour ?' — 
* Not a grain, Mr. Dempsey, after what you 
acquainted me with, on your own account ; 
but for the sake of your wife, and for her's 
alone, as I know her to be rather a deli- 
cate woman, and that she may therefore 
sometimes like turnips, instead of pota- 
toes, you may go up to the castle, and 
get what you want." 

Mrs. O'Brien smiled. — " Well, my dear, 
your patience was certainly tried." 

" Tried ! yes^ I believe you'll allow that, 



20 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Mrs. O'Brien, before I have done. Well, 
now I thought there was an end of any 
farther waylaying, as I may call it, when 
who should rise up before me like a ghost, 
in the dark part of the long gateway of 
the castle, where, having heard of my ar- 
rival, she had placed herself to watch for 
me, but Nelly Rooney. — ' And are you 
come back?' she cried, clasping her hands 
in agony and distraction ; * are you come 
back safe and alive to us ? 'Tis we that 
are ruined, and undone, and lost, since 
you left us !' and she screamed so loud, 
she was near frightening Swiftfoot him- 
self, and it's no childish play will do that ; 
he cocked his ears, suddenly stopped, 
snorted, and, as that devil of a woman ad- 
vanced, performed a retrograde movement. 
— * Ah, then, Nelly dear !' I cried, trying, 
out of respect to her sex, to curb my an- 
ger, ' have you entirely lost your senses 
since I left Altoir-na-Grenie ?' — ' To be 
sure I have,' she replied ; ' and didn't I 
know I should when you went away — for 
didn't I know then there would be no one 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 21 

to save us from wrong and robbery !' — 

* Well, but, Xelly, my dear girl,' I observ- 
ed, ' can't you tell me your injuries with- 
out frightening my horse, and putting my 
neck in jeopardy ?" 

" My dear Mr. O'Brien, how could you 
make so free with that woman ?" 

" Is it with Nelly Rooney? Why she's 
old enough to be my mother !" 

" I know nothing of her age — 'tis the 
freedom of language I allude to. Igno- 
rant people always presume upon that — 

* Nelly, my dear !' and ' my dear girl !' 

" You may easily form an idea how old 
Nelly is, when she was the person who 
received me in her arms on my coming 
roaring into this troublesome world." 

" Well, if you roared then, she returned 
the compliment to-day, by your account." 

" Upon my word, that is \ery well of 
you, Mrs. O'Brien ! — * Ah ! please your 
honour,' said poor Nelly ; indeed she 
seemed in great tribulation ; * it's all over 
with me — Kathleen is gone, stolen, de- 
stroyed, or carried away ! Kathleen, that 



32 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

I built SO much on^-that cost me so much 
— but still I expected so much by ; and 
what will become of me! what will become 
of me !' — * Bless my heart, Nelly,' I repli- 
ed, * I am indeed sorry to hear this, Kath- 
leen was so handsome a creature, and ap- 
peared so good too ; but have you no sus- 
picion ?' — * Oh, yes, your honour !' she ea- 
gerly answered, / and that's what I ana 
come to your honour about. Tim Carthy, 
the barony constable, told me to ask your 
honour for a bit of a search-warrant, and 
promises, for a tinpenny, to find her out/ 
— -' But, my good woman,' I said, * for the 
sake of her reputation, if you could make 

up the matter ' — * Her reputation, your 

honour !' she uttered with a scream ; ^ why 
who does your honour think I am speak- 
ing about ?'r—* Who! why your daugh- 
ter, to be sur^,' I replied, — * Och hone!' 
with another scream, * is it my daughter! 
But this comes of my husband giving our 
pig the ^amenaqOie, whether I would or 
no; because, he ^aid, 4W they were both 
alike handsome, in their way, they should 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 2S 

both be named alike.* — ' And so it's about 
your pig you have stopped and detained 
me all this while ! Really, Mrs. Rooney,' 
I said, no longer attempting to disguise 
my displeasure, * I am very much sur- 
prised at you !' — ' Well, but your honour 
will grant the warrant?' she demanded, 
seeming to care very little for my displea- 
sure. — * No, Mrs. Rooney, I cannot per- 
mit the whole parish to be molested or 
disturbed about your pig; therefore, ex- 
cept you can positively swear to some 

one ' — * Oh, your honour, so I can !' 

she eagerly answered ; ' I told your ho- 
nour I suspected some one — squire Reil- 

ly, I iiave a shrewd guess, has got ' 

* What, my friend, and respectable neigh- 
bour ! Do you know what you are say- 
ing, Mrs. Rooney ?' — * Oh yes, your ho- 
nour!' she replied, * I know well enough; 
but it's not the first time your honour has 
•been deceived in people. However, that's 
^o^matter — I suspect he has taken up the 
poor creatshure out of spite, because, the 
other day, when he threatened he'd pound 



24 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

all the pigs he found in the road, I told 
him, the king's high road was open to all 
his majesty's subjects alike!' — * You did 

' But I won't teaze you, my dear, 

by any more complaints of what I en- 
dured, or have been enduring this some 
time. But there's an end of all this now ; 
I shall now be eased of all further cares 
and troubles." 

" In what way, my dear?" asked Mrs. 
O'Brien, anxiously. 

" In what way ! I really should have 
conceived that question unnecessary. By 
taking up our abode, to be sure, for some 
years at least to come, in the sister king- 
dom. There being now an end to the 
Irish parliament, we are all at liberty to 
reside where we please ; and I do not want 
the representations that have been made 
me on the subject, to convince me tho- 
roughly that every thing will be better ma- 
naged by my being away than remaining 
here, since, from my not being on the spot 
to hearken to them, there will then be an 
end to these excuses that these tenants of 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 25 

mine are continually making, about one 
thing or another, to my very great detri- 
ment, I assure you." 

" But are you certain that the person 
who has made the representations to you, 
you have alluded to, has done so from dis- 
interested motives?" 

" You cannot offend me, Mrs. O'Brien, 
by any tiling you can say, or else perhaps 
I might feel myself a little hurt at your 
supposing I could be influenced by these, 
if I did not believe them disinterested; 
but I have the highest opinion of the in- 
tegrity of O'Callaghan, for I perfectly 
comprehend at whom the suspicion glances; 
but could he give a greater proof of what 
his principles are, than by renouncing the 
profession of an attorney, to which he was 
brought up?" 

" Why, there are others on which I 
should quite as much depend," replied 
Mrs. O'Brien ; " but I hope, my dear 
O'Brien, you will re-consider your plan. 
No one can more dislike a distrustful tem- 

VOL. I. c 



26 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

per than I do; but there are limits to con- 
fidence; and when property, and the in- 
terests of others are concerned, we should 
be very cautious how we place it. As 
long as you continue in parliament, you 
may, or must, occasionally reside in the 
other kingdom ; but except when your 
legislative duties demand your being there, 
I should conceive it more to your advan- 
tage to be at home, and paying attention 
to your affairs in person." 

" By no means, my dear ; and I thought 
I had explained why; and in short, my 
dear Mrs. O'Brien, in order to prevent 
painful arguments or expostulations at ei- 
ther side, I determined not to mention 
what my plan was to you, till I had fully 
weighed and considered it, and which, 
having done, I must hope and expect no 
farther effort will be made to induce me 
to relinquish it." 

Mrs. O'Brien, with deep regret, now 
saw that such an effort would be useless, 
and therefore wisely decided on not teas- 
ing either him or herself by it. She clear- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 27 

ly perceived that for the present nothing 
could turn him from what he had decided 
on, and that nothing therefore remained 
for her, but to try and make it as little in- 
jurious to him as possible. — " Well, my 
dear, since you really have made up your 
mind about leaving your home for some 
years, how," she began, " are our affairs 
to be managed in our absence?" 

" Oh, of course, by being given up to 
the control of O'Callaghan." 

" Not entirely — not w^ithout some check 
upon him, I trust ! In a word, Mr. O'Bri- 
en, you may wonder, or be displeased at 
the confession, but really I must acknow- 
ledge I have not that high opinion of him 
— that exalted confidence in him, that you 
have. His story of having given up the 
profession, or rather trade of an attorney, 
as it may be more justly termed, for con- 
science sake, is really too ridiculous to be 
attended to. Those who profess most, I 
always distrust most; for when conscious 
of no double meaning in our minds, we 
c 2 



28 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

are generally satisfied to let our actions 
speak for us." 

" Well, Mrs. O'Brien, though I am 
grieved that a woman of your superior 
mind should give way to so degrading a 
feeling as mistrust, yet to show you that, 
as far as is in my power, I wish to render 
you happy, and evince the high deference 
I pay to your opinion, there shall be a 
check on O'Callaghan, and he shall be ac- 
quainted with it, for my tenantry shall, at 
all times, have access to me by letter; and, 
depend upon it, if they state any grievance, 
or represent any thing that is likely to be 
injurious, either to themselves or me, it 
shall be inquired into " 

" That is a very good plan," said Mrs, 
O'Brien ; " the only point is, how it can 
be carried into effect; for I doubt much 
if, among the lower classes of your tenan- 
try, and it's for them I feel and am speak- 
ing, that there is one who can either read 
or write; therefore what benefit could 
these poor, ignorant, innocent beings de- 
rive from it? Nevertheless, I admire the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 2& 

humanity that suggested it ; and it grieves 
me to think so Uberal and so kind a mas- 
ter should " 

" Well, well, Mrs. O'Brien," a little im- 
patiently interrupted Mr. O'Brien, "Demp- 
sey shall immediately be set to teach theni 
all to read and write, so that matter shall 
be rectified." 

" What! teach old men and women, 
who are obliged to labour all day for a 
morsel of food, and not only for them- 
selves, but perhaps half a dozen miserable 
children !" 

" I protest I forgot that; but how can a 
man possibly remember every thing ? No, 
I see now that would never do. But I 
will tell you what shall be done in place 
of it, for I will make your mind easy if I 
can — Dempsey shall be appointed secre- 
tary to the cotters of Altoir-na-Grenie, 
with a sufficient allowance for such extra 
work. Every Saturday night he shall 
hold his court in the king's dining-room, 
for the purpose of hearing all complaints, 
against the next day, being an idle one 



so TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

with him, his dancing, hurling, and ball- 
playing days being all over ; and the court 
being broke up, every man shall have a 
noggin of good whiskey, to drink our 
healths and Donaghue's in, with a pipe of 
tobacco and a box of snuff to comfort thdr 
hearts, after the recapitulation of their 
grievances, should any indeed exist." 

Mrs. O'Brien cast her eyes, swimming 
in tears of delight, upon her husband — 
" And why," she internally sighed, " is 
this generous, this benevolent heart at the 
mercy of the avaricious and designing?" 

Again she tried to argue the point with 
him, but in vain ; and grieved as she was 
at his unfortunate determination to fly, as 
it almost seemed, the land of his forefa- 
thers, at a juncture when it struck her 
that the continuance of the landholders on 
their estates was absolutely essential to the 
interests of the country, still she could 
not help being amused with his having a 
remedy for every objection she could start 
to the project. 

Mr. O'Brien did not want for a good. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 31 

plain understanding, but, like too many 
of his countrymen, had given himself up 
so totally to habits of indolence, that we 
may fairly assert, his thinking faculties 
seemed more to belong to others than to 
himself This, as ever must be the case, 
was constontly taken advantage of by the 
selfish and artful, to turn to their own ad- 
vantage. There was an intimate acquaint- 
ance, or friend — but all poor O'Brien's ac- 
quaintances were considered as friends by 

him — the Mr. M mentioned by him 

to Mrs. O'Brien, This man had very good 
reasons for wishing the measure of the 
union to be brought about, and according- 
ly exerted all the influence he possessed 
for the purpose of accomplishing it. Un- 
fortunately it so happened that there were 
none over whom he possessed a larger 
share than over O'Brien, through the pro- 
found respect which he entertained for 
him on the score of politics — a proof he 
did not understand them very well him- 
self, as, had that been the case, his opinion 
of Mr. M would certainly have been 



32 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

rather different from what it was — being 
considered more in the light of a buffoon 
than any thing else by those who made 
him their tool. The reasons he assigned 
for the measure he was so truly interested 
about effecting, were so plausible, that 
poor O'Brien, who was always satisfied 
with one side of the question, entirely sur- 
rendered his judgment to him, and, of 
course, readily pledged himself in the way 
that was required. 

His paternal inheritance was a noble 
one, but certainly had not been improved 
since it had come into his possession ; and 
some little embarrassments, the conse- 
quences of indolence and inattention, ren- 
dered him extremely well pleased with 
the pretext with which the union, he con- 
ceived, would furnish him, to Mrs. O'Brien, 
for taking up his residence, for some years 
to come, in the sister kingdom; his steward, 
O'Callaghan, who had obtained, in one 
way, pretty much the same influence over 

him that his friend M had in another, 

having assured him, that if he were once 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 33 

out of the way, he would not only under- 
take, in the course of a short time, to com- 
pletely retrieve his affairs for him, but, by 
the plans he had formed for the improve- 
ment of his property, which by his not be- 
ing on the spot to appeal to, he should, 
despite of all the opposition that might be 
'made to them, be enabled to carry into 
effect, nearly double the value of his estate. 
To have wealth flow in upon him, with- 
out any exertion of his own, was exactly 
what Mr. O'Brien liked ; and he accord- 
ingly consented to give up his property as 
entirely to the management and control 
of his steward O'Callaghan, as he had his 
political feelings and principles to his friend 
M . Nothing else but indolence, in- 
deed, and credulity, the consequence of 
it, could have induced so national a man 
as he was, to have assisted in voting away 
the independence of his country, and then 
suffered himself to be induced to abandon 
it. He gloried indeed in the name of 
Irishman, never for a moment forgetting 
c 3 



34 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the reason he had to be proud of it, from 
his being a descendant of the illustrious 
Brien Boru, king of Munster, who, ac- 
cording to an Irish historian, " fought in 
person, and won more battles than Julius 
Caesar, and at last fell in the battle of Clon- 
tarf, fighting gloriously for the liberty of 
his country against the Danes;" and of 
whom it has been further observed, " that, 
like Alfred, he was no less a patron of arts 
than arms." 

Mr. O'Brien was early left his own mas- 
ter ; but neither the liberty which this cif- 
cumstance gave him to act as he pleased, 
nor the natural imprudence of his dispo- 
sition, ever allowed him for a moment to 
meditate forming an alliance unworthy of 
him, that is, with a person not as illus- 
triously descended as himself; fortune, he 
cared not about it — it was a vulgar object, 
below the consideration of a person with 
royal blood in their v«ns; but birth was not 
to be dispensed with, and in the charming 
Miss Grace O'Donaghue, whose beauty cap- 
tivated his eye and enchanted his heart the 



tRADlTION OF THE CASTLE. 3o 

moment he beheld her, he was happy to find 
what he required, the young lady being 
descended in a right line, as was incontro- 
vertibly proved to his satisfaction, from 
O'Donaghue, lord, by descent, of the lakes, 
but known in after times by the title of 
king, and the remains of whose ancient 
castle still stand on the island of Ross, in 
the famous lakes of Killamey. 

We are warned against acts of supere- 
rogation, and Miss O'Donaghue's aunt, 
the person who brought her up, by not 
attending to this warning, had nearly 
marred the advancement of her relation's 
fortune; for finding the lover so charmed 
with the proof already adduced of the 
royal descent of the fair lady, she thought 
it would not be amiss if she could lay 
claim to further admiration on the same 
score ; and accordingly, fi-om a sudden re- 
collection that occurred, set herself to 
search amongst some musty old papers, 
that had lain long enough by to have cer- 
tainly rendered them invaluable in the 
eyes of an antiquarian, for the proofs of 



36 TRADITiaN OF THE CASTLE. 

what was requisite for the purpose, and 
which, having found and copied, were 
submitted to Mr. O'Brien on his next vi- 
sit, not without an anticipation of the 
rapture he would experience, at seeing, by 
them, that his fair mistress was also a de- 
scendant of Cormac M'Culinan, at once 
archbishop and king of Cashell, as well as 
of the great O'Donaghues ; and of which 
circumstance she had every reason to be 
equally proud, this Cormac being cele- 
brated by all the Irish historians for his 
learning, piety, and valour, and writing a 
history of his own country, known by the 
name of " The Psalter of Cashell," still 
extant, and containing the most authentic 
account we have of the annals of the coun- 
try down to the year 900. 

With sparkling eyes, these invaluable 
papers, from the consequences anticipated 
from them, were put into the hands of 
Mr. O'Brien, who, on learning what they 
were, received them with equal pleasure, 
and immediately, by the desire of the lady, 
set about their perusal. But, as he pro* 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 37 

ceeded, his looks altered, or rather he read, 
and read, and read, as if he was consider- 
ing, or at a loss to comprehend something. 
Well, this might be owing to the writing 
not being perfectly legible, for of what- 
ever the old lady might be vain or proud, 
she certainly was not of her performance 
this way ; and accordingly she at length 
ventured to suggest that he probably could 
not entirely make out her terrible scrawl. 

" Oh, perfectly, ma'am — perfectly !" re- 
plied Mr. O'Brien ; " it is not that that 
puzzles me. But am I really to under- 
stand that it is wanted to be proved that 
your niece is also a descendant, in a right 
line, from king Cormac M'Culinan ?" 

" Oh, dear me, sir ; surely, we are de- 
scended in a right line from him, as well 
as from the lord of the lakes — king O'Do- 
naghue !" 

" I am sorry, madam, to be obhged to 
differ with you on a matter of such im- 
portance, but it appears to me that that 
could not be the case." 



38 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" As how, sir ? as how, pray ?" demand- 
ed the old lady, in extreme agitation. 

" Why, ma'am, king M*Culinan was a 
bishop, and we all know the Romish cler- 
gy were never permitted to marry." 

" Well, sir." 

** Well, madam, it therefore follows that 
either there must be some mistake in what 
has been transmitted to posterity, or else, 
pardon me hurting your feelings, as I am 
sure I must do by the observation, that 
the descent of the O'Donaghues from 
Cormac was a thing not to be boasted of!" 

" A fig, sir," exclaimed the old lady, 
in extreme agitation, " for his not having 
been permitted to marry ! You forget, 
sir, that he was a king as well as a bishop ; 
and where was the pope, I should be glad 
to know, who would refuse to let a bi- 
shop, that was a king, do as he pleased? 
But supposing, my good sir, for the sake 
of argument, it were " 

But Mr. O'Brien begged leave to de- 
cline any further discussion of the point 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 39 

at present, and abruptly rising, took his 
leave, leaving the old lady in great tribu- 
lation, at having, as she feared, overshot 
the mark. 

Mr. O'Brien was indeed extremely dis- 
concerted at the idea of there being any 
blot in the escutcheon of his bride, which 
must be the case, if the fact of Miss O'Do- 
naghue's being descended from king Cor- 
mac could be proved. While meditating 
on the subject, he was surprised by his 
friend Dick M , who perceiving some- 
thing was amiss, rested not till he had 
discovered what it was ; and by the dint 
of raillery, and representing to him that 
as the lady was not an heiress, and of 
course there would be no quartering of 
arms, what he disliked to think of need 
never be known, induced him to expedite 
the enjoyment of the happiness he antici- 
pated from his union with the fair Grace. 

The offspring of tiiis union were three 
children, two of whom died in their in- 
fency, leaving O'Donaghue in the undi- 
Tided possession of his parents' affection. 



40 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

The ardent attachment of Mr. O'Brien 
to his wife never knew diminution ; but, 
unhappily for him, her wishing to stimu- 
late him to a very different line of con- 
duct to that he pursued, prevented her in- 
fluence over him being as great as might 
from this attachment have been expected. 
This was exemplified with regard to his 
removal to England, which no arguments 
or entreaties of hers could prevent ; and 
in the imprudence of which measure he, 
both then and since, had but too many to 
countenance him. 

" It is attempted to be argued by some 
persons," observes a patriotic nobleman, 
writing on the causes that have produced 
the impoverishment of Ireland, " that the 
absence of the landed proprietors has no 
injurious effect — that whether they live in 
Dublin or London is equally advantage- 
ous to the country. It is calculated that 
about three-fourths of the landed proprie- 
tors of Ireland live out of it, to whom six 
millions of money are annually remitted ; 
how, then, can it be said, that it is the same 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 41 

thing to the labouring poor, their land- 
lords living on their estates or in London !" 

One great advantage, if no other, would 
accrue from the residence, for a certain 
time, of the landed interest on their es- 
tates — their presence would keep their 
tenants together, and thus frustrate the 
wicked schemes of those wretches, who 
are prowling about to take advantage of 
the idle and discontented. Let us hope 
therefore, now the error is discovered, 
which they committed in forsaking their 
properties, that it will be rectified, and a 
certain time apportioned to spending in 
their native country — when over its now- 
solitary and almost deserted fields we may 
once more hear the carol of the blooming 
milkmaid, and cheerful whistle of the 
ploughboy, because contented; and, in 
due time, again see this ancient land of re- 
ligion, science, and song, uprear its head 
with crested pride amongst other nations. 

On the arrival of Mr. and Mrs, O'Brien 
in London, a house was taken in one of 
the fashionable squares, and an establish- 



42 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ment provided, suitable to their rank and 
fortune ; but it was a severe mortification 
to Mr. O'Brien to see the rank and for- 
tune that in his own country were thought 
so much of, here, comparatively, little re- 
garded, and frequently overshadowed by 
the still more dashing equipages and bril- 
liant estabhshments of persons in trade, 
such as he had been brought up to hold 
in no kind of estimation. Such, however, 
must be the case, in a country where pro- 
perty is for ever in a state of fluctuation, 
from its commerce and trade. 

Time, considered and calculated on, ei- 
ther in expectation or even progression, 
appears formidable ; but that spent is as 
nothing. We are therefore often sur- 
prised when we are told such and such 
events have taken place (not immediately 
taking into consideration the many years 
they occupied) ; such at least was the case 
with Mr. O'Brien, on his son's return from 
the university of Oxford, when his studies 
completed, a finished young man of ele- 
gance and fashion, whom it seemed as if 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 43 

it was but the day before he had been play- 
ing his childish tricks upon his knee, stood 
before him. It was impossible for any be- 
ing to be more calculated to gratify pa- 
rental pride than was O'Donaghue : his 
figure was remarkably fine, tall, and com- 
manding, his countenance full of intelli- 
gence, and his mind strong and compre- 
hensive ; there was a native ease and ele- 
gance about him, that imparted a charm 
to every movement, and rendered him 
distinguished even in the most fashionable 
society. 

With such advantages, natural and ac- 
quired, and the son of a reputed man of 
fortune, it is but natural to suppose his 
reception in this society was of the most 
flattering description. He soon became 
" the observed of all observers ;" was copied 
by his own sex, caressed, and even follow- 
ed, by the other, and, in short, allowed to 
be one of the most dashing and tonish 
young men of the day. 

At a very early period of life, it has 
sometimes been considered a disadvantage 



44 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

to a young man to stand extremely high in 
public estimation, from the erroneous idea 
it is calculated to excite, of there being no 
further necessity for improvement. This 
was not exactly the case with O'Donaghue 
— he had a natural taste for the elegant re- 
searches of literature ; but still the ill con- 
sequences of such notoriety were not un- 
felt by him — it had gradually the effect of 
rendering him vain, conceited, arrogant in 
his expectations, and fastidious and pre- 
sumptuous in his notions; while the scenes 
it led him into, from the false ambition it 
excited, too often betrayed him into errors, 
that in the cool moments of returning re- 
flection he at once blushed for and regret- 
ted : but his feelings were ardent, his na- 
ture extremely susceptible, and to have 
resisted temptation, the surest method 
would have been to have avoided it. 

Amongst the fair creatures who distin- 
guished him, the one he most distinguish- 
ed was lady Jane Boyle, the daughter of 
the earl of Dunbrody, an Irish peer, as 
his title announces; and such were the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 45 

allurements of her ladyship, that though 
Donaghue had gradually been taught by 
his fashionable associates to think with 
dislike of matrimony at present, he would 
have resigned his liberty for the sake of 
possessing her, but for the interference of 
his family, his father quite ridiculing the 
idea of his marrying so young, and his 
mother having very different views for 
him. This interference was rather a dis- 
agreeable circumstance to the lady, as she 
had not quite so much time to lose as he 
had, and was not without fears, besides, of 
eventually losing him, if their union was 
much longer delayed. 

The world conceived Mr. O'Brien a happy 
man, but his heart in secret gave the lie to 
the assertion. Too late he beo^an to dis- 
cover the error he had committed in fly- 
ing from his native land, and that had he 
taken his wife's advice in that serious af- 
fair, as well as in many others, his circum- 
stances would have been very different to 
what he now beheld them. To confess 
we have relied too much on our own judg- 



46 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ment, and ask advice we before sneered 
at, is a humiliation that requires no little 
strength of mind to submit to. Mr. O'Bri- 
en possessed not sufficient for the purpose; 
he wished to consult Mrs. O'Brien on the 
ruin he saw impending, but false pride 
stepped in and checked this prudent wish. 
How could he, her lord and master, after 
having so long managed his affairs, with- 
out deigning to impart them to her, now 
condescend to what must bring reproach 
upon him, and prove he had no preten- 
sions to the sense or judgment he had ar- 
rogated to himself? No — the idea was 
not endurable ; and rather than incur such 
mortification, he preferred going on as he 
had begun, and giving order after order 
to O'Callaghan, to raise money in any 
way he could for him, either by bond or 
mortgage. 

Within the last three years, from O'Cal- 
laghan's account, no rents were forthcom- 
ing, or at least hardly any ; the chief sup- 
port Mr. O'Brien had, therefore, arose from 
borrowed money, the weight of which 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 47 

was SO great, that the back of poor Altoir- 
na-Grenie was nearly broke. 

Mrs. O'Brien, a clear-headed sensible 
wonnan, had for some time had her doubts 
that all was not going on right in Ireland, 
for though ISIr. O'Brien scrupulously con- 
cealed his affairs from her, and exerted 
himself to appear careless and happy, when- 
ever he imagined himself unobserved, it 
was evident to her his mind was a prey 
to some secret disquietude. This convic- 
tion made her strenuous, at last, in press- 
ing upon him the necessity of visiting 
their native land, not only for the purpose 
of inspecting their affairs, but giving 
O'Donagbue an insight into them, and 
perfect knowledge of their property there, 
in case of any sudden accident ; but Mr. 
O'Brien uniformly shrunk in alarm from 
the proposition, knowing, if he acquies- 
ced in it, the exposure he dreaded must 
take place ; and in order to try and turn 
his son from such a visit, although so na- 
tional a man, he began, from the moment 
he discovered Mrs. O'Brien had it in con- 



43 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

templation, to take every opportunity of 
endeavouring to prejudice him against 
the country, representing it as a place 
from which every person of respectability 
had fled since the union, leaving it in pos- 
session of a set of beings, who, neither the 
one thing nor the other, still disgusted by 
their impudent assumption of consequence; 
while the land was rude and uncultivated, 
the tenantry lawless, and the common 
people, in short, no better than a set of 
wild savages, ready to start into rebellion 
on the slightest imaginary provocation. 
, In vain Mrs. O'Brien tried to counter- 
act the prejudice thus excited in the mind 
of her son against the land of his nativity, 
strengthened and confirmed as was all his 
father said by lady Jane Boyle, as well as 
many other fashionable and ungrateful ab- 
sentees from the country ; but at length, 
in spite of prejudice, she succeeded in pre- 
vailing on her son, over whose mind in- 
deed she justly possessed a very powerful 
influence, to consent to accompany her on 
a visit to it ; but no persuasions could do 



TKADITION OF THE CASTLE. 49 

more than induce Mr, O'Brien to promise 
to follow, from a hope that, if any thing 
could keep from them the knowledge that 
must prove so disagreeable, it would be 
his not being on the spot to hearken to 
complaints. 

Lady Jane Boyle heard of this intend- 
ed visit with infinite discomposure; and 
but that she did not like to have the re- 
port respecting her and O'Donaghue yet 
confirmed, lest it should be the means of 
depriving her of other admirers she might 
have reason to regret, she would certainly 
have accompanied Mrs. O'Brien, though 
she abhorred what she called her sermon- 
izing. 

As much as possible, however, she strove 
to guard against any thing unpleasant 
from it, by doing all in her power to pre- 
judice the mind of Donaghue against the 
people he would meet in the neighbour- 
hood ; with which, from her father's es- 
tate lying in that part of the kingdom, 
she was well acquainted ; protesting, with 

VOL. L D 



30 THADITIOX OF THE CASTLE. 

the exception of the Magennis family, 
there was not a being there that was en- 
durable. — *• But ma mere must not heai" 
what I have said," she cried, " for I know- 
it would be little short of high treason, in 
her opinion, she is so bigoted to thij> 
sweet land of blunders, and so anxious to 
get you settled there ; and, eiitre nous, 
have you ever heard of her plan for the 
purpose?" 

** No, I know of no plan but what she 
has avowed." 

" Indeed ! then, to enhghten your ig- 
norance, she's long had it in contempla- 
tion, as a means of inducing you to settle 
there, to bring about a match between you 
and the daughter of her friends, the Erins, 
people quite of her own nationality. Ay, 
you may look incredulous, but it is as I 
have stated; and when you go over, you'll 
find, from the dead set that w411 be made 
at vou, that I am correct. Your mother's 
motives for desiring the connexion are 
very pure and disinterested, I am sure; 
but so much cannot be said for those at 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 51 

the other side, since, whatever the other 
attractions of the young lady may be, she 
certainly wants that very essential one of 
fortune, and is, besides, related to so nu- 
merous a clan, that the man who weds 
her might be said to wed more than half 
the w^ild savages of the kingdom ; but 
your mother will not see any of the dis- 
advantages that must attend such an 
union, she's so romantically attached to 
Mrs. Erin, her early friend, one of the most 
artful women, I suppose, in existence ; so 
smooth-tongued and so " 

''And her daughter?" interrupted Do- 
naghue, 

" Oh, you are curious about her !'' ex- 
claimed her ladyship, in a tone of pique. 

" Why, yes, it is but natural I should 
be so, when I don't know,'' provokingly 
laughing, " but she may be my fate.'' 

** Impertinent!" cried her ladyship, 

pushing away his arm from the back of 

h€r chair, on which it had been resting, 

^* I have a mind not to say another word 

d2 



uww^ 



52 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

But you have heard of the stone city in 
Arabia?" 

" Yes." 

" Well, then, Miss Eveleen Erin, whom, 
with her papa and mamma, I saw two or 
three years ago here, when your being 
absent from home prevented your having 
a similar pleasure, looks exactly as if she 
belonged to it, she's so stiff, and so precise, 
and so, in short, almost immovable/' 

" Charming !" exclaimed Donaghue, in 
an affected transport ; " I see I must get 
a seven- fold shield to guard my heart a- 
gainst the powerful attractions of such a 
being." 

*' Ay, you may laugh as you please; 
but, for all that, you'll find yourself in 
more danger from her than you are aware 
of; for all this will be represented as pro- 
priety of conduct, and delicacy, and refine- 
ment of mind ; and so " 

" I may as well let the net be drawn 
over me without any struggling," said 
Donaghue; " but, no, I swear not, by the 
best arrow in Cupid's bow ! for," seizing 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 53 

her hand, and fastening his eyes upon her 
reaUy expressive face — 

** Give me a woman, in whose striking mien, 

A mind, a soul, ^ polish'd air, is seen ; 

Whose motion speaks, whose slightest gesture move — 

Such are the darts to wound with endless love." 

In what she had related relative to Miss 
Erin, lady Jane was certainly not incor- 
rect; that is, as far as it respected Mrs. 
O'Brien's wish for a union between her 
and her son. The two mothers had been 
educated together, and grown up, with a 
sisterly attachment for each other ; and it 
had early been the wish of their hearts, 
that this friendship might be still further 
strengthened and confirmed, by the union 
of their children. It was their determi- 
nation, however, that this wish should not 
transpire till the parties had met; some- 
how or other, however, either through 
surmise or inadvertence, it became known; 
though, from Donaghue's residing aloof 
from those who spoke of it, he remained 
in ignorance of it, till lady Jane, good-na- 
turedly, enlightened him on the subiect. 



54 TRADITION OF THE CASTtE. 

People of the world, like her ladyship, 
might indeed have supposed Mrs. Erin 
had some other motive for it, than the 
one assigned ; Mr. Erin, from having dis- 
obliged his connexions by his marriage 
with her, being unable to give his daugh- 
ter any thing of consequence, while Do- 
naghue was still generally supposed to be 
heir to a handsome property. Of being 
actuated by merely mercenary views, she 
was, however, incapable ; though it would 
be ridiculous to assert, that the idea of 
Donaghue being a man of fortune did not 
render her still more pleased, than she 
might even otherwise have been, at the 
thought of her daughter's obtaining his 
regard. 

On the contrary, Mrs. O'Brien, but this 
through ignorance of the real state of her 
husband's affairs, was rendered still more 
solicitous for the connexion, from the very 
circumstance of Miss Erin wanting a for- 
tune, through the delight she took in the 
idea of the child of her dear friend, her 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 55 

in life through her means. She knew 
Miss Erin was attached to her own coun- 
tr}% and, of course, well inclined to remain 
in it; and the advantages that were like- 
ly, from these circumstances, to accrue to 
Donaghue, and all connected with him, 
from an early union with her, rendered 
her most anxious to effect it. 

Her solicitude for this was still farther 
heightened, by the dread she was under of 
his otherwise forming one eveiy way Ijate- 
ful to her imagination, aware, as she was, 
of the influence a lovely and youthful wife 
was likely to obtain over him, from his ar- 
dent temperament; and that, consequent- 
ly, his future weal or wo, his respectabi- 
lity or degradation, in life, in a great mea- 
sure depended on the kind of woman he 
married ; for, had his father possessed but 
half his sensibility, she knew she never 
should have appealed to him in vain. 

But her wish for the introduction of the 
young people now to each other, without 
any farther delay, was nearly disappointed, 
by 5Ir. Erin's receiving a letter, that re- 



56 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE- 

quired his setting off for the Continent, 
just after her intended visit to Ireland was 
announced, and his deciding on taking 
his wife and daughter with him. Through 
the persuasions of the former, however, 
who knew how terribly her friend would 
be disappointed, if he persevered in his re^ 
solution of being accompanied by both, he 
was induced to change it, with regard to 
his daughter, more especially as the busi- 
ness on which he was going was of a me- 
lancholy nature, and who, accordingly, 
was sent down from Dublin, where they 
principally resided, to his brother's, a few 
miles distant from Altoir-na-Grenie. 

In the latter end of May, that sweetest 
of all the sweet months, when the verdure 
of spring is just beginning to be enriched 
with the glowing tints of summer, the 
travellers set sail for Ireland, and landing 
at Howth, after a short delay in the capi- 
tal, proceeded on their destination. 

When predisposed to find fault, oppor- 
tunities are seldom wanting for the indul- 
gence of the inclination. Donaghue, as, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 57 

they proceeded in their journey, saw much 
to censure, but nothing to admire ; in 
short, so abhorrent was he of the idea of 
settling in the country, from the prejudice 
excited in his mind against it, that he re- 
solved to lose no opportunity of letting 
his mother see it was useless to hope it, 
and, accordingly, perversely closed his eyes 
against what otherwise he might have ad- 
mired, or been amused with. But this 
affected apathy only lasted till fhey came 
in sight of their destination ; when the 
scenery that, with all the suddenness of 
surprise, burst upon his enchanted vision, 
threw him completely off his guard, and 
called forth expressions that convinced his 
mother he must, at least for a moment, 
cease longer to wonder at her regret for 
the abandonment of such a place, or wish 
for its re-occupation. 



d3 



58 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 



CHAPTER II. 



•' Many a voice, and many a harp, in tuneful sounds, 
arose within its walls; and, sometimes, on the lovely 
sound v\as heard the names of its race of heroes." 

ALTOiR-na-Grenie stands upon a high 
promontory, overlooking the sea ; its situ- 
ation adds dignity to its appearance, and, 
in ancient times, must have rendered it an 
impregnable fortress. The castle consists 
of two courts, defended by gates, sur- 
mounted by towers, the outer one fur- 
nished with a portcullis, and bearing marks 
of having formerly been a prison, from the 
deep dark dungeons underneath it. Long 
before the generation now spoken of, its 
ancient towers had begun to exhibit marks 
of the devastations of time, in addition to 
those made on them by war and other cir- 
cumstances, for many were the furious as- 
saults that, according to the records of the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 5Q 

family, they had sustained ; but now the 
long grass streamed, the purple thistle 
shook its down to the wind, and the moss 
whistled in the breeze, where the banner 
of the conquering hero had once floated, 
or the beacon been kindled, to give warn- 
ing to the sept of a coming foe. Yet, on 
these ruins, the eye, perliaps, rested with 
more delight, from the pleasing exercise 
they gave the imagination, than it would 
have done on the most magnificent struc- 
ture of modern days ; for in every breeze 
that sighs amidst these decaying piles, we 
seem to hear the voice of other days ; and 
where is the soul that feels not a pleasing 
dread at the idea? 

A staircase winds up to the top of the 
castle, off of which are numerous apart- 
ments and galleries, all indicative of the 
taste of other times. On the left is a verv 
noble one, ornamented with a series of 
escutcheons, displaying the principal quar- 
terings and intermarriages of the family 
to whom the place belongs. Adjoining 
this is a state drawing-room, whence a 



60 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

passage through a banqueting-hall con- 
ducts to a breakfast- room over the gate- 
way, with closets fitted up as repositories 
for work and books, and connecting it 
with other private apartments. At the 
other side is the Hbrary, a spacious apart- 
ment, containing, over the cases for the 
books, portraits of many of the great men 
of this ancient family, as also a tolerable 
collection of books; but what was most 
valued in it, and considered indeed beyond 
all price, was a manuscript written by 
Erien Bcru himself, in the Ogham cha- 
racter ; one in particular, on the wars and 
antiquities of the Irish, down to the year 
1013, a short time before the battle of 
Clontarf, where he fell, after obtaining a 
complete victory. 

From this, through the cloisters of a 
narrow court, you proceed to the dilapi- 
dated chapel, communicating with other 
ranges of apartments it would be tedious 
to describe. We must not, however, omit 
to speak of one, called the king's public 
dining-room. This is a hall of immense 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 61 

length, with an elevation at the upper 
end, on which stands a chair of state, sur- 
mounted by a gallery for music, with fold- 
ing doors beneath, leading into the interior 
of the building, and hung with crimson 
draperies, to let down at pleasure. Be- 
tween the high painted windows hangs 
many a curious banner and helmet. But 
what, beyond any thing, attracts and fixes 
the attention of a stranger, is the portrait 
of Boru over the fire-place, with a repre- 
sentation of the battle of Clontarf in the 
background, the hotly pursuing Irish, and 
the flying Danes. 

In the days of king Brien, when might 
was right, we may naturally suppose, had 
that monarch considered one spot more 
pleasing than another, he would have fix- 
ed on it for the erection of his castle — Al- 
toir-na-Grenie, so named from an altar of 
the sun said to have stood upon the spot, 
being, according to tradition, built by him, 
though considerably enlarged by succeed- 
ing generations ; we must therefore ei« 



62 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ther conclude that all places were alike to 
him, or else, that the security of the situ- 
ation he chose for this residence, made a- 
mends, in his opinion, for its bleakness in 
winter. This bleakness however can, at no 
season, prevent the eye from being delight- 
ed by its grand and varied scenery. 

As you approach the building, a some- 
what dreary prospect is presented to the 
view, the hills in its immediate vicinity 
being clothed with heath, or harrowed 
into frightful fissures by the fury of the 
mountain torrents, that in winter pour 
impetuously down them, and permitting 
but a scanty vegetation, scarce sufficient 
for the browsage of a few sheep, seem, 
even in the little dales into which they 
stray, to carry melancholy along with 
them. But the view from the castle itself, 
elevated so as to command a vast extent 
of country, affords a prospect as delightful 
as this is cold and poor. 

Over a rocky foreground, you look upon 
verdant meadows, some prettily dispersed 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 6S 

farm houses, grassy plains, and little shades 
of arbutus, all enchanting, from the con- 
trasting deformity of other spots. 

On the right hand a mountain rises, 
hiding its grey head and naked brow in 
clouds ; where, for ages, according to tra- 
dition, a family of eagles here dwelt ; the 
sides are barren rocks, but here and there 
variegated by shrubs, starting from their 
chinks, and casting a tint of green over 
the grey surface ; towards the lower part 
are some curious intrenchments, or ancient 
Irish forts, with several pyramidical stones, 
supposed to be sepulchral ones ; and, in- 
deed, it is on record in the castle, that a 
great battle once took place in its vicinity, 
between the Leinster and Munster men, 
in which Brien himself commanded in per- 
son ; and to this day rude implements of 
ancient warfare are frequently dug up, in 
turning up the soil. On the left, the eye 
takes in a fine sweep of corn fields and 
meadow land, interspersed with some 
woody tracts, and several fine clear mean- 
dering rivulets. 



64 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Altoir-na-Grenie, in former times, was 

inaccessible of approach, save at the land 
side. This pass commences about a quar- 
ter of a mile from the castle, and is form- 
ed by an opening between two mountains, 
so narrow as scarcely to leave footing 
along the river, which rather tumbles 
from rock to rock, than runs through it. 
The depth of this gorge, or rather gulf, 
almost as it may be denominated, is ren- 
dered still more horrific by the blackness 
of the woods, that extend, at either side, 
in intertwisted and apparently impene- 
trable masses ; altogether, from the roar 
of the waters at the bottom, the twilight 
gloom, and immense altitude of the pre- 
cipitous mountains, constituting a scene 
truly grand, but terrific — terrific on more 
accounts than one, as many places are 
patches of bog, that rendering the footing 
insecure, occasion no little alarm to stran- 
gers not acquainted with the circumstance. 
When, however, you emerg-e from this, a 
pleasant scene opens, at either side of the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 65 

castle, with a noble view beyond it of the 
sea. 

On various parts of the O'Brien estate, 
are natural curiosities ; one of which, how- 
ever, we shall only notice : it is called the 
King's Fowling-piece, and consists of a 
funnel, perforated through a rock by the 
constant action of the sea against it, and 
which, at full tide, or in stormy weather, 
forms a complete Jet d'eau through it, 
with a noise and violence that is frequent- 
ly heard at the distance of several miles. 

And here we cannot avoid observing, 
that there is no country, perhaps, that can 
afford a more dehghtful summer excursion 
than Ireland, to the admirers of nature, at 
least those who love it in all its wild but 
interesting varieties — for man here has in- 
terfered but little ; or to those who have 
any passion for exploring ruined edifices, 
abounding, as it does, in the remains of 
afticient churches, monasteries, and abbeys, 
rendered highly interesting by the histo- 
rical accounts transmitted of them, and 
still more, perhaps, to a romantic imagina- 



66 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

tion, at least by the traditions still extant 
of them. 

That this now deserted land was the 
seat of religion and learning, when other 
countries were in a state of darkness, very 
little doubt, if any, now remains. Hither 
the youth of other countries, that, more 
fortunate in the system by which they 
have been ruled, have gradually risen in 
national consequence, as it has declined, 
were sent for instruction ; and hence they 
departed, accomplished in all the learning 
of the times, and still more firmly im- 
pressed with the principles of Christianity. 
But its greatness has passed away, leaving 
only the melancholy recollection of it be- 
hind. But, perhaps, its sun may not have 
set for ever ; yet, when we think of the 
manner in which it has been forsaken and 
run down, by those who should have sup- 
ported its consequence, we see little cause 
for hope. 

Of its lakes and curiosities, the Giant's 
Causeway, and the Lakes of Killarney , must 
claim attention ; the former considered 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 6? 

by men of science as one of the greatest 
natural curiosities in the world, and the 
latter, by persons of taste, as scenes it is 
impossible for pen or pencil to do justice 
to. A writer, speaking of them, observes 
— " In the lower and middle lakes, the 
pleasing and sublime are most happily 
combined ; the upper lake reflects a more 
solemn grandeur, from the stupendous 
crags with which it is encircled ; but the 
prospects in both are infinitely diversified ; 
the several islands, the white rocks of Mu- 
cruss, the groves of arbutus, the venerable 
woods, the variety of waterfalls, and the 
impending cliffs, are separately as delight- 
ful and interesting as this assemblage is 
eminently grand and magnificent ; and al- 
together we will venture to say, that were 
the extraordinary beauties and natural cu- 
riosities with which Ireland abounds, be- 
longing to another country, we should 
hear incessantly of them, and find it the 
fashion to explore them ; but overlooked, 
as they appear to be, by the children of 



68 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the soil, is it natural to suppose that stran^ 
gers can think them worth visiting ?" 

The grandeur of the scenery, that burst 
so unexpectedly upon the sight of Do- 
naghue, was heightened by the reddening 
beams of the setting sun. The castle was 
a blaze of splendour, and all looked bright 
and glorious, as if to welcome him to his 
native land, and allure him to remain. 

Allure him to remain ! in a moment the 
spell of admiration was dissolved, at the 
idea of what he must relinquish, should 
he be induced to do so, and he hastily 
passed on ; for what, in local scenery — 
what, in all the grandeur he contemplated, 
could make amends for the want of polish- 
ed society? the barbarism to which he 
should be exposed by remaining, and of 
which he conceived he had a proof, in the 
reverberating shouts, or rather yells, as he 
chose to denominate them, that met his 
ear — the tenantry, in every direction, on, 
the approach of the carriage, coming lite- 
rally racing to the castle — his imagination 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 69 

became not only disgusted, but absolutely 
chilled at the thought, and he determined 
it should not be his fault, if the visit he 
had been induced to pay, so much against 
his inclination, was not shortened. 

How affecting was Mrs. O'Brien's re- 
view of these scenes of other days ! scenes 
that hi ad left so vivid an impression on her 
mind, that it seemed as if it was only the 
day before she had left them ; and yet, 
since then, what changes had taken place! 
How many had she to seek for in vain, 
whom she had known — how many to meet 
whom she had not before seen ! but the 
current of time is continually bearing 
away from us objects familiar to us, and 
presenting new ones in their place ; our 
hearts, our affections, however, follow those 
who are thus borne from our sight, and 
with involuntary coldness we look upon 
those who succeed them, unassociated as 
they are in our minds with any endeared 
ideas. 

She ranged through the apartments ; 
their size, their grandeur, had never so for- 



70 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

cibly struck her as now ; and the more she 
looked around her, the more she was as- 
tonished at the infatuation of her husband, 
in quitting such a place. The additional 
gaps and chasms in the walls — the down- 
right ruin into which many places had 
been allowed to fall, since their departure, 
through the want of a master's eye, to see 
every thing kept in proper repair, spoke 
pathetically to her feelings ; and she 
thought, with a sensation of involuntary 
indignation, of the sums which Mr. O'Bri- 
en had expended, in the fantastic adorn- 
ments of a paltry villa, while this noble 
seat of his ancestors, this ancient pile, re- 
flecting such real consequence on its pos- 
sessors, and which nature almost enjoined 
him to keep up, was suffered to decay. 
But she had not come over to indulge me- 
lancholy reflections, nor, if she had, would 
she have been permitted ; her arrival was 
no sooner known, than visitors flocked to 
the castle, and invitation after invitation 
succeeded ; but her pleasure at these tes- 
timonies of respect and regard was lessen- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 71 

ed by the conduct of Donaghue. Unlike 
himself, he kept fastidiously aloof from all 
but the Magennises, to whom he had pre- 
viously been introduced in London, and, 
through the force of prejudice, kept him- 
self out of the way of being convinced of 
the erroneousness of that prejudice. 

But hurt as was Mrs. O'Brien by his 
behaviour, she did not seem to notice it ; 
she knew the force of prejudice, and that 
observation is infinitely more powerful in 
conquering it than argument ; and, in con- 
sequence, made a point of his returning 
to Dublin, to join a party there, who had 
come over in the same packet with them, 
for the purpose of visiting the lakes, and 
had strenuously urged him to accompany 
them. 

She could have wished, ere he departed, 
to have effected an introduction between 
him and Miss Erin ; but he would not 
seem to understand this wish, and as his 
absence would be but short, she did not 
like to press the matter. Indeed, the more 



72 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

he heard of this young lady, the more he 
was decided against letting his mother in- 
dulge any hopes of being able to accom- 
plish her plan respecting her, and, in con- 
sequence, would not permit the hints she 
threw out about her, to appear to excite 
any curiosity in his mind to see her ; in- 
deed he had but little, if any ; lady Ma- 
gennis and her daughters having confirm- 
ed lady Jane's description of her, with this 
addition, that she was a young lady, that, 
upon the slightest attention from a gen- 
tleman, was apt to build a fabric of hope, 
such as rendered it almost dangerous for 
any one to pay her any, lest the demoli- 
tion of her airy edifice should occasion him 
censure. 

Lady Magennis was a complete woman 
of the world, not by any means scrupulous 
about what she advanced, when she 
thought a strict adherence to truth likely 
to disappoint her wishes. The general be- 
lief that was still entertained of Dona- 
ghue*s being sure of a handsome inherit- 



TRADITION OV THE CASTLE. 7S 

ance, made her delighted at the idea of 
his coming to the neighbourhood, from the 
hope that as there were there fewer compe- 
titors for his admiration than in London, 
one of her daughters might have the good 
fortune to secure him. 

The dislike he evinced to forming any 
intimacy in the neighbourhood seemed to 
favour this hope, and to confirm which 
she accordingly omitted nothing in her 
power ; but particularly against the Erins, 
whom, on many accounts, she had the 
greatest dread of. Her husband, sir Ul- 
ick, with her assistance, had contrived to 
get his fortune so fashionably involved, as 
to render it requisite her doing penance 
for her extravagance, by occasionally rus- 
ticating amidst the barbarous wilds of Ire- 
land ; where, however, she never lost sight 
of having three daughters to dispose of, 
and accordingly made her house the grand 
rendezvous for all who were likely to take 
them off her hands. 

The young ladies were educated for ex- 

VOL. I. E 



74 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

hibitian^ and so extremely well disciplined, 
as to be ready to accept the hand of any 
one inclined to conduct them into the tem- 
ple of Hymen, provided they were sure of 
their having the power of keeping them a 
handsome establishment, for, without that, 
matrimony was out of the question. 

They were delighted at Donaghue's 
coming over, conceiving it would be odd 
indeed if, now that they should have him, 
as it might be almost said, to themselves, 
one or other of them did not secure him» 
'Tis true, lady Jane, who sometimes amu- 
sed herself with writing to them, when she 
had nothing better to do, or wanted scan- 
dal from their side of the wat^r, had given 
them to understand he was her devoted. 
This did not in the least prevent their de- 
termining to try whether he had not eyes 
for others as well as her, though their pro- 
fessions of regard for her were of the 
most romantic description — the dear, the 
charming creature, as they called her, al- 
wavs vso lively and so entertaining !— " And 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 75 

then continuing to look so well," their 
mamma observed. 

" Continuing to look so well !" and the 
invidious remark forced Donaghue to recol- 
lect, as was intended, what, when in her 
presence, he always forgot, that the lady- 
was a few years older than himself. 

But though he set out on his excursion 
without seeing Miss Erin, it was not from 
not having an opportunity for doing so, 
as, with her uncle and aunt, she paid her 
respects to his mother, immediately after 
hearing of her arrival ; but though he was 
within at the time, he gave positive orders 
to the servant who was sent to announce 
the visitors, to say the reverse, and imme- 
diately slipped out to lady Magennis's, 
anxious to avoid, as long as possible, an 
introduction, from which he only antici- 
pated what was disagreeable, conceiving his 
mother only waited its taking place, to 
commence her operations about Miss Erin; 
and this idea induced him to act in direct 
opposition to politeness, by refusing to re- 
E 2 



76 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

turn Mr. Erin's visit before his departure, 
Mr. Erin was deeply offended by this 
mark of disrespect ; and confirming, as it 
did, what he had previously heard of Do- 
naghue's wishing, through conceit and ar- 
rogance, to decline forming any acquaint- 
ance in the neighbourhood, incensed him 
not a little against him. The connexions 
of his mother's particular friend, ought, he 
thought, to have been treated differently; 
however, it was to him of no consequence. 
Not so, however, was the slight to his 
niece ; but, whatever she thought or felt 
on the subject, pride assisted her to con- 
ceal. By some indirect means she also 
had learned the plan of their mothers re- 
specting them ; and so obvious was the 
motive for her being left behind her pa- 
rents, that, in alarm at the thought of be- 
ing suspected privy to it, she had deter- 
mined on the utmost circumspection in 
her conduct to Mrs. O'Brien, even to veil- 
ing what her real feelings towards her 
were, for she had early been taught to re- 
gard her with reverence and admiration ; 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 77 

but with this determination was mingled 
a hope, that the manner of Donaghue 
would soon relieve her from the necessity 
for any painful restraint upon herself 

This hope, however, now seemed threat- 
ened with disappointment, from his acting 
so contrary to what she was aware he 
must know his mother's wishes were. She 
was led to imagine that he had discovered 
the plan for their union, and, in utter dis- 
like to the idea of it, had taken this me- 
thod of letting it be understood it was one 
that never could be accomplished. Well, 
no matter — even though he should realize 
every expectation she had formed respect- 
ing him, he should find nothing in her 
manner indicative of regret at the circum- 
stance. 

Early instructed to acquire a command 
over herself, she had but little appre- 
hension that she should not be able to 
keep up to this determination : brought 
up under the immediate eyes of her ^pa- 
rents, there was nothing indeed wanting 
in her education to give correctness to 



78 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

thought and feeling; and to accompli^- 
iTients were united the ease and elegance 
imparted by polished society ; for although 
her father had not power of giving her a 
fortune suitable to her birth, she had al- 
ways mixed in the company it entitled 
her to. 

The family of her mother was excellent, 
but she wanted fortune, and this circum- 
stance rendered the friends of Mr. Erin so 
exasperated with him for marrying her, as 
to occasion them, in a great degree, to 
throw him off; in particular, his uncle, 
sir Walter Erin, was, or at least pretend- 
ed to be, incensed at it, in order to have a 
pretext for changing his condition himself, 
at a time of life when it was but natural 
to suppose all thoughts of the kind would 
have been relinquished. 

If he meant to punish his nephew by 
his marriage, he also punished himself, by 
the affliction it was the means of drawing 
on him, for shortly after the birth of a son 
he lost his lady, and it was now the dying 
state of that son that caused Mr. Erin to 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 79 

be summoned to Italy, who, in the event 
of his death, was heir to the title and es- 
tate. 

Immediately after the departure of Do- 
naghue, ^Irs. O'Brien invited Miss Erin 
to the castle ; but a fear of being sui-prised 
there by Donaghue, made her find a pre- 
text for declining the invitation, deter- 
mined as she was not to let him be forced 
to an introduction to her. 

Her uncle highly approved of her doing 
so, conceiving, after the slighting conduct 
of Donaghue, it would argue a want of 
proper pride for any of the family to put 
themselves in his way ; but her aunt, who 
thought very differently, was much vexed 
at the circumstance, thinking it would be 
a means of precluding them from the agree- 
able parties, that she was sure would take 
place there. 

Nothing more sensibly touched Mrs. 
O'Brien than the wretched condition to 
w^hich she saw many of the tenantry re- 
duced, by the absence of their landlord ; 
as much as lay in her power, she did for 



80 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ameliorating their misery ; but the hope 
they required, of the reestablish m en t of 
the family again at the castle, she could 
not positively give them ; if things, how- 
ever, turned out as she wished, Donaghue 
became captivated by Miss Erin, she did 
not despair, through her influence^ of this 
being the case. 

Donaghue at length returned from his 
excursion, accompanied by his friend Sed- 
ley Melville, a very pleasant and elegant 
young man, the nephew and heir of sir 
James Melville; and who, in occasional 
visits to England, had become acquaint- 
ed with Donaghue ; and, besides his mo- 
ther, was the only person who attempted 
to set him right in his ideas of his native 
country ; but Donaghue, prejudiced a- 
gainst it by those who had then a stronger 
influence over his mind, considered all he 
said on the subject as only ironical, and 
therefore only laughed at it. 



TEADITION OF THE CASTLE. 81 



CHAPTER III. 



** As in a garden, fenc'd with skilful care. 
By hands uHcropt, unwounded by the share, 
Some latent flower displays its blushing hues, 
Which, while it drinks pure gales and fostering dews, 
Drinks the strong sunshine that its bosom warms. 
Each longing youth, each lingering maid it charms," 

*' Well, I hope, Donaghue," said his mo- 
ther, at breakfast, the morning after his 
return, " you don't mean putting off re- 
turning the visit of Mr. Erin any longer? 
If you have even no wish for any ac- 
quaintance with the family yourself, yet, 
out of respect to me, knowing, as you do, 
they are amongst my oldest friends, I 
think you ought not" 

The moment Donaghue found his mo- 
ther serious on the subject, all further he- 
sitation about it was at an end ; starting 
e3 



82 TRADITION OF TFTE CASTLE. 

up, he directly gave orders for the horses 
being got ready. 

" And beyond the usual dinner-hour I 
shall not wait for you," resumed Mrs. 
O'Brien ; " so that, if inclined to remain, 
you need not let any consideration about 
me hinder you." 

*' Oh, as to that " cried Donaghue, 

with an involuntary shrug. He laughed 
a little satirically, and he and Melville set 
off. 

A mountainous road, loosely fenced in 
with stones, led to the habitation of Mr. 
Erin. Some speculations, in whidi this 
gentleman had embarked, proving unfor- 
tunate, had compelled him to give up a 
handsome house he occupied in one of the 
provincial towns, lay down his carnage, 
and retire to an old and long-deserted 
mansion, that, with a few acres of sterile 
ground, had been left him, when very 
young, by a relation. 

Unable, from the alteration in his cir- 
cumstances, to entertain, as be had been 
accustomed, retirement was his wish here; 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 83 

this, however, was too hateful to the ima- 
gination of his wife, to be submitted to. 
She dehghted in the bustle of company, 
and, one way or other, contrived to pro- 
cure it for herself, regardless of the re- 
marks that aiming to entertain hke others 
excited; but she was so perfectly good na- 
tured herself, that she had no suspicion of 
the pleasure that is taken in sneers and 
sarcasms ; besides, she was much given to 
castle-building, and fancied, that by keep- 
ing up an intercourse with what she call- 
ed the world, something beneficial to her 
family might yet accrue. Some one might 
take a fancy to one of her children — or 
procure a situation for her husband, or a 
thousand other things, equally improbable. 
She was quite dehghted when she heard 
that Miss Erin was coming to her, from 
the expectation that she would furnish her 
with an additional pretext for indulging 
her inclination. 

In this, however, she was disappointed, 
as Miss Erin, from all she saw and knew, 
wished rather to prevent than encourage 



84 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

her to see company ; and the consequence 
was, her aunt being quite provoked with 
her, more especially as she had calculated, 
through her being seen in the neighbour- 
hood, on her making some conquest of 
consequence, that might be of advantage 
to the family. But her previous anger 
was slight, compared to what she felt on 
her refusing Mrs. O'Brien's invitation to 
the castle ; where, if she did not captivate 
Donaghue, she would have been sure at 
least of making a conquest of some other 
person of equal importance, and thus ob- 
taining the power of taking off her daugh- 
ters to London with her, introducing 
them at court, and procuring them great 
matches. 

" Ah, poor Pat !" exclaimed Donaghue, 
affecting a bit of the brogue, as he and his 
friend rode on, over a road that certainly 
had not smoothness to recommend it. Ob- 
serving the slovenly manner in which the 
fields were enclosed, and the squalid 
wretchedness of the hovels that were 
scattered about — " When will your fences 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 85 

and fields boast of the neatness of your 
brother John's ?" 

" Never, probably," replied his compa- 
nion ; " at least till, like him, he is pos- 
sessed of some of those comforts that give 
what may be called heart for exertion. 
Unceasing privations will, at length, crush 
the stoutest spirits ; the natural conse- 
quence of this is, recklessness about every 
thing ; where there is no hope, there can 
be no emulation ; and the spot on which 
we blankly look, without any expectation 
of enjoyment, we certainly care nothing 
about improving." 

" Ay, very true," assented Donaghue, 
in a careless tone ; " yet if poor Pat's si- 
tuation was improved, how much inge- 
nuity should we lose the display of! 'Ne- 
cessity is the mother of invention ;' and 
really it is amusing to see the contrivances 
it has led to here, in cars turned into gates, 
gates into roofs, and wheels into chim- 
nies !" 

" Rather say deplorable," cried Mel- 
ville, a little warmly. 



86 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" Ah ! well, so it is," said Donaghue ; 
" however there is no use in our horrify- 
ing ourselves, by dwelling longer on what 
we cannot remedy ; so for the present, at 
least, let us satisfy our feelings by throw- 
ing what loose silver we have about us a- 
mongst these smoke-dried beings, that are 
peeping out of their hovels at us, as if 
beings of another world." 

At length they came in sight of Mr. 
Erin's mansion, standing in a ruinous 
court, in the very heart of a wild moun- 
tainous tract, and every where evincing 
proofs of desertion and decay, yet from 
its size proving that it must once have 
been a mansion of consequence — " Though 
how any one could think of building a 
house in such a spot, except it was to have 
the pleasure of shooting grouse out of the 
windows without any trouble, I cannot 
conceive," observed Donaghue. 

They dismounted at the gate, and cross- 
ed the court to the hall-door, which was 
lying open, without encountering any 
living thing, except a few cocks and hens 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 87 

that were straying about it. Donaghue 
knocked, but no one answered. After 
waiting some minutes, he knocked again ; 
hut still no one came, nor was any sound 
heard within the house, but that of the 
ticking of an old-fashioned clock, that 
stood at the head of the staircase facing 
them. 

" Well, this is odd enough," cried Do- 
naghue; " why, I believe they have all 
run away ; and, faith, I don't w^onder at 
it, since from such a place I think I should 
be very apt to eject myself. — But come," 
addressing Melville, " will you venture 
to explore ? perhaps we may at least dis- 
cover a sleeping beauty." 

A stifled laugh made them hastily turn 
round, and they encountered the eyes of 
a strikingly elegant-looking girl, about 
nineteen ; she had a large bonnet on, and 
a small basket on her arm, filled with field 
flowers, and altogether appeared as if just 
returned from a ramble. — " Permit me, 
gentlemen," she said, still laughing, as 



88 TUADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

she returned their rather confused saluta- 
tion, for surprise gave to both an appear- 
ance of embarrassment, " to assure you, 
that no such discovery would have recom- 
pensed you for the trouble ; but pray walk 
in," leading the way to an old-fashioned 
parlour. " And now permit me to ask who 
has done my uncle the honour of calling, 
that I may inform him." 

" Her uncle !" Donaghue almost started 
— " Good Heavens ! and was this Miss 
Erin? this elegant, animated, beautiful 
girl, looking all soul, all intelligence, the 
stiff, stupid, statue-like being, lady Jane 
had represented her ? — oh, what a satire 
on a woman's painting !" 

** But first," continued Miss Erin, " to 
account for what must appear so extraor- 
dinary, as no one being within to answer 
you: our hay-harvest has just commenced, 
and from the variableness of our humid 
climate — the old proverb of making hay 
while the sun shines not being to be ne- 
glected here — our whole household have 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 89 

turned into the fields, with my uncle and 
aunt at their head, to amuse themselves, 
and see how matters are going on.'* 

Donaghue introduced himself, and then 
his friend ; and Miss Erin then left them, 
to acquaint her uncle with their visit. 

Donaghue watched her from the win- 
dow till she was out of sight ; then, as he 
turned from it — " Rather a — a well-look- 
ing girl that," he cried. 

" Rather !" exclaimed Melville ; " well, 
really, this is too ridiculous ; but it won't 
do, my dear fellow — I saw no emotion, to 
be sure, on your first encountering her 
eyes, or on her announcing herself!" 

" Pshaw !" cried Donaghue, as he walk- 
ed to a glass to adjust his hair — " I may 
in my turn exclaim ridiculous !" 

" Oh ! come, I think you'll do," said 
Melville ; " at least you won't quite hor- 
rify the lady." 

Donaghue laughed — " Really you are 
intolerable, Melville ; if I was to attend to 
you, you would make me believe that I 
was " 



90 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" Not that you were a superlatively con- 
ceited feHow," cried Melville — " no, no, 
that at least you must acquit yourself of 
being." 

Donaghue again laughed — " You are 
really enough to provoke one," he cried ; 
" but do, my dear fellow, spare me now, 
for I am all but done up by our hor- 
rible ride over that stony road, which, by- 
the-bye, I believe has been paved by some 
malicious priest, for penitential purposes; 
and the barbarous smell of turf that per- 
vades this apartment — really, as lady Ma- 
gennis observes, what between bog, brogue, 
and smoke, one w^ould need the nerves of 
an Esquimaux here." 

" Pshaw ! lady Magennis !" exclaimed 
Melville, a little petulantly, " I hate her 
observations — so much any thing but what 
they ought to be ; let us not disparage the 
land we live in, or rather belong to." 

"Oh, sentimental!" cried Donaghue; 
" oh ! then I am off, for that is not my 
forte ;" and throwing himself on a sofa, he 
took up a book he found there. 



TBADITION OF THE CASTLE. 91 

In the mean time Miss Erin proceeded 
to her uncle.. — " So he has condescended 
at last !" he cried, on receiving her infor- 
mation. 

" Who?" exclaimed his wife, catching 
the sentence, and eagerly approaching. 

" Prince Donaghue and his friend," re- 
plied Mr. Erin, laughing a little satiri- 
cally. 

" Indeed ! well really I am quite glad ; 
I dare say he would have come before if 
he could, and so we must keep him to 
dinner." 

" Oh no, my dear aunt!" cried Miss EriOj 
shrinking at the bare idea, from the little 
order she knew any thing was in for an 
entertainment, and the persuasion she en- 
tertained of Donaghue's conceit and fas- 
tidiousness — " I beg not — for — I — really 
think, after acting as he has done, that he 
does not merit any compliment of the 
kind." 

" Pooh ! I hope you don't want your 
uncle to have a coolness to the son of your 
mother's particular friend? besides, it is 



92 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

really requisite we should keep him to 
dinner, in order to let him see what 
kind of people we are — that is, that we 
know what is right, as well as others; for 
I dare say it was owing to some doubt of 
this, after all, that he did not come before, 
for I know what kind of invidious being 
that lady Magennis is ! — But, Lord, my 
dear," turning to her husband, " do quick- 
en your pace ; if you delay much longer, 
I shouldn't wonder if your visitors lost all 
patience, and were off without seeing you ; 
you really walk as slow as if, like a snail, 
you had a house on your back !" 

Miss Erin could not contend the point 
any further herself, but she cast a look at 
her uncle, in the hope of inducing him to 
do so; but in this hope she was disap- 
pointed — he did not, out of regard to "Mrs. 
O'Brien, like to appear to retain any re- 
sentment against Donaghue, so he decided 
on letting his wife do as she pleased. 

Though Donaghue was not quite as 
much surprised by the uncle as he had 
been by the niece, yet he certainly was a 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. QS 

good deal so, at finding him so entirely 
contrary to what he had expected, resem- 
bUng those he had hitherto associated 
with, and felt almost inclined to be asham- 
ed of the slighting manner in which he 
had treated him ; but his wife — she cer- 
tainly rather looked as if she had not long 
been caught ; and if the rest of the family 
resembled her, it would be quite as well 
to be still a little shy of them, that if they 
encountered elsewhere, he might not be 
horrified by their claiming acquaintance 
with him. 

This reflection, it might have been sup- 
posed, would have operated in deterring 
him from accepting the invitation to din- 
ner — it had not this effect, however ; but 
not wishing to let Melville think, who, he 
saw, was very much inclined to laugh at 
him, that it was his inclination to stay, 
instead of returning an answer to Mr. 
Erin, he referred him to Melville for one, 
hoping by this he should be able to make 
it appear to him that it was out of com- 
pliment to what he conceived were his 



94 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

wishes he consented to remain ; but Mel- 
ville saw his drift, and determined to dis- 
appoint him; in his turn referring Mr. Erin 
to him, by saying he was perfectly at the 
disposal of Mr. O'Brien. 

Mrs. Erin only waited to have the invi- 
tation accepted to disappear, and Miss Erin 
quickly followed her, to try and prevent, 
as much as possible, the bustle she dread- 
ed. But in vain she represented how 
much more elegance and comfort there 
woul(} be in a plain neat dinner, that could 
easily be got ready, than in a great one 
without the proper means for it. — " Oh, 
pooh ! don't trouble yourself about that," 
was the reply ; " I'll engage I'll contrive 
every thing; if they drop in again, I sha'n't 
mind letting them sit down to our own 
fare, but first impressions are every thing; 
we must let them see we know how to 
entertain as well as other people — that 
lady Magennis is not the only person in 
the county who knows how to have a 
table laid out. So run away, my darling, 
and don't be staying in this hot place," for. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 95 

they were speaking in the kitchen ; " and 
be sure you put on your grey silk, for 'tis 
the most becoming of all your dresses; 
and be sure you don't forget your darling 
wreath of white roses ; and when you are 
dressed, have a look to the drawing-room.'* 

" The drawing-room I" exclaimed Miss 
Erin, in an alarmed tone, at the idea of 
its ragged and faded furniture, the sad 
proofs of better days ; " oh, my dear aunt ! 
would it not be better not to introduce 
them into any other room than the par- 
lour ?" which, from the best of every thing 
being picked out for it from the other 
rooms, had something of a respectable ap- 
pearance. 

" Pooh ! I know what you mean ; but 
they won't be long enough in it before 
dinner to have time to examine things ; 
and as the sun will be full upon it then, 
that will be an excuse for the curtains be- 
ing down, so that will shade a good deal ; 
and on the very worst of the chairs one 
can spread a scarf, or cloak, as if by acci- 
dent, and by the time they return to it in 



96 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the evening, it will be too full for them 
to see any thing." 

" Too full !" repeated her niece. 

" Why, yes, my darling, I mean to 
give them a dance, and that's true. — Pat, 
let Tim Nevin — if you whistle at the back 
door he'll hear you — come in from the 
field and clean the knives ; and do you run 
down to the village, and tell Thady Mul- 
lins and Rooney Macguire (the piper and 
fiddler of the place) I want them this even- 
ing, and if they are engaged elsewhere, 
not to mind that, but come, and I'll give 
them plenty of Inishowen, and a good 
supper, and a few more tenpennies than 
they would get from any one else ; and 
when you are there, you may as well send 
up Biddy Neil — she'll help to pick the 
chickens, and mind the meat as 'tis roast- 
ing ; and if she says she can't come on ac- 
count of the children, why she may bring 
them all with her. But stop — let me see 
if I want you to do any thing else — ay, 
there's not tea enough in the house, and 
I want almonds and raisins besides, for 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 97 

the supper-table ; so when you are so far, 
you may as well go on to the town, but 
don*t be waiting to catch one of our horses 
— you'll find Flinn's old mare grazing by 
the roadside, so take her ; and if the par- 
cels can't be made up in a moment for 
you, don't, for the life of you, be delay- 
ing for them, but let them be sent after 
you — but wait another minute, I want 
you to drop a note by the way at Mr. 
Bond's, and as you are coming back you 
may call for an answer.— And, my darling," 
turning to her niece, " do you run up and 
write it for me — tell them who we have 
here, and that we shall expect them to 
dinner." 

" Oh, not the Bonds, my dear aunt, I 
innplore !" 

" Pooh ! why not ? it would be stupid 
to have no one but ourselves at dinner ; 
besides, you know I couldn't ask for the 
epergne, or the silver bread-basket, I want 
for handing about cake in the evening, 
without inviting them." 

VOL. I. F 



98 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" But why ask for these things? there 
is no necessity for them." 

" Tut ! sure I have explained that to 
you already ; but here I am wasting my 
time, when I have so much to do — blanc- 
mange and custards to make ; and, ah ! 
then, Judy, is it with your hands dangling 
before you, you are looking on, when 
there's not a minute to spare — while you 
are standing there doing nothing, couldn't 
you be running about, making yourself 
useful ? And my two young devils," 
meaning her daughters, " I wonder where 
they are — tumbhng about in the hay, I 
suppose, when they might be giving a 
hand, though, God knows, I believe we 
are better without them ; and there, if I 
believe they have a white frock ready to 
put on ! Well, to be sure, as old nurse 
Whelan says, I may well cry och hone ! 
for I'm sure I'm finely pestered." 

Miss Erin, finding remonstrance useless, 
repaired, with a sigh, to her writing-desk, 
and then proceeded to get matters regu- 
lated in the unfortunate drawing-room ; 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 99 

after which, having merely exchanged one 
white dress for another, she repaired, with 
her work-basket and a book, to the sum- 
mer-house in the garden. 

Here she was soon after found by the 
friends. Mr. Erin was just on the point 
of taking them out to view his fields, 
when, being called away on business, on 
being left by themselves, they walked in- 
to the garden, into which the parlour 
opened. 

Accustomed to produce an effect, Do- 
naghue could not help experiencing a sen- 
sation of mortification at the perfect cool- 
ness and composure which this conduct of 
Miss Erin evinced about him — no flutter, 
no indication of emotion, no additional 
ornament in consequence of his consent- 
ing to stay ; but this indeed she required 
not, for never had his charmed eyes rested 
on a being who so perfectly answered every 
idea he had formed of elegance and grace. 

Eveleen Erin was indeed of the first 
order of fine forms — her complexion was 
F 2 



100 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

pale, but varying with every feeling — a 
tale of wo would make it fade away into 
nrjaiHble whiteness, while joy, or any other 
sudden or powerful emotion, would flush 
it with tints as bright as colours over the 
morning sky, but, like them, as transient 
too ; her eyes and hair were dark, and the 
former, shaded as they were by their beau- 
teous lashes, were of themselves alone 
sufficient to give resistless attractions to 
any countenance — full of life, of spirit, and 
intelligence, their expression clearly prov- 
ed, that if she was not satirical, it was not 
from the want of power, but of inclina- 
tion, to be so ; while she smiled in such a 
sort, as if secure of all beholders' hearts, 
neglecting she could take them. 

Donaghue carelessly took up the book 
she laid down on his entrance — it was the 
" Giaour" of lord Byron, and opened at 
his enchanting description of Lelia. Never 
had lines, Donaghue thought, appeared so 
applicable, and in a transport of admira- 
tion he took out his pencil, and transcribing 
them, while she was engaged in conversa- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 101 

tion with Melville, on a sheet of paper he 
found on the table, left it, when he had 
done, folded up in the book, with the fol- 
lowing remark above what be had copied : 



" Had the author of the following Hnes 
seen the fair divinity of this bower, she 
would have supplied the picture he drew 
from his imagination. 



Her eyes' dark charm 'twere vain to tell, 

But gaze on that of the gazelle, 

It will assist thy fancy well; 

As large as languishingly dark, 

But soul beamed forth in every spark 

That darted from beneath the lid, 

Bright as the jewel of Giamschid. 



On her might muftis gaze, and own 

That through her eye the immortal shone ; 

On her feir cheeks* unfading hue 

The young pomegranates blossoms strew 

Their bloom in blushes ever new. 

Her hair, in hyacinthine flow. 

When left to roll its folds below. 

As midst her handmaids in the hall 

She stood superior to them all, 

Hath swept the marble. 



102 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

As rears her crest the ruffled swan, 

And spurns the ware with wings of pride. 
When pass the steps of stranger man 

Along the banks that bound her tide, 
Thus rose fair EveJeen's whiter neck. 
Thus armed with beauty would she check 
Intrusion's glance, till Folly's gaze 
Shrunk from the charms it meant to praise — 
Thus high and graceful was her gait. 



But scarcely had he given way to his^ 
feelings ere he regretted it, and would 
have recovered the paper that disclosed 
them, but that on his laying down the 
book, she had put it aside; however, he 
hoped what it contained would be placed 
to the score of mere gallantry, for he could 
not endure that, without appearing to 
have produced any effect on her, she 
should have the gratification of know- 
ing she had produced such an one upon 
him. But was not this affectation, va- 
nity suggested ; or to such a conviction 
that their marriage was inevitable, from 
the arrangement of their mothers, that 
she might give herself what airs she 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 103 

pleased; but he should soon undeceive, 
soon teach her the reverse; for with all 
her loveliness he could not — no, he could 
not think seriously of her, for there would 
be no eclat attending a union with her; 
and then such a sacrifice of lofty preten- 
sions ! no, the thing was impossible; yet 
since it was, he w^ished he had found her 
just what he expected, the cold, stiff, 
marble-like being lady Jane had described 
her — dear, delightful lady Jane ! so every 
thing a fashionable man could desire a 
wife to be — he really did believe, if she 
had but the loveliness of the other, he 
would no longer hesitate to become a Be- 
nedict ; but then, if she had that with her 
other attractions, she would be too glori- 
ous a prize for any mortal ; but it was ill- 
judged of her to deceive him as she had 
done about Miss Erin, knowing, as she 
must, it would be apt to heighten any ad- 
miration she was calculated to excite : but 
was it for this purpose she had done so ? 
no ; and he smiled with a feeling of gra- 



104 TEADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

tified vanity at the motive to which he 
ascribed it. But all this was ridiculous ; 
for as yet to resign his liberty, give up 
the dear delight of seeing himself manoeu- 
vered for by all the speculating mammas 
and exhibiting Misses of fashion in Lon- 
don, was out of the question ; besides, to 
run the risk of having a set of sons and 
daughters startiiig up about him, ere he 
was by any means inclined to resign the 
stage to them — no, the thought was not 
endurable. Some years hence, for the 
sake of the family name, he might then 
take a wife, and mortify withal. 

Yet notwithstanding these resolutions, 
he felt almost peevish when Mr. Erin 
had hunted him and Melville out, to 
drag them over his horrible fields. The 
bower was so cool, and so deliciously se- 
questered ; " and then," as AVerter says, 
*' to look in the dark eyes of the divinity 
of it," was of itself a pleasure ; but in vain 
he gazed in them, to discover what was 
then passing in her mind — had she been 
composed of the marble of vrhich lady 



TRADITION OP THE CASTLE. 105 

Jane had represented her, she could not 
have given him less indications of this. 

By the time they returned from their 
drag, the other guests were arrived, con- 
sisting of Mr. and Mrs. Bond, and their 
grandson and his sister, both grown up. 
They were people of comfortable indepen- 
dence, and had every appearance of en- 
joying life; but there certainly was no- 
thing of ton about them, and at the first 
glance Donaghue determined on keeping 
himself aloof from them ; determinations, 
however, are much easier formed than 
kept. Mrs. Bond, who was no great adept 
in interpreting looks, soon forced some 
attention from him. Taking possession 
of a chair by his, and drawing it as close 
to it as possible — " You must know, my 
good young sir," she cried, " that your 
being here to-day was no slight induce- 
ment to our also coming ; not but that we 
are always happy in the company of our 
friends here, but I was so particularly glad 
at the opportunity I saw of being intro- 
P 3 



106 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

duced to you would afford me of getting 
an acquaintance in London for my young 
people, against their going there, who, 
from having always resided there, would 
know what to shew them, and what to 
teach them to avoid, for their grandfather 
and I can think of no more journeys 
now." 

" Know what to shew them !" and as 
she made the remark, Donaghue involun- 
tarily glanced at master Bob, and survey- 
ing him from head to foot, thought of the 
effect, with an absolute sensation of hor- 
iror, which he should produce at the opera, 
loitering down the pit, or emerging from 
behind the scenes, with such a being — 
short and thick, with a face as broad as a 
full moon, and red as a piony, with coal 
black hair, that from its straightness seemed 
as if it would bid defiance to all the curl- 
ing fluids in the world to produce an effect 
onj and a mouth so capaciously wide, as 
.to render it impossible for him to open it, 
without disclosing a set of teeth, quite as 
formidable, from their size, as those of the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 107 

terrible visitor of poor little Red-riding- 
hood. 

"And if London is not very much altered 
since my time," continued the good lady, 
" there are many things there to be avoid- 
ed ; for you must know, sir, I once paid 
it a visit, before I was married, and I be- 
lieve it is the descriptions 1 have given of 
it that have set these young folks so long- 
ing to see it. But I saw it when it had 
even more public places to boast of than 
it has now, for then there was Mary bone 
Gardens, and Ranelagh, besides Vauxhall 
— enchanting Ranelagh ! as my friend lady 
Donnybrook used to call it ; I could have 
cried when I heard of its pulling down, 
for I remembered it in all its glory ; and 
grand it was, and grand every one looked 
then, for dress in those days gave dignity 
and consequence to one's appearance — ah ! 
it was something then to see a lady in full 
dress for an assembly !" 

" Awful, no doubt, ma'am," cried Do- 
naghue. 

" In a full-trimmed sack, with a large 



108 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

hoop, and treble ruffles," proceeded the 
old lady, pursuing what seemed to her to 
be an enchanting theme ; " not as now, in 
her cobweb drapery, looking as slim and 
as insignificant as the sprite in the fable- 
book on the top of the cradle; people 
were then distinguished by their dress, for 
from the richness of the materials, and the 
quantity of them, not as now, it was im- 
possible for all to dress alike ; and really, 
on this account, if on no other, it is to be 
lamented that the fashion of hoops and 
sacks is gone out." 

" And the injury besides it is to tlie 
whale-fishery !" said Melville, advancing ; 
" really I wonder the Greenland Company 
have not taken it up, and remonstrated 
with government on the subject ; but all 
in good time — when all this fuss that has 
lately been made about the beauty of the 
human form, and the Grecian style of 
dress, is over, we shall see the dignified 
taste of other days reviving, and the ladies 
again bearing down upon us, in all that 
extension of dress that is so commanding. 



Tradition of the castli. 109 

But you were observing, ma'am, if London 
was not altered since your time ; if it is, 
I will venture to say, it is not for the bet- 
ter ;" and he launched out into an account 
— yet perhaps, after all, not an exaggera- 
ted one — that was enough to terrify any 
one, of its various impositions and enor- 
mities, interspersed with remarks on the 
precautions it was requisite to practise, 
and the manner in which one should al- 
ways be on their guard ; during which 
Mr. Bond, joining the party, kept conti- 
nually calling out to his grandson — 
" Mind that, Bob ! put that down with 
your pencil in your pocketbook, that it 
shouldn't be forgot !" and, to the great a- 
musement of Melville, the tablets were ac- 
tually produced. 

" But, notwithstanding what I have 
said of the dangers of this wilderness, as it 
may be termed," he went on, " yet, with a 
friend at one's elbow, one may just as safe- 
ly steer through them all, as they may 
through Scylla and Charybdis, with a skil- 



110 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ful pilot ; and really, to conduct one safe- 
ly through them, I know not any one bet- 
ter qualified than my friend here, he is 
so perfectly acquainted with the town, so 
completely au fait with regard to every 
thing connected with it. Indeed I don't 
know any person more calculated to ren- 
der the visit of a stranger to it pleasant, 
than he is. With him for his guide and 

director, ISlr. Bob 1 beg his pardon — 

Mr. Robert, need fear nothing ; and, 
through an acquaintance with him, will 
have an opportunity of being introduced, 
in the most stylish way, to all the places 
of fashionable resort. In particular, if he's 
fond of music, he'll have reason to con- 
gratulate himself on his acquaintance with 
him, for he's a constant frequenter of the 
opera." 

Here the provoked Donaghue, by an 
absolutely savage look, tried to stop him, 
but in vain. 

" Then he is so well acquainted with all 
the lions " 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. Ill 

" The lions ! bless me !" interrupted the 
old lady, in a tone of affright, " are there 
many there ?" 

" He, he !" now tittered the young lady, 
and " la, grandma !" she dutifully demand- 
ed, " how can you be so silly ? By lions 
are meant the curiosities of a place — when 
I was at school I learned that !" 

" Dear me ! to see what changes there 
are in every thing !" sighed her grandmo- 
ther; " in my time it was — * have you 
seen the sights ?" 

" Ay ; but, grandmother — ' have you 
seen the lions ?' is now the go," cried mas- 
ter Bob, with a laugh. 

" Have you put that down with your 
pencil, sir ?" asked Melville, gravely ; " for 
it is pleasant for a person to be up to all 
these things, to avoid being taken for a 
stranger." 

" Ah ! then, faith, I believe," cried ho- 
nest Bob, " with the tongue I have got in 
my head, it will be impossible for me to 
avoid that." 

" Ohj pardon me, sir," returned Mel- 



112 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

vine; " or, if your tongue does betray 
you, it will only be as the stranger was 
betrayed in the market at Athens, by the 
superior elegance and purity vnth which 
he spoke the language." 

Donaghue, with a look that seemed to 
say this was too bad — for certainly poor 
Bob had a tongue that would any where 
have proclaimed his country — now rose, 
or rather broke away from the old lady, 
for her hand had all this time been resting 
on his arm, and walked to a window. As 
he did so, he caught the eye of Miss Erin, 
and by a significant shrug, or at least what 
he meant to be one, immediately strove to 
imjiart his feelings to her ; but either she 
did not understand him, or else thought 
him impertinent, for nothing could exceed 
the unaltered gravity of her look ; and it 
seemed so like a rebuke to Donaghue, that 
he felt the blood mounting up to his very 
temples. 

At length dinner was announced, in a 
manner that electrified the whole party, 
by the fling that Pat gave to the doOr, in 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 113 

order to prove to his mistress, that her in- 
structions to him to be all alive were not 
thrown away. 

As Miss Erin had foreseen, every thing 
was uncomfortable and in confusion, from 
the entertainment her aunt would persist 
in giving. She felt it, and her uncle felt 
it ; but the lady of the house herself was 
perfectly satisfied — her feelings were not 
particularly sensitive about such matters, 
and she accordingly set about doing the 
honours of the table, with as much ease 
and self-complacency as if it had been laid 
out by the first maitre d'hotel in either 
kingdom. 

But if the previous discomposure of Miss 
Erin was great, what it was when the un- 
fortunate vanity of her aunt was detected 
may be conceived. The epergne was Mr. 
Bond's first present to his lady, and so va- 
lued by her, as to be long intended for an 
heirloom. She could not therefore help 
keeping a watchful eye over it, or caution- 
ing Pat about it, whose alertness absolute- 
ly terrified her, in a manner that proved 



114 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

but too clearly how much she was inter- 
ested in its preservation. 

Of course the strangers noticed nothing 
that was not wished ; but Donaghue was 
all eye, all ear; and his fastidiousness 
every moment increased, till at length he 
almost ceased to make an effort to conceal 
it. But the coolness of Miss Erin had 
piqued his pride, and mortified his vanity, 
and in return he wished to let her see, that 
his feelings were of a description that must 
render him very indifferent on the subject. 
Now and then he condescended to give a 
languid smile, and attempt to say some- 
thing ; but when the evening guests, ere 
dinner was well over, agreeable to the in- 
timation of Mrs. Erin, not to be late in 
coming, were heard thundering up the 
stairs, for it is here to be understood, that 
they were not exactly of the first descrip- 
tion of fashionables in the neighbourhood, 
it was all over any further attempt at con- 
straint, and hastily rising, he rang, to have 
the horses got ready directly, to the no 
small surprise of the rest of the party, and 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 115 

anger of Melville, who had quite enjoyed 
the idea of the scene above stairs. But he 
could not be prevailed on to give up going 
immediately, more especially as, on glanc- 
ing at Miss Erin, to see whether she at 
all looked as if she wished hira to stay, he 
saw nothing but a supercilious smile on 
her countenance. 

Melville was so provoked with him, 
that they had proceeded a considerable 
way on their return ere he would speak 
to him ; and when he did, it was to rail 
at him for his conduct. 

Donaghue affected to laugh at what he 
said ; but in reality was so vexed himself, 
by this time, at the way in which he had 
acted, that it had the effect of making him 
feel still severer the subject; but then, 
had he acted otherwise, might not his si- 
lence and constraint have been imputed to 
want of natural animation, and the impu- 
tation of stupidity would not be a very 
pleasant one to incur ; besides, it was re- 
quisite to let the party see he too well un- 
derstood what was due to himself, to per- 



116 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

mit an introduction to the heterogeneous 
set assembled for the evening, and thus to 
try and reconcile himself to his conduct, 
had recourse to false reasoning and false 
arguments, but which, as usual, failed of 
succeeding. 

On reaching Altoir-na-Grenie, they 
found Mrs. O'Brien was gone to spend the 
evening at lady Magennis's. The family 
there did not much expect to see any one 
from Altoir-na-Grenie that day ; but on 
learning, by chance, the direction iii which 
the friends had been seen riding that 
morning, their agony to know whether 
they were going to Mr. Erin's was so 
great, that the young ladies were dispatch- 
ed, after dinner, under the pretext of 
bringing Mrs. O'Brien to tea. The eager 
manner in which they looked round the 
room, and their agitated inquiries after the 
gentlemen, betrayed their real motive for 
coming. 

Their mamma was scarcely less agitated 
than they were themselves, when a signi- 
ficant look, on their return, gave her to 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 117 

understand it was as they feared ; how- 
ever, it was some comfort to think they 
should not be long kept in suspense as to 
what was likely to result from the visit — 
it would be easy to see what impression 
Miss Erin had made ; and if she failed of 
making a positive impression at first sight, 
why there was a chance that nothing in- 
jurious to them would result from the vi- 
sit ; at all events, she could not deprive 
them of both the beaux, and Melville, 
from the first moment of his arrival, had 
become quite as great an object of specu- 
lation as his friend. 

The early return of the gentlemen gave 
a fillip to their drooping spirits. — " So, 
gentlemen," cried her ladyship, laying 
down her cards, with eyes sparkling with 
pleasure, as they entered the drawing- 
room, " for the wreck of matter, or the 
crush of worlds," almost, could not have 
induced her to give up cards for an even- 
ing, " this is a very unexpected pleasure ; 
for, from the place where you were visit- 
ing, I scarcely thought," and ^e spoke 



118 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

sneeringly, from believing she might safe- 
ly do so, " that you would be too com- 
pletely spell-bound, to be able to leave it 
at such an hour !" 

" Indeed I" said Donaghue; and he was 
on the point, perhaps, of saying something 
in unison with her wishes, when either 
the rebuking eye of his mother, or eke the 
majestic form of Miss Erin, suddenly ri- 
sinjr to his imasrination, checked him, and 
made him colour and falter at the idea. 

" Why the fact is, ma'am," said Mel- 
ville, who had a most ungallant dislike to 
her ladyship and her daughters, ** Dona- 
ghue found such danger in remaining, that 
he determined on a precipitate flight." 

" Really !^ cried her ladyship, with a 
quivering lip, but affectedly misunder- 
standing his meaning, " what ! ftt)m the 
hospitality of the good lady of the house. 
who really treats her guests as they do 
fowl, when they are put up for fattening?" 

" No, not exactly," replied Melville; 
•* it was from another cause — from beauty 
tnilv blended, whose red and white,'' and as 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 119 

he spoke, with a sly glance at the well- 
rouged cheeks of her daughters, he gave 
a slight but significant rub to his own 
cheek, " Nature's own rare and skilful 
hand put on." 

" Oh dear, poetical !" exclaimed her la- 
dyship, with another sneer ; " you must 
be far gone then indeed ! and Miss Eve- 
leen Erin will doubtless feel vain at being 
able to rank the accomplished Mr. Melville 
amongst her conquests." 

" No, not exactlv amonofst her con- 
quests, though certainly amongst her 
warmest admirers — for certain considera- 
tions," and he spoke emphatically, " will 
continue to make me guard my heart a- 
gainst her attractions." 

" Pshaw ! it is ridiculous," cried her la- 
dyship, " from the manner in which you 
speak of her, to deny its being already 
surrendered to her ; and I suppose, Or- 
lando like, we shall soon have you hang- 
ing elegies on oaks, and odes on bramble 
bushes, in praise of her charms." 

" No, if I was to exert my muse on her 



1^ TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

account, I think it would be in loyld can- 
tos, of contemned love." 

" How modest ! No confidence then in 
your own attractions— but come, now that 
you have given utterance to your raptures, 
will you join us at cards ?" 

" No, excuse me." 

" Oh ! more inclined for musing. Well, 
that is natural for a man in your case. — 
But, Mr. Donaghue, do you purpose fol- 
lowing the example of your friend ?" 

" By no means," replied Donaghue, and 
instantly took a seat at the table ; whence, 
in the course of a few hours, he rose the 
loser of a considerable sum. 

" Well, 1 don't pity you," said Melville, 
as he was putting up his lightened purse, 
with perhaps not the most complacent 
brow in the world ; " had you remained 
where you were, instead of having to re- 
flect on your folly, in putting yourself in 
the way of being cheated out of such a 
sum of money, for the play here is nothing 
but cheating — the observations of this even- 
ing- have convinced me of this, for I have 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 121 

been watching her ladyship and her ami- 
able daughters, and now clearly under- 
stand why the latter decline playing, and 
always keep hovering about the table 
where their mamma is — you might have 
been enjoying the conversation of the live- 
liest girl in the kingdom, perhaps at this 
very moment holding her soft hand in 
yours, and meeting her smiles, and, in 
short, have had something to dwell on 
with delight." 

" Why I suppose you think I have the 
patience of a saint," cried Donaghue, al- 
most in a rage ; " is it the art of torment- 
ing that you have lately been studying, 
that you appear such an adept in it ?" 

" Oh, you wince ! well, I'll stroke you 
down again. Is it not a proof that I think 
something of you, my taking these pains 
to admonish you ?" 

" Oh, thank you ! so you wound but 
for the pleasure of healing ! but certainly 
you have found out an ingenious way of 
trying the temper of your friends !" 

VOL. I. G 



122 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

All the art of Donaghue could not hide 
from his mother the impression which 
Miss Erin had made upon him, and she 
had no longer any hesitation in revealing 
what her wishes were respecting her, lest 
ignorance of them should occasion his 
struggling against his admiration for her, 
or, at least, be pleaded hereafter as a rea- 
son for resisting its impulse, assuring him 
she had not the slightest doubt of his fa- 
ther's acquiescing in them. But though 
Donaghue listened attentively, he allowed 
nothing to escape him that could put her 
out of suspense as to what his real inten- 
tions were ; but she would not despair of 
their being favourable to the wishes she 
had avowed. With his acute susceptibi- 
lity, his taste, his turn of mind, she thought 
it next to impossible that a further know- 
ledge of Miss Erin — the conviction that 
must follow, of the adornments of her 
mind being equal to those of her person- 
would not complete her conquest over him, 
and make him think with contempt of all 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 123 

that had previously militated against his 
yielding to her power. 

But how was this further knowledge to 
be obtained ? she feared his apprehended 
wish to resist the impression that had been 
made upon him might prevent the repe- 
tition of his visit to Mr. Erin's, and the 
family did not keep up any great inti- 
macy in the neighbourhood of Altoir-na- 
Grenie, and these considerations made her 
regret still more Miss Erin's positive re- 
jection of the invitation she had given her ; 
but perhaps if now repeated, and she was 
just on the point of setting out to try if 
she could not prevail on her, when she 
learned she Avas coming to pass a little 
time with the friend of her aunt, Mrs. 
Burros, a lady residing at no great distance 
from Altoir-na-Grenie. 

Mrs. Erin, that is Miss Erin's aunt, was, 
in her way, a manoeuvrier, as well as lady 
Magennis, and conceiving if her niece 
went on a visit in the neighbourhood, she 
should be furnished with a pretext for go- 
G 2 



124 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ing there too, as often as she pleased, her- 
self, she wrote privately to her friend 
Mrs. Burros, to invite her, knowing Eve- 
leen would have no excuse for declining 
an invitation of hers. 

Donaghue no sooner heard of this visit 
than, unacquainted with her refusal of his 
mother's invitation, vanity immediately 
suggested its being paid on iiis account ; 
the dead set he had been warned of, by 
lady Jane, occurred to his imagination, 
and he determined to act accordingly, to 
let it be seen that he was not easily to be 
caught, or, at all events, induced to form 
a downright Irish connexion. Conceiving 
the lady had advanced, he believed he 
need take no further pains to render him- 
self agreeable, if indeed he had already 
taken any, but might give himself what 
airs he pleased ; and the idea of obtaining 
proofs of her admiration, or rather being 
sure of it, without giving any of his own, 
was extremely pleasing to his imagination. 

Instead, therefore, of hastening to pay his 
respects to her, on hearing of her arrival. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 125 

he carelessly ordered the horses, and rode 
out with Melville, but took the road lead- 
ing to Mrs. Burros's cottage, from believ- 
ing Melville, which however was not the 
case, was unacquainted with it. On com- 
ing nearly opposite the cottage, he espied 
a female through the divisions of a Vene- 
tian blind, and fancying it must be Miss 
Erin, such an opportunity for playing off 
his fine figure before her was not to be re- 
sisted ; he excelled in the manege^ and ac- 
cordingly his horse suddenly began cur- 
vetting in a manner that, while it threw 
both himself and his rider into the most 
elegant attitudes imaginable, seemed to 
render the utmost skill requisite for his 
management. 

Melville penetrated the trick, but not 
choosing to say so at present, drew quietly 
up at the roadside till the display was over; 
but an end was soon put to it, by the sud- 
den flying up of the blind, and Caty, Mrs. 
Burros's maid, thrusting her head out of 
the window, and in a tone of alarm be- 
seeching his honour to get off of that baste 



126 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

of a horse, or else to be sure it*s after kilt 
he would be. 

Donaghue, though feeling absolutely 
ridiculous to himself, from the mistake he 
had been under, affected to laugh, and 
thanking her for her concern for his safety, 
inquired whether the ladies were within ? 
and on being answered in the negative, 
left his compliments for them, and rode off. 

Melville followed. After they had got 
to some distance — " Well, what a pity l" 
he cried. 

" What ?" demanded Donaghue, turn- 
ing short on him. 

" Why, that so much good horseman- 
ship should be thrown away." 

" Why, I hope you don*t mean to in- 
sinuate " cried Donaghue, colouring 

scarlet. 

Melville laughed, nodded significantly, 
and touching the side of his horse, passed 
him in full gallop, leaving him to chew 
the cud of mortification by himself. 

For some minutes it would be impos- 
sible to say which Donaghue was most 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 127 

provoked with — himself or Melville ; with 
himself for his ridiculous vanity, or Mel- 
ville for having discovered it ; but his na- 
tural good-humour soon got the better of 
any resentment towards his friend, but 
with a determination to take care how he 
played the part of an egregious coxcomb 
again before so keen an observer. 

Now that she actually was in the neigh- 
bourhood, Mrs. O'Brien hoped that inter- 
course would take place between Miss 
Erin and Donaghue which she wished; 
their respective determinations, however, 
were hostile to this wish ; still it was prob- 
able that they must now meet pretty 
often, and from these meetings she would 
augur what she desired. Indeed she was 
encouraged to do so, by penetrating more 
into the feelings of Donaghue than he 
was aware of; she saw the struggle there 
was in his mind between inclination and 
conceit, and from his good sense, his acute 
sensibility, and warmth of temperament, 
could not avoid believing it would yet end 
as she wished. The more she contem- 



128 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

plated Miss Erin — the more thoroughly 
she understood the qualities of her heart, 
and the adornments of her mind, the more 
anxious she became for this. 

As much as she was pleasad at Miss 
Erin's coming to the neighbourhood, lady 
Magennis and her daughters were dis- 
pleased and disconcerted. To have her 
thus forcing herself upon notice — really it 
was quite insufferable ! To be sure they 
could not find that she was gaining much 
upon Donaghue ; but there was a gravity 
in his looks whenever they now attempt- 
ed to speak slightingly of her, that still 
alarmed them; and as to Melville, they 
had before began to fear it was a hopeless 
business about him. Well, really it was 
provoking, to think they should slip 
through their toils, as so many others had 
done before them. The young ladies were 
not getting younger, and in the course of a 
few years — a very few — it was absolutely 
horrific the idea of what they would be 
considered, if they did not get married. 

But careless as Donaghue chose to be 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 129 

considered about seeing her, he was con- 
tinually on the watch to meet Miss Erin. 
There was always an expression of sur- 
prise, however, on these occasions, as if 
the meeting was quite unexpected ; but 
Miss Erin was quite as keen and pene- 
trating as his friend Melville, and more 
than once, in consequence, was led to 
doubt the truth of the assertion ; but what- 
ever she thought or felt in consequence 
was best known to herself, never, for a 
moment, being otherwise than cool or 
collected. Melville himself could not have 
devised any thing more mortifying to Do- 
naghue than was this uniform composure 
of manner; anger or disdain could not 
have hurt him half so much, since they 
would have been indicative of his power 
of exciting some emotion ; but was it not 
affected ? or might it not be owing to be- 
ing certain of him, through the influence 
or interference of his mother ? He was 
determined to ascertain to which, b}^ act- 
ing in such a manner as should convince 
g3 



130 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

her this influence would be exerted in 
vain ; and then indeed, if she retained her 
usual calmness, why, he must suppose it 
was owing to indifference about him. 

The very day after he had formed this 
resolution, Miss Erin came to dine with 
his mother, Mrs. Burros being gone to 
visit a sick friend. In the capacity of host, 
Donaghue had a pretext for paying all 
those attentions his feelings prompted; 
and the hours sped dehghtfully, and, of 
course, rapidly away ; but soon after tea 
Donaghue rose, and pushing aside his 
chair, made a movement towards the door. 

" Why, where are you going?" de- 
manded his mother, in rather an alarmed 
tone of voice. 

" To lady MagennisV' was the reply. 
" I should have sent an excuse, but that 
my going won't be a means of leaving 
you alone." 

Mrs. O'Brien turned pale with vexa- 
tion, and for a moment was too angry to 
speak, then, with a look of mingled re- 
proach and indignation — " Well, if you 



TKADITIOT^ OF THE CASTLE. 131 

are so tasteless as to wish to go," she said, 
" I am sure Miss Erin will excuse you." 

Donaghue turned his eyes full upon 
Miss Erin, but hers were so steadily fixed 
on a new publication she had just taken 
up, that it was impossible to see her courb- 
tenance perfectly ; he stood, however, look- 
ing at her, as if waiting for her reply to 
his mother's observation; Mrs. O'Brien 
perceiving this — " My dear," she said, 
touching her arm, " won't you excuse Do- 
naghue's keeping a previous engagement ?'* 

" Me ! what, ma'am ?" cried Miss Erin, 
looking up — " I beg your pardon, but I 
was really so absorbed in a beautiful pas- 
sage I was reading, that I did not hear 
what was saying." 

Mrs. O'Brien repeated the question. 

" Oh dear, certainly !" she replied, " and 
I am quite sorry that Mr. Donaghue 
should have thought so much ceremony 
necessary with me — I am sure he might 
have gone without my ever missing him." 

" There now !" said Melville, laughing, 
enjoying not a little the mortification which 



132 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

this assertion, perhaps a little maliciously 
uttered, evidently gave to Donaghue ; ** I 
hope you are satisfied! you may vanish 
whenever you please." 

" I thank you for your permission,*' 
cried Donaghue, in no very complacent 
tone; " but I suppose you are coming?'* 

" Me! no truly — cards and painted dow- 
agers are a dose I am not fond of every 
night, so on my account don't delay ; I 
am impatient indeed for you to be gone, 
that I may ask Miss Erin to play and sing 
for me." 

" Play and sing for him !' and was be 
to have this enjoyment to himself, and of 
hanging over her chair while she was play- 
ing, and of meeting her eyes, melting in 
soft languishments through the effect of 
her own melting cadences ; and as these 
images rose to his imagination, Donaghue 
was almost tempted to give up his resolu- 
tion of going out. He hesitated^ and 
looked again at Miss Erin, but she had 
again taken up the book, and in a trans- 
port of rage at her immovable composure 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 133 

about him, he flung, or rather rushed, out 
of the room. 

The Magennises had learned who was 
at Altoir-na-Grenie, and in consequence 
gave up seeing him that evening, and at 
the same time almost all further hope re- 
specting him ; their joyful surprise, there- 
fore, on his entering the drawing-room, 
may easily be conceived ; expectation re- 
vived, and with new-flushed hopes they 
set about playing off* their arts upon him. 
But Richard was not himself this evening. 
His manner was distrait-— his thoughts evi- 
dently wandering. In vain lady Magennis, 
calling him a charming creature for having 
come, wooed him to take a seat beside her 
at the card-table — in vain Miss Magennis, 
who, of the three, thought he admired her 
the most, endeavoured to render herself 
more amiable than ever in his eyes, by be- 
ing alternately gay, grave, capricious — she 
might have been the very son I of whim, 
€«• spirit of variety, for any thing he knew 
or cared about the matter. Miss Erin, 
justly piqued by his rudeness, and Mel- 



134 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ville taking advantage of his absence, think- 
ing himself at liberty perhaps from his 
conduct to do so, the indifference it indi- 
cated about her, to insinuate himself into 
her good graces, engrossed his thoughts 
too completely to allow of any attention 
to any one, or any thing ; and after a few 
hours of absolute penance, he abruptly 
retired, ere the party had any idea of 
breaking up. 



CHAPTER IV. 



" Did men but think, and oft to think they seem, 
That from themselves their heaviest sorrows rise, 
And knew they too whence they themselves create 
Their bosom suflFerings, seldom should we see 
Life spent as now each passing hour portrays." 

But by the time Donaghue was returning 
to Altoir-na-Grenie, Miss Erin was leav- 
ing it, attended by Melville. They were 
advancing down the pass just as Donaghue 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 135 

entered it, and who quickly distinguish- 
ing their voices, immediately rushed a- 
midst the underwood to avoid them, un- 
willing, since he knew they could not now 
be much longer together, that they should 
know of his return, lest the cause of it, 
so much sooner than was expected, might 
be surmised. 

But with all his quickness he had not 
escaped the eyes of MelviUe, and who, in- 
stantly conjecturing what Donaghue had 
feared if he allowed himself to be seen, 
set about plaguing him. Accordingly, 
after the slight interruption watching 
him had occasioned in his conversation 
with Miss Erin — " So, as I was telling 
you about my friend Donaghue, ma'ara," 
he began 

" What ?" Miss Erin was on the point 
of demanding, from not recollecting that 
he had been telling her any thing about 
him, when a significant squeeze of the 
arm, and glance towards the spot where 
Donaghue had concealed himself, gave her 
instantly to comprehend what he meant. 



136 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

and induced her to enter into the joke — 
" How he acted on that occasion," he con- 
tinued, " the " and here his voice be- 
came so low, it was impossible to distin- 
guish what followed, but that it was some- 
thing he had reason to be highly offended 
with, and resent, Donaghue could not but 
suppose from the laughter that ensued, 
and his blood took fire at the supposition. 

" Ridiculous !" exclaimed Miss Erin, 
aloud, after appearing to be listening with 
the most profound attention to what her 
companion was telling her ; " and was it 
really as absurd as you say ?" 

" Oh, ma'am, I can give you no ade- 
quate idea of the scene ! but this kind of 
conceit really often gives rise to the most 
ridiculous equivoques— to fancy a German 
princess was dying for him !" 

" Oh, ridiculous !" again exclaimed Miss 
Erin. 

Donaghue could hear no more — in a 
transport of fury he rushed through the 
thickets, and sprung out on the path be- 
fore them, with a determination of letting 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 157 

Melville know he had detected the perfidy 
he was guilty of, in thus rendering him 
an object of ridicule. 

" Ha ! what is that you ?" cried Mel- 
ville, in a tone of well-counterfeited sur- 
prise ; " why is it you we have heard this 
half-hour, rustling amongst the bushes a- 
bove ? I really thought it was a deer our 
voices had disturbed in its lair, or some 
other wild animal ; and let me see," look- 
ing in his eyes, which absolutely glared 
upon him, " was I mistaken in thinking 
it a wild animal ?" 

" Pshaw ! absurd !" exclaimed Dona- 
ghue, turning from him ; " it was not me 
you heard, for I am only this instant come 
from lady Magennis's, in consequence of a 
violent headach." 

" Indeed ! poor fellow !" and Melville 
spoke in a tone of affected pity, that 
heightened the rage of Donaghue to a de- 
gree that nothing but the presence of Miss 
Erin could have had power to make him 
restrain — " well, make haste home then, 
and see what mamma can do for it" 



138 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" It is not my pleasure," said Doiiaghue, 
fiercely. 

" Indeed ! well perhaps the cool night 
air may be of service, so come, let us pro- 
ceed — we detain Miss Erin." 

Proceed accordingly he and she did, 
closely followed by Donaghue, stalking 
after them, too deeply offended at both to 
hold converse with either, though deter- 
mined on accompanying them, in order 
to prevent any further discourse about 
himself. 

" Well," asked Melville, in his usual 
tone, after they had taken leave of Miss 
Erin, " how do you find yourself now ? 
I have some notion if you had passed as 
delightful an evening as I have done, you 
would have been better than you appear/' 

" Yes," cried Donaghue ; " and you 
have ended it in a way to render the con- 
clusion of it equally delightful to your 
imagination, by an abuse of the confidence 
reposed in your sincerity," flinging his arm, 
which he had passed under his, from him. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 139 

" A fine specimen you have given me of 
modern friendship !" 

" Why what has Damon to sccuse his 
Pythias of?" cried Melville. 

" Pshaw ! this trifling is not to be en- 
dured !" exclaimed Donaghue. " Your 
own conscience must tell you what I 
mean. It was unkind, ungenerous of you, 
jNlelville, to take advantage of my absence 
to speak of me in the manner you have 
done ! Nothing but my own ears could 
have made me believe you were capable of 
such treachery ; and it has hurt me — hurt 
me in a way I cannot describe! for my 
confidence in your regard — your friendship, 
was so great, as to console me for what I 
often regretted — the want of a brother," 

" Oh ho !" said Melville, " you have 
finely betrayed yourself! So it was you, 
after all, we heard rustling amongst the 
trees, and you have shared the deserved 
fate of all those who listen intentionally, 
by hearing something of yourself you did 
not like, or at least fancying you did ; and 
it was a headach brought you so soon from 



140 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

lady Magennis's; and Ah, my dear 

fellow," again catching him by the arm, 
" ere you attempt to practise deception 
again, take a few more lessons from her 
ladyship — you could not be in a better 
school than hers to learn all the arts of dis- 
simulation !" and the laugh that accom- 
panied these words at once opened the 
eyes of Donaghue to the trick that had 
been played him, and rendered him hear- 
tily ashamed of the petulance he had be- 
trayed. His heart, however, was light- 
ened of a load that had been intoler- 
able ; the suspicion of being deceived by 
his friend, and ridiculed or laughed at by 
the woman he admired, any thing he felt 
after that was as nothing. 

" But," resumed Melville, after they 
had laughed for a minute or two together 
at the trick he had played him, " though 
you rated me so finely about the supposed 
abuse of the confidence you reposed in me, 
I would be glad to learn what proof of 
this unlimited confidence, as your re- 
proaches would have intimated its being, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 141 

was your listening secretly to my conver- 
sation with your mistress ?" 

" Tut ! think no more of that," said Do- 
naghue, in some confusion ; " you are 
mistaken, I assure you, in imagining I did 
— that is, I mean, in imagining it was ow- 
ing to any particular interest — or — or anx- 
iety about Miss Erin, or " 

" Donaghue," said Melville, in a tone 
of gravity, " you cannot deceive me ; and, 
for God's sake ! if you value your happi- 
ness, do not attempt to deceive yourself! 
while you are trifling with your wishes, 
and trying to persuade yourself they are 
not what they are, some one will slip in, 
and bear away the beauteous prize from 
you !" 

" Ah ! well, we will see," said Dona- 
ghue, carelessly ; " if I can ascertain that 
I covet it, I think I shall have a struggle 
for it ; but really that is not the case at 
present : if I could possibly bring myself 
to think, yet awhile, of any thing so for- 
midable as matrimony, it certainly would 



142 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

be in a quarter different from this. But 
see — here we are again before her win- 
dow," for, in the earnestness of conversa- 
tion, they had taken the circuit of the cot- 
tage, without exactly knowing the direc- 
tion they were going, " and she may per- 
haps hear us speaking." 

" Oh, no danger of that," replied Mel- 
ville ; " by this time, I dare say, she is 
asleep, little dreaming her Dermid is here 
deprived of peace and rest." 

" She!" exclaimed Donaghue, conceit- 
edly ; " I don't as yet know the she that 
has been able to do that !" 

" Oh !" cried Melville, " after this, let 
me hear you no more talk of sincerity. 
You, who have sighed, and sworn, and 
made more than half the belles in London 
believe you as true a lover as ever sighed 
upon a midnight pillow, to tell me now 
you know not what love is !" 

" Pshaw ! if women will not be satisfied 
without thinking they have excited a pas- 
sion, men are justified in imposing on their 
credulity." 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 143 

" Well, neither time nor place allow of 
arguing that point now, and so, to bid 
adieu to the fair saint enclosed within 
these walls — 

" Angels and seraphs, v^ho delight in i^oodness, 
Forsake your skies, and to her couch descend !" 

Mortified by the suspicion of being at- 
tached where he M^as not sure of having 
excited any interest — piqued by the seem- 
ing indifference of Miss Erin, Donaghue 
determined on keeping a better guard 
over his feelings for the future. There 
was to be an assembly, in a night or two, 
at the neighbouring town, and at this he 
resolved on putting her feelings to a posi- 
tive test ; if she could bear u«nmoved to 
see herself unnoticed for others, and in a 
great degree passed over by him, why then 
adieu to all hope of having excited any 
interest in her heart. But he would not 
suffer himself to think that any thing so 
mortifying would be the case, and, as if 
determined, if he had not made an impres- 
sion before, on making one this night, he 



144 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

devoted more than the usual time to the 
toilet. 

On Melville's being completed, he saun- 
tered into his dressing-room, and found 
him still under the hands of M*Cormick. 
— " Well, upon my soul," he cried, " Cor- 
mick must have great patience! — Come, 
like an honest fellow, speak the truth, 
Cormick, and tell me how often he has 
made you go over that mop of his, and 
got up to look at himself in the glass ?" 

" Ah, then, Mr. Melville, why shouldn't 
he wish to make himself look handsome, 
when he's going where the ladies will be 
— Miss Erin, and the whole set of them?" 

" Ah, poor Miss Erin !" sighed Melville. 
" Have you heard any thing about Mrs. 
Burros, Cormick?" 

" Why should he hear?" cried Dona- 
ghue, starting up from his chair, in a 
fright, at the question ; and, in the agita- 
tion it occasioned, completely discompo- 
sing his hair by the manner in which he 
rubbed it back from his forehead. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 145 

Melville again sighed, shook his head, 
and turned to a window. 

" There, you may go, Cormick," cried 
Donaghue, tearing off his dressing-gown; 
and, without well knowing what he was 
about, taking up the coat he had worn in 
the morning, " I don't know that I shall 
do any thing more to myself, for " 

" Why, are you mad ?" demanded Mel- 
ville, turning round abruptly ; " after tell- 
ing every one you were going to the as- 
sembly, now to change your mind ; and 
then to give me the trouble of dressing 
for nothing, for, as I am a stranger in the 
place, I don't like to stalk into the room 
by myself. But I will not allow you to 
disappoint me in such a manner ; so come 
finish your adonizing as fast as you can, 
or we shall have none but frights to pick 
and choose out of." 

" But," hesitating, " did not you say 
something about Miss Erin — that she 
pould not go ?" 

" Me ! I never said such a thing !" 

VOL.1. H 



146 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" No ! then I am sure you allowed me 
to imagine it." 

" Oh, as to that, it is not now I am to 
learn that I must allow you to imagine a 
great many strange things." 

" Then what did you mean by your ex- 
clamation about her ?" 

" Mean ! why nothing — but that how 
disappointed she probably would have 
been, if Mrs. Burros had not been able to 
procure a carriage to take them to the as- 
sembly. But how you have ruined your 
hair ! oh, it is useless now for you to hope 
to have it restored to the order in which 
it was when you thrust your hand so abo- 
minably through it. What a waste of 
time and huile d'antique has been here !" 

" Any thing more?" asked Donaghue. 

" No, I believe not.— What do you 
think, Cormick ? do you think he will 
do?" 

" Ah, then, Mr. Melville, it's yourself 
that knows he will ! I'll be bound for it, 
there won't be two handsomer gentlemen 
in the room than your two selves ; and, to 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 14? 

be sure, it's not the ladies that won't be 
thinking that ; but I'll be after having a 
peep at you there myself, for I shall go 
along with the carriage." 

The friends set out by themselves, a 
slight cold preventing Mrs. O'Brien from 
going, to her great disappointment, as she 
wished much to have had such an oppor- 
tunity for witnessing the conduct of Do- 
naghue to Miss Erin. 

This assembly was expected to be very 
brilliant, through the arrival of a new re- 
giment in the town, and some other cir- 
cumstances ; and having been announced 
for some time, the Miss Magennises were 
allowed to make due preparations for it. 
They sent up to Dublin for dresses for it, 
and, in short, quite set their hearts on 
eclipsing every one this night ; and if, by 
the aid of these new dresses, they did not 
make a decided conquest of Donaghue, 
that is, one or other of them, this night, 
they resolved on giving up all further idea 
of him, and instead of losing any further 
H 2 



148 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

time about a being so insensible, turning 
their thoughts elsewhere. There were se- 
veral dashing men of fortune in the regi- 
ment newly arrived, and if they seriously 
laid themselves out for them, they thought 
it hardly probable but that they should 
succeed in ensnaring one or two of them 
at least, aided, as their designs would be, 
by the pleasant home they had to have 
them entertained in, and they had known 
more than one girl married merely through 
that means. 

The friends arrived before them, and an 
introduction having previously taken 
place between them and the officers, whom 
on their arrival Donaghue, with the other 
gentlemen in the neighbourhood, had paid 
his compliments to, they joined them, and 
began parading the room with them, and 
watching near the entrance, to make their 
remarks on those who entered. 

At length lady Magennis, with several 
other ladies, besides her daughters, made 
her appearance, her ladyship liking the 
eclat of a large female party. The young 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 149 

ladies nodded, and bowed, and smiled, to 
every one they knew at either side, in a 
way that betokened them infinitely pleased 
with themselves, as they advanced into 
the room, through the, as they hoped and 
believed, admiring beaux, as their dresses 
were charming, and of their being so 
themselves, they never had a doubt. But 
still the queen of beauty, for so the heart 
of Donaghue styled and confessed her, 
came not ; and as the minutes fled with- 
out bringing her, and preparations began 
to be made for dancing, he almost began 
to despair of seeing her, and in consequence 
was turning from the door, whence, in- 
deed, the fan of lady Magennis had been 
for some time beckoning him, when he 
beheld her entering with Mrs. Burros. 

The heart of Donaghue fled to her, but 
his feet were not allowed to obey its im- 
pulse. Melville, however, obeyed his feel- 
ings, by darting to her the moment she 
appeared, for the purpose of securing her 
hand for the first set, which, had he delay- 
ed a moment doing, he would have been 



150 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

disappointed of, from the numerous soli- 
citors for it. 

With a sensation of envy Donaghue 
saw him leading her out, with a glow 
upon her cheek, that evinced her neither 
unconscious of, or ungratified by, the ge- 
neral admiration she excited. Mechani- 
cally then he proceeded to the Magennis 
party. 

" So you are come at last, you loiterer !" 
exclaimed her ladyship, as he approached ; 
'' had you delayed another minute, you 
would have lost her, for I could not have 
continued hiding her, as I have been do- 
ing this half-hour, for you ;" affectedly 
withdrawing her fan from between herself 
and Miss Magennis as she spoke. 

Donaghue said something of his grati- 
tude. 

" Ay, you should be grateful indeed," 
said her ladyship, " for all the pains I have 
taken to guard her for you ; and that they 
should not be thrown away, make sure of 
her while you can." 

Donaghue perfectly comprehended the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 151 

real meaning of these words, without ap- 
pearing however to do so, from certainly 
having no intention of profiting by them. 
— " Assuredly,*' he exclaimed, immediate- 
ly taking the young lady by the hand, to 
lead her to the set. But his attention 
wandered from her. Miss Erin was only 
separated by a couple or two from them, 
and the opportunity this afiforded him of 
gazing on her, and witnessing the homage 
she received from others— for several of the 
officers, from not being able to procure 
partners they liked, had declined dancing, 
and stationed themselves near her, for the 
pleasure of looking at her, and, having 
been introduced, of conversing with her, 
whenever an opportunity occurred — ren- 
dered him totally unmindful of every 
thing else ; but, at length, fancying he 
saw a smile steaUng over the features of 
^liss Erin, from finding his eyes still fas- 
tened on her, whenever hers glanced in 
his direction, he began to recollect him- 
self, and make exertions to enter into chat 
Tvith his partner. 



152 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

The young lady, however, was so agree- 
ably engrossed by her own thoughts, that 
till it was their turn at least to lead off, he 
might have continued to amuse himself in 
any manner he pleased without giving her 
offence. After the decided preference he 
had shewn her, by asking her for the set, 
instead of Miss Erin, whom he had such 
opportunities for securing for it, if he had 
pleased, it would be ridiculous any longer, 
she conceived, to doubt what his inten- 
tions respecting her were ; and according- 
ly, making as sure now of him as if 
he had absolutely popped the question, 
she permitted her imagination to set it- 
self to work, in devising what alterations 
and improvements she would have made 
in Altoir-na-Grenie, so as to make it vie 
in splendour and magnificence with the 
most celebrated piles in either kingdom. 

Donaghue, however, could command 
himself no longer than till the set was fi- 
nished, when, conducting the young lady 
to her mamma, he left her ; but, instead of 
hastening to Miss Erin, joined one of the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 153 

officers, and with him again began to per- 
ambulate the room. 

At length, after a few turns, seeing that 
Melville was called away from her by lady 
Magennis, he joined her ; and having paid 
his compliments, in rather an affected 
nianner, he proceeded to ask whether he 
might take the liberty of inquiring what 
set she was disengaged for, or if for any ? 

For the fourth set she was disengaged, 
Miss Erin replied. 

" Indeed ! I am so happy to hear that!" 

" Really !" and she turned her eyes full 
upon him, with a look of inquiring solici- 
tude, he thought. 

" Yes, for I should have been so disap- 
pointed, if, for one set at least " and he 

paused purposely, and fancied he saw a 
little flutter in her bosom, " my friend 
here," he added, " had not the honour of 
obtaining your hand for one set — permit 
me to introduce him." 

She bowed, and captain Cautherley was 
named to her. 

h3 



154 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Donaghue kept his eyes steadily fixed 
upon her, while he was presenting him, 
and fancied he saw a slight variation of 
colour. 

If however she felt any emotion at the 
disappointment of the expectation he had 
raised, it was but transient ; in a moment 
her features recovered their expression of 
smiling vivacity ; and after replying to an 
observation or two of the delighted Cau- 
therley's, she turned to Donaghue, and 
asked what he thought about the provin- 
cial assembly ? 

Piqued by her manner — the total un- 
concern it manifested about his assumed 
indifference towards her, Donaghue could 
scarcely bring himself to reply to this ob- 
servation ; when he did, it was with care- 
lessness and affectation ; but, abruptly ad- 
dressing captain Cautherley — " Now that 
I have taken care of you, Cautherley, I 
must not forget myself I have secured 
partners for the two succeeding sets ; but 
if I don't now leave you, I shall probably 
be at a loss for them for the fourth and 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 155 

fifth, which, I presume, are as many as are 
likely to be danced this evening. Come, 
like a good fellow, cast your eyes round 
the room, and tell me who you would 
choose for me." 

Cautherley laughed. — " You are not 
competent then to choose for yourself?" 

" Why I don't exactly say that — but 
then it is so troublesome; but stop," rais- 
ing his eyeglass affectedly, " that is cer- 
tainly an attractive creature in blue. — 
Adio r kissing his hand to Miss Erin, 
" I must hasten, or I shall probably be 
too late to secure her." 

But the indication of emotion he fan- 
cied he had seen in the countenance of 
Miss Erin, dwelt upon his imagination, 
and conceiving, if it was as he had imagi- 
ned, she could not have immediately sub- 
dued it, his eyes were continually turned 
upon her in the course of the succeeding 
dance, to try if he could read in her looks 
any confirmation of the flattering suppo- 
sition ; but no, there was nothing in them 
indicative of any vexation ; she appeared 



156 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

no more anxious than before to shun his 
eyes, and whenever she encountered them, 
he was always sure of a good-natured 
smile. Provoking a frown would have 
been ten thousand times more agreeable 
to him, from the belief it would have in- 
spired. But still he persevered in the con- 
duct he had decided on for the evening, 
till, at length, hopeless of its producing 
the effect he wished — led to believe she 
was either in reality indifferent about him, 
or else had too much pride, too great a 
command over herself, to allow it to be 
seen that she was affected by his conduct 
— he suddenly changed his manner, and 
began to evince as much solicitude for her 
notice as he had before indifference about 
it. 

Hastening to her the moment his, 
now regretted, engagements were over— 
" Well," he cried, " I am come again, to 
ask — are you disengaged for this last set, 
I believe, that will be danced this even- 
ing?" 

" What ! have you another friend to 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 157 

introduce to me?" she asked, a little 
archly. 

" No, it is for myself I am now come 
to solicit." 

" Indeed ! well, I am sorry you did not 
come before." 

" What ! you are engaged then ?" said 
Donaghue, in a tone of disappointment ; 
but gently seizing her hand, and pressing 
it to his bosom — " are you really sorry I 
did not come sooner ?" 

" Yes, I am indeed, for you would have 
saved me from dancing with a person I 
greatly dislike." 

" Thank you !" cried Donaghue, drop- 
ping her hand, with a heightened com- 
plexion ; " the motive for regretting the 
circumstance is certainly flattering." 

" I was not conscious that it could be 
considered so — ^but here comes my part- 
ner to claim me ;" kissing her hand, and 
rather mimicking the tone in which Do- 
nague had uttered the expression adio ! 

Donaghue was more provoked than ever 
— to have ridicule united to indifference 



158 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

was too much ; yet did he not merit it — 
had he not provoked it by his affectation ? 
and had he acted differently — had he al- 
lowed his real feelings to sway him, how 
differently might she now have regarded 
him ! and he began to regret and repent, 
but, after all, without having made up his 
mind about her, or indeed having any po- 
sitive idea that he should be induced to 
think seriously of her, would this have 
been right. Yet if he had indulged him- 
self in a little particularity to her, would 
not the eclat his attentions have given 
compensated for any disappointment of 
the expectations they might have excited ? 
in short, he persevered in wishing he 
had not decided on acting as he had done 
towards her. 

More unsettled, more undetermined 
than ever, from this evening the principal 
part of every day was passed at Mrs. Bur- 
ros's. This might not, however, have been 
the case, but that just at this time Mel- 
ville was called away, by a letter acquaint- 
ing him with the illness of his uncle, and 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 159 

his mother became particularly engaged 
with an old friend, who was sick, and de- 
rived great consolation from her company, 
so that a dread of their comments or in- 
quiries did not induce him to lay any re- 
straint upon himself. But such were the 
struggles between pride and inclination, 
the variations of humour, the inconsisten- 
cies of conduct, they occasioned, that had 
not Miss Erin been a perfect Serena with 
regard to temper, or else resolutely deter- 
mined on not letting him have the grati- 
fication of thinking he could disturb her 
tranquiUity, she must have evinced some 
resentment and indignation at his beha- 
viour. 

If at one moment he was all that was 
tender and assiduous, the very next per- 
haps indifference itself could not have as- 
sumed a more cold and distant air — now 
he seemed as if he could not tear himself 
away, then as if it was by mere chance 
he had called, and thought he could never 
make his escape too soon ; and in this way 
he went on for some time, as if he abso- 



160 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

lately knew not what he meant: but 
might not this apparent indecision with 
regard to his intentions have originated in 
lady Jane ? the breach of honour he might 
conceive himself guilty of, if he thought 
seriously of any one but her? but no — in 
the first place, he had never made any po- 
sitive declaration to her, and in the second, 
even if he had, he should have thought 
himself fully released from any engage- 
ment to her, by the manner in which he 
heard she had conducted herself since his 
absence, flirting and coquetting with every 
man that came in her way, without ap- 
pearing to retain the slightest recollection 
of him. 

Having, as he imagined, betrayed him- 
self too much one day, in order to do away 
the supposition which he might have given 
rise to this day, he chose to absent him- 
self for the two following entirely from 
Mrs. Burros's. On going the third even- 
ing to drink tea there, he was very dis- 
agreeably surprised by this lady's telling 
him she was on the point of losing her 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. l6l 

fair guest, since, from never having re- 
peated his visit to her uncle's, her return 
thither would oblige him either to give 
up seeing her entirely, or else allow his 
real motive for now calling there to be 
surmised; and either was extremely un- 
pleasant to his imagination. — " So soon ! 
so suddenly !" he exclaimed, completely 
disconcerted by this intimation. 

" Not very soon, nor yet very sudden- 
ly," said Miss Erin, " for I have now been 
here upwards of three weeks, and have 
for some days been thinking of returning." 

"But then with an intention of soon 
coming back, I hope ?" 

Miss Erin shook her head — " No, I 
have no such intention. I have received 
an invitation to a relation's at some dis- 
tance, where I shall probably remain some 
time, perhaps indeed till the return of my 
parents from the Continent." 

" Then there is but little chance of our 
meeting again !" said Donaghue, turning 
pale. 

Miss Erin made no reply to this obser- 



362 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

vation, but rising, went to the window, 
and began intertwining the gadding bran- 
ches of a honeysuckle that grew about it 
— " For our stay will not be much longer 
protracted, I am sure," he added, with a 
deep-drawn sigh. 

" Well, but I hope you don't mean this 
should be your only visit to Altoir-na- 
Grenie ?" said Mrs. Burros ; " it would be 
paying us all a bad compliment, Mr. Do- 
naghue, if you did not intend coming a- 
mongst us again. Who knows, but in the 
course of another year or two we may^see 
you again here ]" 

" No, ma'am, no," replied Donaghue, 
in a passionate tone, " that I am sure you 
will not. I should hate to return here, 
from the idea of the alterations I should 
find had taken place in my absence — 
people married — and " 

" Well, and why should you dislike the 
idea of seeing your friends married ?" ask- 
ed Mrs. Burros; " I should think it ought 
to give you pleasure." 

" Why, yes, to be sure, only that — 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 163 

that — with change of name there is often 
such a change of manner ;" and here, at 
the idea of what he should feel if he re- 
turned, to find Miss Erin the wife of an- 
other, her smiles, her attentions no longer 
at her own command, obtruded itself on 
his imagination ; and in unutterable agi- 
tation at the thought, he started from his 
chair, and began pacing the room. 

Mrs. Burros was not without a share of 
shrewdness, no more than other people, 
and, in consequence, it striking her that 
she might just as well take herself off as 
not at the moment, she began fidgetting 
about the room for a minute or two, as if 
for something she was at a loss for, and 
then quietly slipped away. 

Miss Erin no sooner perceived what she 
had done, than provoked at the construc- 
tion that might be put upon the circum- 
stance, she determined on following her. 
Accordingly, abruptly addressing herself 
to Donaghue, she told him he must ex- 
cuse her leaving him, as she had some 
preparations to make against her departure 



164 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

in the morning ; but that he would find 
some books in the room, with which he 
could amuse himself till Mrs. Burros came 
back, which of course she would soon do, 
as it was near the hour for tea. 

Without appearing to have heard this 
observation — " And so this is the concern 
you feel at our approaching separation !" 
cried Donaghue, interposing between her 
and the door ; " to leave me without evin- 
cing the slightest regard about my feelings 
— without giving me the least hope of 
coming back." 

" Coming back !'* repeated Miss Erin, 
with a laugh; " and for what should I 
come back ? or why, at least, should you 
desire it, since you say your own stay 
here will not be much longer, except in- 
deed you wish me to return to have me 
exclaim — 

' The fields, the woods, the streams remain, 
But Damon here I seek in vain.'' 

" No, not on that account," cried Do- 
naghue, half laughing ; " no, insensible 
girl, not on that ; but there is no use in 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 165 

contending mth destiny ; you are my fate, 

and " as he spoke he suddenly caught 

her in his arms, and ere she had power to 
make the slightest resistance to the at- 
tempt, impressed a fervent kiss upon her 
beauteous lips. 

Glowing with indignant blushes, she at 
length burst from him, and — " What has 
provoked this conduct, Mr. O'Brien ?" she 
angrily demanded ; " what in mine has 
led you so entirely to forget the respect 
due to me on my own account, as well as 
on your mother's ?" 

" If I have offended," cried Donaghue, 
in extreme confusion, " thus I deprecate 
your anger ;" and he attempted to throw 
himself at her feet, but she prevented him 
— " No, no," she exclaimed, retreating, 
" this is idle, this is ridiculous — what am 
I to infer from your conduct ?" 

" That my heart, my very life, is de- 
voted to you ! that it rests with you to 
render me the happiest or the most miser- 
able of men." 



166 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE* 

" I am sorry for it," said Miss Erin^ 
with forced calmness, " for " 

She threw herself upon a seat, and mo* 
tioned him to take one; but for a few 
minutes emotion such as he had never be- 
fore seen her in — such as he had once 
doubted her being capable of feeling — 
obliged her to avert her face from him, 
and rendered her unable to speak ; then, 
evidently making an effort to collect and 
recover herself — " For the sentiments that 
led to your recent declaration," she said, 
" I must thank you ; but thanks are the 
only return I can make for them. Nay, 
start not away — to prevent what must be 
unavailing, I wish to be explicit. What 
woman of common pride or delicacy, al- 
low me to ask, could think of accepting 
addresses, preceded by no effort to win 
her esteem, to conciliate her affections, 
but tendered in such a manner as to indi- 
cate a conviction, that, paid as they might 
be, they would not be rejected ?" 

" Good God ! and of such indelicacy do 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 16T 

you accuse me?" demanded the greatly- 
agitated Donaghue, reddening to the very- 
temples. 

" Do I ! review your conduct, and then 
see whether your own heart will not also 
do so. Yes, I accuse you of acting so, 
as to intimate a belief that, if once you 
could make up your mind about me, you 
had no other difficulty to overcome ; for, 
permit me to ask, before this evening, 
what intimation was there of any prefer- 
able attachment? — a proof that you were 
at once undecided and confident — unde- 
termined how you might yet like to act 
with regard to me, but at the same time 
with a conviction on your mind, that if 
you at length chose to avow yourself 
my lover, you need not fear the want of 
any previous attention occasioning you 
any disappointment. In giving way to 
such confidence, you entirely forgot who 
I was, and what I was; but your doing 
so has never for an instant made me 
do so myself. I am not one of those 
vain creatures that desire a dangling 



168 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

lover, or would derive any gratification 
from exhibiting a conquest ; but I repel 
the idea of having it thought I could, un- 
sought, be won ! I should indeed be for- 
getful of what was due to my sex — to 
myself — to my connexions, if I could pos- 
sibly justify such a one by my conduct; 
but, no — even though it had been possible 
I could have bestowed my regard without 
any effort having been made to obtain it, 
yet still would I have spurned your ofifer 
with the same disdain I now do." 

" Spurned !" repeated Donaghue, with 
his cheek again flushing to the deepest 
crimson. 

« Yes — the expression may be strong, 
and I regret being impelled to use such a 
one to the son of Mrs. O'Brien ; but if my 
language wounds your ear, how has your 
conduct," and her voice faltered a little, 
" wounded my feelings ! To be uncon- 
trolled master of your actions with regard 
to me, and yet to — to treat me in such a 

manner ! to " and, spite of her efforts 

to suppress them, a shower of tears burst 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 169 

from her brilliant eyes ; " but, no matter," 
rising from her chair in extreme agitation, 
as she covered her face with her handker- 
chief, " you have given me an opportunity 
of fully explaining myself; and, from this 
hour let this scene be forgotten, for not 
for any consideration would I have us the 
cause of any coolness, any breach in the 
friendship that has so long existed between 
our mothers; should we therefore meet 
again," again her voice for a moment hesi- 
tated, " let it be without any appearance 
of pique or resentment." 

" Resentment !" cried Donaghue, dis- 
tractedly striking his forehead ; " oh that 
I could hope it might ! but no — you give 
me no hope — you drive me to despair! 
oh ! if you could look into my heart at 
this moment — if you could see the feel- 
ings with which your reproaches, worse 
than daggers, have transfixed it — I think 
you might — you must " 

" Hush !" interrupted Miss Erin, " I 
think I hear Mrs. Burros coming ; don't 

VOL. I. I 



170 TRADITION OF THE CASTI.E. 

let her see you in this agitation. I may 
not be able to come down to tea ; lest I 
should not, accept my farewell now, and 
with it my wishes for your happiness. I 
regret not being able to take a personal 
leave of Mrs. O'Brien ; could I have put 
off returning, I should have done so for 
that purpose, but I shall write to explain 
this to her myself Adieu !" and kissing 
her hand to him, she vanished from his 
sight. 

But in what a state of mind did she 
leave him ! He listened, and fancying he 
heard, as she had asserted, Mrs. Burros ap- 
proaching, he snatched up his hat, and 
sprung through the window to avoid her, 
for he was distracted, unable to regain any 
immediate command over himself, and 
dashed forward, over brook, through briar, 
without knowing or caring whither, till 
he found himself at a considerable distance 
from the cottage ; he then slackened his 
pace, to try and collect himself, but how 
vain the effort ! his mind was all a chaos ; 
he had not only to deplore the loss of the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 171 

only woman he had ever loved, but to 
deplore its being through his own egregi- 
ous folly and insolent presumption. Had 
it been through the interv^ention of arbi- 
trary friends, or any of those common ob- 
stacles that so frequently impede the hap- 
piness of united hearts, he still might have 
found consolation under the circumstance, 
from the belief of her esteem and regard ; 
but with the conviction of what it was 
owing to, how unendurable the anguish 
it occasioned ! Surely he must have been 
mad, utterly deprived of reason at the 
time, or he could not have thought of 
actincr as he had done — could not have so 
entirely forgot, as she had observed, what 
was due to her — to her who, from so many 
united considerations, her rank in life, her 
beauty, her accomplishments, v/as entitled 
to such deference, such admiration, and 
respect. To treat her as if he was an east- 
ern tyrant, and she a creature of his ha- 
rem, whom it was only requisite to sig- 
nify his pleasure to, to have at his com- 
I 2 



172 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

mand — no wonder she spurned him. The 
more he reviewed his conduct, the more 
he admired the proper sense of dignity 
that had made her do so, and assert her- 
self. He stamped, he raved, at the idea 
of the light in which she must consider 
him ; but why had he allowed her to leave 
him, till he had made a further effort to 
appease her offended pride ? but how use- 
less would have been the effort ! he was 
convinced she was not to be forced into 
any thing she disliked. 

Would that he had never come over ! 
he franticly exclaimed; yet might not 
happiness, far beyond his deserts, have 
been the result, predisposed as was Miss 
Erin to like him, through the influence 
of her mother, but through his own con- 
duct, the arrogant, the overweening idea 
he had allowed himself to imbibe of his 
own pretensions, and the false prejudices 
he had given way to; his mother, his 
friend, had warned him of what would 
probably be the consequences of these, but 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 173 

he had scoffed at the warning till it was 
too late. 

He continued wandering about, utterly- 
regardless of the approach of night, or per- 
haps unconscious of it, for his mind was 
in a complete fever. The light in which 
Miss Erin had forced him to contemplate 
himself was not passively to be endured, 
and he continued straying about, as if he 
hoped by motion to lose the keen sense of 
agony that oppressed him. Had his mo- 
ther been at home, a fear of creating her 
uneasiness might have occurred to recall 
him to recollection, but at the earnest re- 
quest of the sick friend already mentioned, 
she was gone to pass a few days with her, 
so there was nothing to do so. 

At length, utterly exhausted by emo- 
tion, he plunged amidst the thickets at 
the entrance of the pass to the castle, and 
threw himself upon the grass. Here, on 
this very spot, had the fair Eveleen, but a 
few nights before, on her way back to 
Mrs. Burros's, paused, leaning on his arm, 
to listen to the rolling of the torrent be- 



174 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

low, and gaze upon the sparkling host of 
heaven, with the queen of the silver bow, 
riding to her highest noon, and pouring 
down a flood of glory on this nether scene. 
But never more should he feel the soft 
pressure of her hand upon his arm — never 
more should he hear the music of her voice — 
never more have an opportunity of gazing 
on that angelic countenance, declaring her 
but a descended spirit from the bright re- 
gions she contemplated. No — or if he 
did, it would be but to see those lovely 
eyes beaming with tenderness on another 
— to see another entitled to her endear- 
ments, her caresses ! and at the madden- 
ing thought he again struck his burning 
forehead, and pressed his writhing form 
against the earth, as if he had wished to 
force an opening in it to hide himself; and 
here the morning might have found him, 
but for his faithful Cormick, who, on the 
waning of the night without bringing him, 
became so alarmed as to set out in quest 
of him. 

Donaghue was new to vexation, or af- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 175 

fliction of any kind, and he bore the first 
experience of either with all the impa- 
tience natural to an ardent teraper yet un- 
disciplined by trials. The period was to 
come, in which he would be quiescent un- 
der them, and yield without struggling 
to what seemed to be his destiny. 

Cormick, like his countrymen in gene- 
ral, and indeed most men of his age and 
complexion, was a great admirer of the 
fair, and Miss Caty Magloghan having 
what he called, and she certainly herself 
thought, a good face of her own, he some- 
times met her, by accidental appointment, 
in the neighbourhood of the cottage. On 
this evening one of these meetings took 
place, but not till after Donaghue's de- 
parture ; and it was in consequence of some 
information which Caty obtained the power 
of giving him, by being within at the time 
of the scene above described, between Do- 
naghue and JNIiss Erin, that Cormick ex- 
perienced the alarm we have alluded to, 
for Caty had a most excellent pair of ears, 
which a very considerable portion of curi- 



176 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

osity in her composition induced her some- 
times to use in a way that was not per- 
haps strictly correct, but which certainly 
enabled her to give a good deal of secret 
intelligence, had it been required from her. 

Brooding over what she told him, Cor- 
mick, as the night advanced, could no 
longer control his anxiety about his mas- 
ter. He accordingly sallied out, and strik- 
ing into one of the upper paths of the pass, 
instead of proceeding along the bottom, 
in consequence of a slight overflow of the 
river, through some recent rains, he dis- 
covered him, by nearly stumbling over 
him — " And is it here you are lying !" he 
cried, " on the cold damp earth, with no- 
thing but the sky over you ! ah ! then, Mr. 
Donaghue, is it wanting to be killing 
yourself you are, and breaking the hearts 
of your parents ! I wonder what the mis- 
tress would say if she saw you here." 

" Is that you, Cormick ?" asked Dona- 
ghue, as if rousing himself from a state of 
insensibility. 

" Is it me ! musha ! to be sure it is ; but 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 177 

come, come," and he raised, or rather drag- 
ged him up ; " och, was there ever any 
thing like this ! here your hand is burning 
like a coal, and yet you are shivering and 
shaking as if you were in an ague! — 
musha ! Altoir-na-Grenie, if it is sickness 
we are to get by visiting you, much as we 
like you, ourselves wishes we had never 
come back to you." 

Leaning on his arm, for his frame was 
so tremulous from emotion, he had hard- 
ly power to support himself, Donaghue 
reached the castle, where, without the 
smallest resistance on his part, Cormick 
got him immediately to bed. But scarce 
had his head been laid on the pillow, ere, 
starting up, he commanded him to bring 
him his writing-desk — " For I will write 
to her," he cried ; " yes, I will in this way 
explain what she has made me suffer — 
what she is making me suflPer, by her cruel 
scorn !" 

" Is it bring the desk to you in bed !" 
said Cormick ; " ah, musha ! what vaga- 
ries are these ?" 

I 3 



178 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

** Scoundrel ! do you dare to disobey 
me!" cried Donaghue, in a tone unusual 
with him, for, with all his faults, that of 
insolence or unkindness to inferiors or de- 
pendents was not to be numbered, raising 
himself up, as if to leap from the bed. 

" Be aisy — be aisy !" said Cormick, re- 
straining him, " and you shall have what 
you want ; but, oh, musha /" he muttered 
to himself, in a low tone, as he turned 
away to get the desk, " if this is what we 
get by being in love, if I don't keep my- 
self out of the mess, 'tis no matter — Miss 
Caty, nor Miss Judy, nor any Miss of 
them all, shall be making me lose my rea- 
son, or break my heart." 

But the desk was brought to no purpose 
to Donaghue — his hand trembled, his head 
was dizzy, and after scrawling a few un- 
intelligible lines, he bid Cormick take it 
away, and sunk back exhausted on the 
pillow; but hardly had his head been a- 
gain rested on it, when again starting up, 
and pulling back the curtain which Cor- 
mick had drawn to shade the light from 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 179 

him — " Spurned ! did she not say ? ay, 
was not that the word?" unconsciously 
fastening his eyes upon Cormick, as if ad- 
dressing a question to him. 

** Then if she did, more shame for her !" 
cried Cormick ; " spurn — spurn an O'Bri- 
en, and the very prince of the O'Briens 
too !" 

" What's that you say ?" demanded 
Donaghue with quickness ; " let me but 
hear a disrespectful word against that an- 
gel, and I will drive from the face of the 
earth the man from whom it proceeds! 
Oh, she is above all praise ! it is I alone 
that merit censure — that merit blame!" 
and he threw himself, in all the bitterness 
of softening grief, back on the pillow. 

To the great relief of Cormick, his mo- 
ther, who had been nurse to Donaghue, 
and was now almost every thing in the 
castle, now appeared with a jug of hot 
white wine whey, the principal part of 
which Donaghue, through their united 
means, being induced to swallow, it soon 
had the desired effect, that of throwing 



180 TKADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

him4nto a deep sleep, from which he woke 
in the morning perfectly collected, but with 
a heaviness of heart, a feeling of wretched- 
ness, that was not endurable. 

Again he thought of writing to Miss 
Erin ; but soon becoming convinced that 
he was not at present competent to doing 
so in the manner he wished, he finally de- 
cided on another interview with her, not 
without a hope, as he regarded himself in 
the glass, that his pallid looks would have 
some effect upon her. 

How much did he now miss Melville, 
and of course deplore his absence ! since, 
had he been with him, he would have em- 
ployed him as a mediator between them, 
and that without any fear of his ridicule, 
for however Melville might now and then 
amuse himself with a little trifling or teas- 
ing, it was only where there was no sor- 
row or vexation ; his was a spirit indeed 
as kind as it was generous — such a one as 
made him consider no effort of friendship 
could be too great for the man he called 
his friend. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 181 

But Donaghue might have spared him- 
self the pains he a little artfully took in 
giving a disordered appearance to his dark 
hair, such as he conceived likely to heigh- 
ten the effect of his pale looks, for Miss 
Erin was gone — had departed that morn- 
ing at daybreak ; and his reception from 
Mrs. Burros was so extremely cold, that 
he had not courage to utter a word on the 
subject next his heart. 

The fact was, the good lady had had a 
quarrel with her young friend, on his ac- 
count, and felt so angry with him, for 
having been the cause of what she soon 
regretted, as to be unable to receive him 
in her usual manner. Deeply interested 
in her welfare, and, like many others in 
the neighbourhood, believing that the fears 
of sir Walter had magnified the danger of 
his son, and that consequently there was 
very little chance of her father succeeding 
to a fortune that would enable him to give 
her one, she could not bear to think of 
her having refused such an offer as she 
imagined Donaghue's — more especially as 



182 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

she knew it was through a report of their 
being engaged, invidiously propagated by 
the Magennises, on finding all chance of 
obtaining him themselves was over, that 
other admirers, not less unexceptionable, 
had not come forward, more especially the 
commanding officer of the regiment, re- 
cently arrived, a man of rank, and one or 
two other gentlemen of fortune, immedi- 
ately belonging to the neighbourhood. 
Not, however, from the lips of Miss Erin 
did she learn what so provoked her with 
her at the moment, but through her hav- 
ing repaired to a room adjoining the par- 
lour on quitting it; not, we must presume, 
from knowing that it was impossible for 
her to be there without overhearing every 
thing that passed in the apartment it com- 
municated with, but entirely through 
chance. 

The reproaches she uttered, on what she 
termed her fastidious folly, Miss Erin was 
not exactly in a frame of mind to bear 
with composure. There had been a strug- 
gle that had rendered it sore, and perhaps 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 183 

a little irritable at the moment, and the 
consequence was her resenting them in a 
manner that led to a slight coolness, at 
either side, at parting. 

But hardly was she gone, ere Mrs. Bur- 
ros was all repentance for having given her 
any cause of offence, more particularly as, 
on reviewing her conduct, she could not 
but admire and approve of it. But, if an- 
gry with herself, it may readily be ima- 
gined she was infinitely more so with the 
person who had occasioned what she re- 
gretted ; her reception, accordingly, of 
Donaghue was what we have described 

Suffering the uneasiness and vexation 
she did through his means, Miss Erin 
might well have exclaimed, that till she 
saw him, what indeed was the case, 

" Clear and serene my life's calm current ran. 
While scarce a breezy wish provok'd its tide; 
Down the smooth flood, the tuneful passions fell 
In easy lapse, and slumbered as they pass'd : 
Now what a change is wrought — oh, love ! in age 
Thou art indeed a child, in power a god." 

Love ! and is it possible that the vain, 
the arrogant, the fastidious Donaghue 



184 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

O'Brien could have inspired a feeling of 
love in such a mind as Miss Erin's ! But 
were there no qualities to make amends 
for what was offensive ? no lights as well 
as shades in the picture ? or, in the words 
of the historian, was only one side of the 
medal to be viewed ? He was vain, arro- 
gant, presumptuous, in the drawing-room ; 
but she had traced him from the drawing- 
room to the cabin, and the lip that was 
curved by pride in one place, she had dis- 
covered trembled with emotion in ano- 
ther ; and could he, who had a heart to 
feel for others, to whom neither the cla- 
morous voice of wo, or the silent and 
more touching tear of misery never ap- 
pealed in vain — who even, at the very mo- 
ment his cheek was flushed with gratified 
vanity, could yet fly the scene in which, 
he was but too conscious, he shone un- 
equalled, to give comfort to the wretched 
in the squallid hut of poverty, be utterly 
unamiable? No, impossible! and was it not 
evident from this, that example and adula- 
tion, more than disposition, were the cause 



TKADITION OF THE CASTLE. 185 

of what was censurable; and thinking this, 
and previously disposed to feel an interest 
for him, and realizing, as he did, every 
idea she had formed of manly beauty and 
elegance, is it surprising that, in a degree, 
her gentle heart was yielded to him ? But 
offended pride got the better of tenderness, 
for she " what was honour knew — nor 
would unsought be won ;" yielding to its 
dictates, therefore, she left him to his own, 
with a determination of making every ex- 
ertion to banish his idea from her mind. 

Donaghue, the utterly disconsolate Do- 
naghue, had scarcely regained the castle, 
ere his mother returned from her charit- 
able visit. The moment she cast her eyes 
upon him, she was struck with the alter- 
ation in his looks, and eagerly inquired 
whether he was ill ? or any thing had hap- 
pened to disturb him ? 

Donaghue replied in the negative ; but 
his looks contradicted the assertion ; and 
she was proceeding to question him more 
closely, when the letter Miss Erin had 
mentioned her intention of writing to her. 



186 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

to apologize and express her regret at not 
having been able to wait her return to take 
leave of her, arrived, and by its perusal ac- 
counted for what had so alarmed her in 
the appearance of Donaghue. 

He had allowed her then to depart, 
without coming to the explanation with 
her he wished, for she had all along sur- 
mised what his real sentiments for her 
were, and he now repented having done 
so. Well, but there was comfort in the 
thought, that she was not gone to such a 
distance as to render this impossible, and 
she immediately set about explaining what 
she thought, and administering the com- 
fort afforded by this reflection. 

Donaghue listened to her with the most 
poignant feelings, and something like a de- 
termination to conceal from her the truth ; 
but as she proceeded, his anguish becom- 
ing too great for control, he suddenly start- 
ed from the seat she had made him take 
beside her, and with all the vehemence of 
passion — " Oh that it were as you ima- 
gine !" he cried ; " but no, no ! I have ru- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 187 

ined, I have undone myself with her, and 
to follow her would be useless !" 

Mrs. O'Brien became greatly alarmed, 
and looked fearfully at him for an expla- 
nation. He had gone too far to recede, 
and was perhaps not sorry that he had done 
so, from the relief the anguished heart an- 
ticipates, in unclosing itself to a real friend. 

His mother forced herself to listen with 
calmness to him ; but had she obeyed the 
impulse of her feelings, she could not have 
avoided reproaching him as he proceeded, 
but the anguish he evidently laboured un- 
der prevented her. To offend the daugh- 
ter of her dearest friend, lose the chance 
of possessing so lovely a being, nothing 
but a dread of driving him to desperation, 
did she express what she felt, could have 
hindered her. But at length the natural 
feelings of the mother got the better of an- 
ger and resentment, and throwing her 
arms round his neck, she fondly kissed his 
faded cheek, and bade him not despair, as 
she would try what she could do for him. 

Hardly were the words uttered, when 



188 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

a letter from England was delivered ; and 
ere the emotion it had excited, requiring i 
as it did their immediate presence there, 
had in any degree subsided, Mrs. Burros 
came literally bursting into the room, to i 
say that the packet that had brought it 
over had also brought intelligence of the ] 
death of young Erin, and a messenger from 
Mr. Erin, to conduct his daughter to the ' 
Continent, in consequence of the wish of j 
his uncle, who could not, yet awhile at i 
least, be prevailed on to quit the place i 
where his son had died, to see her ; and | 
thus was an end put to the intentions of 
Mrs. O'Brien, for, from the melancholy an- ! 
ticipations the letter just received led her : 
to form, and the announced reverse in Miss \ 
Erin's prospects, it was impossible for her , 
now to think of carrying them into effect ; ; 
and could she have indulged the idea, the | 
pride of Donaghue would have prevented \ 
her ; for, after acting as he had done to- j 
wards Miss Erin, what now would prob- ! 
ably be thought, or, rather, must to a cer- l 
tainty, of his being eagerly solicitous for ] 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 189 

her hand? and, maddening as was the 
thought of having lost her, he preferred 
the endurance of its torture to incurring 
the degrading imputation of sordid selfish- 
ness. 

He knew himself incapable of any mean 
or sordid consideration ; but the world 
must and would judge from appearances ; 
and since he could not, without incurring 
its contempt, make an effort to obtain 
what he had seemed to slight, when he 
might have sought it with honour, he de- 
termined to submit quietly to his fate, nor 
make an effort to pass the gulf that for- 
tune, smiling at one side, and fi'owning on 
the other, had placed between them. 

His mother could not but approve his 
sentiments — they were in unison with her 
own. Yet it cannot be denied, that her 
regret at what had occurred was heighten- 
ed by the consideration, that had he acted 
differently, he might now have been se- 
cure of affluence, let what would happen 
to his father ; for if Miss Erin had entered 
into any engagement with him, for which 



190 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

she had her parents' permission, ere their 
departure, she knew their principles of ho- 
nour and liberality too well, not to know 
that no change of circumstances could have 
induced them to make her break it ; but 
the smiling hour he had let slip him — the 
favouring tide to take a turn unattend- 
ed to ; and what the trials were to which, 
in consequence, he might be exposed, 
Heaven only knew. 

But it was requisite that she should give 
a truce to reflection, in order that prepara- 
tions should be made for their departure. 
They were soon completed; but, just as 
they were on the point of setting out, Mrs. 
O'Brien became so ill, through agitation, 
that she was compelled to let Donaghue 
depart without her ; and who left Cormick 
behind him, in order to attend her over as 
soon as she was able to travel. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 191 



CHAPTER V. 



" Our youth is like the dream of the hunter on the hill of 
heath — he sleeps in the mild beams of the sun, but he 
awakes amidst a storm ; the red lightning flies around, 
and the trees shake their heads to the wind." 

On the departure of his wife and son, Mr. 
O'Brien became gloomy and abstracted. 
He dreaded the postman's knock at the 
door, lest the letter he brought might be 
from either one or the other, containing an 
account of the sad discoveiy of his deran- 
ged affairs. He often cast his eyes upon 
a case of pistols, that hun^ over the fire- 
place, in his study ; but still a warning 
voice within checked any fearful idea they 
might have suggested — thoughts and re- 
flections like his one naturally wishes to 
fly from, however better it might be to try 
and endure them, for the purpose of see- 
ing what is best to be done. 



192 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Having gone one evening to the play- 
house, for the purpose of diverting them, 
he met with a friend, as he termed every 
acquaintance, who proposed, on the con- 
clusion of the entertainment, their ad- 
journing to a tavern to supper. 

Mr. O'Brien readily consented, glad of 
any thing that could delay his return 
home ; but the spirits he was wont to car- 
ry to such places he wanted. The altera- 
tion in his manner soon struck his compa- 
nion, and by dint of kind professions he 
drew from him the cause of his distraction 
of mind and melancholy. 

On his curiosity being satisfied — " For 
a man of your sense, and knowledge of the 
world, to be so cast down by trifles — how 
ridiculous ! I really should not have thought 
of such a thing." 

" Trifles ! what, a ruined fortune, anti- 
cipated privations, and the consequent loss 
of that high estimation I have hitherto 
maintained in society ?" 

" Pooh! let a man but have his liberty, 
and there is nothing he may not retrieve." 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 193 

" AshowP," 

" Attend, and you shall learn." 
Attend O'Brien did, with the utmost 
anxiety and impatience, and the result was 
his becoming a decided gambler. It cer- 
tainly was a character he had hitherto de- 
tested, but he was now enticed to incur it, 
by a fallacious hope of being able to re- 
trieve his fortune. The variations of hu- 
mour, and strangeness of conduct it occa- 
sioned, did not long escape the notice of 
the faithful attendant that had been left 
with him, the father of Cormick, who, in 
the double capacity of butler and valet, 
had accompanied him to England : under 
the pretext of his person not being safe 
(being no longer in parliament) from his 
creditors, and that of cou^-se he could not 
venture abroad in daytime, he never rose 
till nine at night, when he dressed, dined, 
and went abroad, but without ever return- 
ing till broad daylight ; and this mode of 
acting so alarmed his faithful servant, that 
he at length took the liberty of following 

VOL. I. K 



194 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

him, and by this means discovering the 
manner in which he passed the night, 
and that the house to which he had been 
allured was the haunt of a set of the most 
noted sharpers about town, he conceived 
it requisite, as an act of bounden duty, to 
immediately apprize his family of what 
was going on, and the absolute necessity 
there was for their speedy return. 

Mr. O'Brien's pleasure at seeing his son, 
when relieved by his manner from the ap- 
prehension of hearing any thing disagree- 
able from him, was truly sincere ; and on 
Donaghue's suggesting how delighted his 
mother would be, if, instead of giving her 
the trouble and fatigue of coming over, 
he forthwith returned with him to Ireland, 
he readily acquiesced in the plan, but on 
this condition, that his son, being now of 
age, should join him in a security for a 
certain sum of money he wanted to raise. 
This was unhesitatingly agreed to, Mr. 
O'Brien solemnly promising that the mo- 
ment he obtained it, and of course the 
power of settling some pressing demands. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 195 

which he had pledged his honour he would 
not leave the kingdom without first dis- 
charging, he would set out with him. The 
needful instructions were given to his at- 
torney, and no delay whatever permitted 
in the business ; Donaghue wrote over to 
his mother, to prevent her coming, and 
every thing was shortly arranged for their 
departure. 

On the evening previous to it, his father 
left him under a trifling pretext, but with 
a promise of being back almost immedi- 
ately with him. Hour after hour, how- 
ever, passed away, without bringing him, 
and Donaghue at length became so rest- 
less and unhappy, from a suspicion of the 
cause to which he imputed the failure of 
his promise, that he could not forbear 
summoning old Cormick, to impart his 
uneasiness to him. 

Much as the old man regretted saying 
any thing that could increase it, he could 
not help doing so now, by candidly ac- 
knowledging it was his opinion his master 
K 2 



196 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

had no serious intention of going to Ireland. 

" What, after what has passed !" cried 
Donaghue, somewhat indignantly, for he 
knew he was aware of the late transaction ; 
" sure you cannot think he would deceive 
or disappoint me !" 

The old man shook his head — " You 
must forgive me, my dear young master," 
he said ; " who once thought more highly 
of my dear master than I did ? and still, if 
he had not got amongst such a set — but — 
but — I can say no more than that I have 
my fears." 

Donaghue required to hear no more — 
his blood was on fire at the idea of being 
deceived on a point that so nearly con- 
cerned the happiness of his mother. Snatch- 
ing up his hat, he desired Cormick to lead 
the way to the house his father frequented. 

The old man obeyed without hesitation, 
thinking the shame his master must feel 
at being surprised in such a place by his 
son, would be likely to have a salutary 
effect on him. 

On reaching it, Donaghue, after a few 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 197 

forms, perhaps a little artifice, obtained 
admission. On entering the room he was 
introduced into, the first person he beheld 
was his unfortunate father, evidently in a 
state that rendered him incapable of any 
thing like cool judgment, and surrounded 
by a set of fellows, whose looks and ap- 
pearance altogether proclaimed their avo- 
cation ; the scene filled Donaghue with 
horror and disgust, and had he been un- 
interested in it, he would instantly have 
withdrawn with abhorrence. 

Several minutes elapsed, during which 
he made observations that would hardly 
allow of his maintaining any command 
over his temj>er, ere his father noticed him ; 
when at length he did, not even the state 
he was in could prevent his being over- 
whelmed with confusion at being detected 
there. Quickly, however, recovering from 
this, in a voice indicative of the rage he 
felt at the discovery that had taken place, 
he demanded of Donaghue what his busi- 
ness was there, and how he had presumed. 



198 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

as his following him thither indicated be- 
ing the case, to watch his movements ? 

Donaghue appeared not to hear the ques- 
tion, but began at once, soothingly and 
respectfully, to try and persuade him to re- 
turn home. Persuasion however was use- 
less, and only served still further to irri- 
tate him ; Donaghue, however, was deter- 
mined that nothing should induce him to 
leave the place without him, or lose sight 
of him for an instant. 

At length, seeing him depositing a sum 
of money that it was madness to risk, 
he could not forbear exclaiming against 
such conduct. Unfortunately for him, 
while remonstrating, his father threw, and 
lost, and in absolute frenzy at having done 
so, he started up, and seizing a stick that 
lay beside him in a corner, made a violent 
push with it at his son, in order to get 
him from his chair, and in so doing plung- 
ed a sword into his body, for in this way 
one had been smuggled into the gambling- 
room, so contrived as on the slightest pres- 
sure at the top, or shaking of the stick, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 199 

to dart out with a velocity that gave re- 
sistless force to it. 

Donaghue staggered back a few paces, 
and fell to the ground. The gamesters, in 
terrible consternation, instantly extinguish- 
ed the lights, and fled, leaving the unfor- 
tunate youth weltering in his gore. 

Expecting every moment the return of 
father and son, Cormick thought not of 
retiring to repose ; but when, contrary to 
his expectations, hour after hour passed 
away without bringing them, his uneasi- 
ness became SO- great, that he could no 
longer refrain from repairing to the gam- 
ing-house. Day was by this time just dim- 
ly breaking, and on reaching it, he could 
scarcely doubt, from being unable to dis- 
cover the smallest glimpse of hght in it, 
that it was shut up, yet elsewhere he knew 
not to seek or inquire after his masters. 

While in extreme perplexity, consider- 
ing what he should do, he was accosted by 
a watchman's inquiring what was the mat- 
ter ? Cormick candidly informed him, up- 
on which the other advised him, since he 



200 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

had taken the trouble of coming, not to 
mind the place appearing to be shut up, 
but to try and obtain the information he 
required at it. 

Accordingly Cormick proceeded to 
knock, but on raising the knocker the door 
gave way, instead of being barricadoed, 
being left merely a-jar, owing, no doubt, 
to the confusion of the affrighted wretches 
that had been within. 

Convinced by this that there was some- 
thing or other wrong there, the watchman 
had no hesitation in entering the house 
with him. They listened and called, but 
no one replied, nor could they hear the 
slightest movement. After examining all 
the lower apartments, they proceeded up 
stairs, and here, in the first room they 
turned into, amidst heaps of cards, and 
overturned chairs and tables, for in the 
hurry of escape nothing was attended to, 
Donaghue was discovered drenched in his 
blood. The horror of this sight complete- 
ly suspended the faculties of the old man ; 
he was dropping on the floor, when the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 201 

watchman called out to him to take cou- 
rage, for he had examined the body, and 
found there was life still in it. Other as- 
sistance was immediately procured, and 
Donaghue conveyed home, where surgi- 
cal aid was of course obtained without de- 
lay, and poor Cormick rescued from abso- 
lute despair, by an assurance that the chief 
danger to be apprehended from what had 
happened was ftx)m loss of blood. 

But where was his unhappy master all 
this time? anxiety for the son could not 
for an instant supersede the anxiety he felt 
about the father, and in agony of mind 
not to be described, he persevered in his 
inquiries after him, aided by the officers 
of the different police establishments, but 
all without avail. But as if this was not 
enough to distract him, he knew not what 
excuse was to be made to his mistress, for 
being disappointed of seeing her husband 
and son as soon as she expected. At length 
it occurred to him to leave it to his son to 
frame one, and to whom he forthwith accord- 



202 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ingly wrote, transmitting to him of course 
the particulars of all that had happened, 
and acquainting him with the cruel incer- 
titude he remained in concerning the fate 
of his master. 

In the hopes inspired of Donaghue's re- 
covery he was not deceived — even sooner 
than he had expected he was proclaimed out 
of danger. No sooner was Donaghue suf- 
ficiently recovered to recollect every thing, 
than his first inquiry was after his father. 

Cormick, well aware of the fatal effect 
which a disclosure of the truth might have 
upon him, assured him he was well, but 
that his agitation was so great whenever 
he entered the chamber, that by the ad- 
vice of the surgeon, lest it should be any 
disturbance to him (Donaghue), he had 
exerted himself to keep him from it. All 
things considered, Donaghue could not 
wonder at this, and for the present indeed 
conceived it better they should be kept 
apart. 

Cormick could not but be curious to 
know how he came by his wound. Dona- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 203 

ghue satisfied him in a way that led him 
wide of the mark. Completely imposed 
on by the old man, he was continually 
sending the kindest messages by him to 
his father— assurances that he had no doubt 
he should soon be able to set off for Altoir- 
na-Grenie, and that he hoped he would 
take care that no want of health or spirits 
on his side should delay the journey. 

Poor Cormick's emotion at receiving 
these messages w^as often so great, as to 
oblige him to hurry from the room, lest of 
betraying prematurely the deception he 
had practised. 

At length Donaghue w^as able to leave 
his bed, but the joy Cormick w^ould have 
felt at the circumstance was prevented by 
the explanation that must now soon follow, 
but as long as possible he determined on 
putting off the dreaded hour. Donaghue 
felt himself so weak on the first day of his 
rising, that he did not press as much to 
see his father as Cormick had feared. 

His faithful attendant was called away 
from him, and he was sitting in the evening 



204 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

by a window, for the benefit of the air, the 
house being in one of the large fashionable 
squares at the west end of the town, and 
his room a front one, when he saw a crowd 
of people approaching the house, in the 
centre of which was the body of a man, 
stretched upon a bier. The heart of Do- 
Tiaghue instantly misgave him ; he rose, 
and tottering down the stairs, reached the 
hall just as the bier was set down, and the 
appalling cry of Cormick confirmed the 
dire apprehension that had brought him 
thither. 

For a considerable time he knew no- 
thing farther of what passed. When he 

recovered but how impossible to give 

any adequate idea of the complicated hor- 
rors of his mind ! Yet he would hope — 
he would believe — if he did not, madness 
might be the consequence — that it was, 
as the inquest that sat upon the body 
seemed to believe, that it was by accident 
his father had met his fate. The body had 
been found in the Thames, and from the 
circumstance of his watch and money be- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 205 

ing found with the deceased, this was the 
verdict. But who should disclose the 
dreadful tidings to his unhappy mother ! 
He felt the absolute necessity of either 
breaking them himself, or at least being 
at hand when some other person under- 
took the melancholy task. This convic- 
tion induced him to make exertions which, 
perhaps, nothing else could have done-*- 
it was his determination to take the body 
of his father over to Ireland for interment, 
but not to let it be removed from the house 
till he could accompany it, which, from 
the weak state he was still in, he did not 
think could possibly be the case for a few 
days. 

Cormick no sooner understood what his 
determination was, than, with tears roll- 
ing down his furrowed cheeks — " Why 
must I pain you, my dear master ?" he 
cried ; " but it is my duty to tell you, that 
the most prudent plan to be pursued will 
be to let the funeral take place without 
delay, lest of the body being arrested." 



206 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" Arrested ! the body arrested !" ex- 
claimed Donaghue, in a tone of horror. 

Cormick shook his head — " Such acts 
have been, and may be again ; for how- 
ever their legality may be, and has indeed 
been recently disputed, yet still there will 
be found people hardy enough, and bar- 
barous enough, to venture on them ; take 
my advice, therefore, I beseech you." 

" Good God ! what a world !" cried Do- 
naghue ; " what, not death even allowed 
to keep his prey in quietness ! but what is 
to be done! at this instant I have not 
strength enough to walk across the room. 
Yet supposing what you fear were to hap- 
pen, could I not redeem the body, by sa- 
tisfying the creditors that I possess — am- 
ply possess, the power of discharging their 
several demands ?" 

The old man cast a look of anguish at 
him, and clasping his hands — " Oh ! why 
then must I give you so much pain ?" he 
cried ; " and oh that it had fallen to any 
other person's lot than mine to do so ! but 
it must be told, the sad truth— your father 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 207 

has been the means of depriving you and 
my dear, dear lady, of almost all." 

Donaghue started in the wildest dismay, 
at the idea of distress to his mother. — 
" Explain ! how can that be ?" he cried, 
awakened to the keenest solicitude to the 
matter on her account — " the family es- 
tates, you know, being entailed." 

" They were — they were ; but on that 
fatal day you signed the papers prepared 
for your signature, as you thought for a 
very diflferent business, you joined with 
him in cutting off the entail, thus leaving 
him at liberty to dispose of them as he 
pleased, and of which he did not fail to take 
advantage. Oh that I had known in time 
what he was about, that I might have 
tried to prevent such a wicked act !" 

Donaghue cast his eyes despairingly to 
heaven, yet the sharpest pang perhaps he 
felt at the moment was owinsf to the cruel 
deception his father had practised on him ; 
but he was gone, and for having for a mo- 
ment thought reproachfully of him, he ex- 
perienced almost a sensation of remorse. 



208 TRADITION OP THE CASTLE. 

At length— "The cup is bitter," he 
cried ; "but since I must drink of it, let it 
be done without murmuring; but what 
is to be done to prevent what you fear ? 
for I shall be miserable if I do not take 
over the body to Ireland." 

Cormick deliberated for a few minutes, 
and then said he would proceed to an un- 
dertaker whom he knew, to consult with 
him on the business. The result of this 
consultation was an arrangement for the 
removal of the body at midnight to the 
undertaker's, there to remain till all mat- 
ters were settled for its final removal. 

Completely overcome by the shocks he 
had met with, Donaghue, on the depar- 
ture of Cormick about this melancholy 
business, threw his exhausted frame on a 
sofa, where he gradually sunk into a kind of 
sleep ; from this he was roused by the low 
trampling of feet near where he lay ; he 
opened his eyes, and instinctively looked 
round him, but the room was by this time 
involved in a darkness that rendered it 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 209 

impossible for him to distinguish any thing 
within it. 

While he was listening, scarcely consci- 
ous whether he was awake or asleep, for 
his brain was feverish and confused by 
all he had gone through, the door of the 
adjoining apartment was, by some acci- 
dent, thrown open, and he saw several, 
to him, strange-looking figures in black 
moving about it. At length they began 
to form a procession, preceded by Cormick 
bearing a light, and he clearly saw they 
were bearing away the body of his father. 
He waited to see no more — starting from 
the couch, he rushed wildly towards them, 
and, in a transport of delirium, seizing 
the pall, arrested their progress. — " Whi- 
ther are you going?" he cried ; " whither 
are you bearing the body of my father? 
It cannot, it must not, be interred here, 
in this land, that has been the cause of all 
our sorrows ! that has reduced us to the 
shameful necessity of having the remains 
of my parent stolen forth from his home 



210 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

at midnight, as if that of a felon from the 
just sentence of the law." 

The violence of the transport was too 
much for him, his hand relaxed its hold, 
and he fell to the floor. Cormick had him 
conveyed to bed, and leaving an attendant 
with him, took advantage of the circum- 
stance to have the body removed without 
further delay. 

The necessity of exertion was too great 
not to induce Donaghue to make it. In 
the course of a few days a vessel was heard 
of, bound to the neighbourhood of Altoir- 
na-Grenie, and in this he and Cormick em- 
barked with the body. 

On the eve of their embarkation, a let- 
ter was dispatched from Cormick to his 
son, apprizing him when they might be 
expected, and giving him instructions to 
have every thing prepared for the funeral, 
with as much privacy as possible, on ac- 
count of the feelings of Mrs. O'Brien. 

What the feelings of Donaghue were, 
during this melancholy passage, may easi- 
ly be conceived. As if to sorrow for one 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 211 

parent was not enough, his soul was tor- 
tured with grief and alarm for the other. 
Cormick informed him of what he had 
done for breaking the terrible business to 
her, and which he entirely approved of; 
but how she had borne the communication 
was not known, no answer having been re- 
ceived by Cormick from his son, though 
there had been time enough to have allow- 
ed of one ; and the most fearful presages 
in consequence took possession of the mind 
of Donaghue. 

At length, after a passage of some days, 
the vessel cast anchor in the magnificent 
bay near Altoir-na-Grenie. Cormick im- 
mediately landed, to see that every thing 
was got ready by night for the funeral ; 
but Donaghue remained on board, unwil- 
ling to have any meeting with his mother, 
lest it should occasion any delay in it, that 
might be the means of still further agoni- 
zing her feelings. 

When the bustle attendant on casting 
anchor was over, Donaghue ascended to 
the deck. The sun was setting in a flood 



212! TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

of glory, and as he sat, lost in melancholy, 
the clouds of evening, tinged with its 
gorgeous hues, seemed to condense around 
him into the forms of stately towers, hills, 
and mountains, with a silvery river flowing 
at their feet. The mourner almost forgot 
himself, in gazing on the magic scene ; 
but, while he yet gazed upon it, it began 
to fade, and change, and gradually die a- 
way, in the cold dark grey of usurping twi- 
light. 

" What an emblem of human hopes !" 
sighed Donaghue, as he watched the ra- 
pid change ; " while yet rejoicing in their 
brightness, thus do they fade and die away, 
leaving nought but the gloom of disap- 
pointment, or the chilliness of despair, be- 
hind them !" 

But as the shades of evening deepened 
round him, the moon began to exhibit her- 
self in the east, and shed that softened 
light, that yet sooths while it seems to 
deepen the melancholy of the stricken 
heart. How beautiful was the rippling of 
the restless waves beneath her beams — 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 213 

how solemn the gigantic shadows she pro- 
duced—and how impressively did the still- 
ness of the hour accord with the shadowy 
scene she created ! The few sailors that 
remained on board were quietly leaning 
over the sides of the vessel ; and the ro- 
mantic coast was as silent as if unknown 
to the foot of man. The light fell full upon 
the ancient towers of Altoir-na-Grenie ; 
and how finely did the pale and mournful 
ray harmonize with those decaying tow- 
ers ! but the spell of enchantment was dis- 
solved the moment Donaghue cast his 
eyes upon them, and thought of what was 
now enduring within them, and of the 
scene that awaited him there ; and, as if 
this was not enough, the idea of a meeting 
with a widowed mother, in all the wild 
extravagance of grief, his soul was still 
further torn and tortured by a dread of the 
repose and quiet her sorrows needed, being 
soon denied her ; for, from what he had 
heard, he knew not how soon or by whom 
this, now their only home, might be claim- 
ed and wrested from them. 



214 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

His anxiety about his mother was so 
great, as at last to render him restless 
and impatient for the return of Cormick. 
At length a boat pushed off from the shore 
— and Cormick presently after stepping 
into the vessel, acquainted him that every 
thing was ready for the interment, and 
matters managed in such a way, as he 
might be sure would prevent any disagree- 
able gathering. 

" But my mother ?" demanded the agi- 
tated youth, " what of my mother?" 

The old man, half averting his face, tried 
to evade the question. 

" I must be told," cried Donaghue, 
grasping his arm ; " my feelings are not 
of a description to be trifled with. There 
is nothing you can tell me that can more 
torture me than the suspense I see you are 
inclined to keep me in." 

Cormick, finding it in vain to try and 
put off the distressing tidings he had to 
communicate till after the funeral, as he 
wished to have done, now reluctantly in- 
formed him, that his mother, overpowered 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 215 

by grief, or perhaps the suddenness of the 
shock she had met with, was then in a 
kind of lethargic state, that scarcely ad- 
mitted any hope of her recovery ; for it 
seems poor Terence, utterly unable, from 
its violent effect upon his feelings, to at- 
tend to the caution prescribed in his fa- 
ther's letter, gave utterance, on its perusal, 
to such doleful cries and lamentations as, 
reaching the ears of JNlrs. OBrien, brought 
her down to inquire the cause. 

While asking, she espied the letter on 
the floor, where, in the height of his dis- 
traction, he had thrown it ; and, ere an ef- 
fort could be made to prevent her, she 
eagerly snatched it up, and, at one glance, 
taking in its terrible contents, sank lifeless 
on the ground ; in which state she was 
conveyed to bed, from which she had never 
since risen. 

Donaghue listened with anguish, that 
w^as hardly to be controlled, to this sad in- 
telligence ; and then, retiring to his cabin, 
remained there till summoned to the boat, 
that was to take him to shore. 



216 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

The moment he landed, a mourning 
cloak was thrown over him, and the pro- 
cession began to move, consisting of a few 
of the oldest of the tenantry and their fa- 
milies ; four of them carried the body, for 
they had not far to go, and wished to avoid 
the parade of a hearse, lest of attracting 
too much attention ; and four of them sup- 
ported the pall. The moon alone illumed 
their road, and they passed on with a si- 
lence well calculated to heighten the so- 
lemnity of the feelings natural on such an 
occasion. 

As they drew near the church, the bell 
struck out. Donaghue felt the toll rever- 
berate through his heart, for was it not 
the summons of his father to the grave? 
At the sound, the birds of night, that nes- 
tled in the ancient steeple, began hooting 
and screaming, and flapping their heavy 
wings about it, giving, by their dismal 
cries, a dreariness to the scene not conceiv- 
able. At the entrance of the church, 
which was partially lit for the occasion, the 
body was met by the clergyman, and, af- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 217 

ter the usual part of the burial-service pre- 
vious to the interment was gone through, 
conveyed to the vault belonging to the fe- 
mily. 

This ancient burial-place of the O'Briens 
adjoined the church, and was covered over 
by a kind of shrine, or chapel, in which, in 
former times, it was customary for masses 
for the souls of the departed to be said. It 
still retained vestiges of the purpose to 
which it had once been devoted, and, al- 
together, from its damp and decayed ap- 
pearance, and the ghastly imitations of life 
it contained, in some old monumental ef- 
figies, was well adapted to strike a chill and 
sadness to the soul, when seen at least by 
the flickering and partial light that now 
gave it to the view. 

" And oh, Death !" Donaghue could not 
help involuntarily exclaiming to himself, 
as he felt its effect upon his sinking soul, 
" dreary are thy regions ! and well we need 
to recollect thou art a passport to rest and 
happiness, to be enabled to face thy terrors 
with steadiness!" 

VOL. I. L 



218 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

But at length the mournful cereniony 
was over — " Earth to earth !" " dust to 
dust !" was solemnly pronounced — the at- 
tendants dispersed, the clergyman offered 
his condolements — and Donaghue, leaning 
on the arm of Terence, took the way to the 
castle. As he approached it, what a con- 
trast was he forced to draw between what 
his feelings now were, and what they were 
when, a few weeks before, he had entered 
it with his mother ! how buoyant, how 
joyous, how flushed with hope and expec- 
tation ! now uncertain whether even the 
shelter of its decaying roof would be his 
for another night. 

The moment he entered, he instinctive- 
ly threw aside the cloak. Terence took it 
up, and flung it carelessly on a chair. Do- 
naghue shuddered, and motioned for him 
to remove it from his sight, unable to en- 
dure its remaining in it, from the dismal 
intimation its doing so seemed to convey 
to his feelings. 

The nurse now appeared ; and, with all 
the fond solicitude of a mother, tried to 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 219 

make him take some refreshment. Do- 
naghue waved her aside, and proceeded to 
the chamber of his mother. Dimly lit, it 
was nearly as dark, and quite as silent, as 
the dreary one in which his other parent 
now slept. He stepped softly to the bed- 
side — the caution was needless, for she still 
remained in the lethargic state that had 
been described to him ; so pale, so cold, so 
still, that Donaghue could not be persua- 
ded she yet lived, till he laid his hand upon 
her heart. 

Fatigued and exhausted as he was, he 
still could not be prevailed on to seek re- 
pose. His nurse kept watch with him in 
the chamber ; but he could well have ex- 
cused her company, for she tormented him 
by her remarks. Apprehension for those 
we love, will render us superstitious. The 
night, whose beauty and serenity had given 
such augmented solemnity to the mourn- 
ful scene he had been engaged in, sudden- 
ly changed, rain came on, and wind ; and 
as the latter sobbed and moaned around 
L 2 



220 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the building, it might well indeed have 
been taken for the wailings of grief; and 
as the nurse listened to it, she turned pale, 
and cowered, and — " The Lord be merci- 
ful to us !" she cried ; " there it is ! there 
it is ! just as we have heard it, the night 
before we got that terrible letter from poor 
Hugh, that dismal banshee !" and, shortly 
after, on going to a window, to see how 
the night looked — " There again !" she ex- 
claimed, in a low tone, " see if I am not 
speaking truth — there's a corpse candle, 
moving across the bog, to where the poor 
master lies, cold and dreary enough to- 
night !" 

At length nature became completely 
overpowered, and just as the first ghastly 
beam of morning entered the apartment, 
Donaghue repaired to his chamber, to get 
a little sleep, leaving, strict directions that 
if the slightest change took place in his 
mother, he should immediately be called, 
or that, if she recovered sufficiently to 
speak, and inquired for him, she should 
be cautiously informed of his arrival. This 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 221 

proved to be the case — he had not long 
left the room ere she woke from her long 
protracted sleep, and asking for him, was 
told what he had desired. He was imme- 
diately called — but we shall pass over the 
scene that ensued ; yet was his mother in- 
finitely more composed than he had ex- 
pected to find her ; and he would have re- 
joiced at the circumstance, but for the fear- 
ful cause to which he imputed it. He 
gazed in her countenance with all the in- 
tentness of alarm, for if he lost her, what a 
world of desolation would the world be to 
him ! Her features were drawn, but this 
might be owing to mental suffering ; but, 
no, no, there was death in every glance — 
a conviction of its approach, in the pitying 
looks she cast upon him, in the eyes up- 
lifted, from time to time, in silent prayer 
to Heaven. 

Now that he was losing her, he felt as 
if there were a thousand things to be for- 
given, and — " Oh, my mother ! my mo- 
ther !" in the intensity of his anguish, burst 
from him, " what, in this dreadful hour. 



222 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 

can impart consolation to me, but the as- 
surance of pardon for the pain, the various 
disquietudes I may have occasioned you?" 

" Pain !" repeated his mother, with the 
fondest smile of maternal affection, and 
resting her feeble hand on his shoulder ; 
" oh no ! you have been the joy, the pride, 
the comfort of my soul, since you were 
born ! When dawned the day, when clo- 
sed the night, in which I did not praise 
my God for the blessing he had given me 
in you ? Yes, I have gloried in you ! and 
if my blessing, given with all the fervour 
of a dying mother's tenderness, can draw 
one down from heaven on you, oh, bless 
you ! bless you, my son ! Never," she add- 
ed, after a slight pause, " but in one in- 
stance, did you give me a pang." 

Donaghue knew what she alluded to; a 
deep groan burst from his surcharged 
heart, as for a moment he buried his face 
in the bedclothes. 

" It was my wish," she said, " to have 
seen you the husband of the daughter of 
my friend ; but, for the wisest purposes, I 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 223 

make no doubt, that wish has been disap- 
pointed. Who can tell but that an unin- 
terrupted course of prosperity, such as 
there is now reason to suppose you might 
have enjoyed with her, might have per- 
verted that generous nature, and confirm- 
ed, till they turned into vices, follies inci- 
dental, perhaps natural to youth ? Who is 
there that has not an offending Adam in 
him, that needs the discipline of trials 
to eradicate? Whatever therefore hap- 
pens, is for the best ; both our confidence 
in the wisdom of the Almighty, as well as 
our reason, teach us to believe so ; and, 
like many others, may not my son, in the 
words of the Psalmist, have yet reason to 
exclaim — * 'Tis good for me to have been 
afflicted.' Nay, has he not already, for al- 
ready, through the influence of disappoint- 
ment, do I not see him shaking off from 
him, like degrading trappings, those little 
follies that the force of example betrayed 
him into, and asserting those high facul- 
ties with which God has endued him, 
and which none can abuse with impunity? 



224 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

But be comforted, my son ; there is hap- 
piness for the afflicted — a place of rest for 
the weary. According to the laws of na- 
ture, vou must have looked forward to the 
separation that is now approaching. Death 
to me will be a relief — to you, my loss a 
trial of that fortitude, which the sufferings 
of this life render it so essential for us all 
to possess. Yet think not I inveigh a- 
gainst it. The ways of Providence are 
reckoned dark and intricate — but not al- 
ways do they appear so, in my opinion : 
like a traveller, who from a hill reviewing 
the road he has taken, becomes then sen- 
sible that more than half its perplexities 
were owing to his own mistakes, while im- 
pediments that opposed his proceeding ac- 
tually prevented his rushing upon danger 
— so few of us can look back upon our own 
conduct, without becoming sensible that 
many of our sorrows were of our creating, 
and the disappointment of our wishes, in 
many cases, a mercy." 

But life was ebbing fast, and this gra- 
ciously granted to her prayers the power 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 225 

of making the last exertion she was cap- 
able of. She shortly after gradually sunk 
away, and for some hours remained in a 
state that rendered it difficult to determine 
whether she yet breathed. On reviving 
from this, the clergyman was in attend- 
ance, and being admitted to her chamber, 
the most solemn rite of the church was ad- 
ministered to her. Her soul was now rea- 
dy for its flight — calm and resigned, she 
had confidence in the goodness of her Cre- 
ator, relying on it for mercy to herself, and 
protection for her son : but we shall not 
dwell longer on the scene. Towards night 
it was evident to all about her, there was 
very little chance of her witnessing the 
dawn of another day. Her breathing be- 
came difficult, and, after a short struggle, 
her eyes were finally closed upon the bo- 
som of her son. 

In a state of stupefaction, he was not 

conscious of this, till he felt them gently 

drawing him away fi'om the body. He 

made no opposition, but stooping down, 

l3 



226 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

impressed one long, lingering kiss upon 
the icy lips, and then suffered himself to 
be led from the apartment ; but, hardly 
had heleft it, ere all the storm of grief 
burst forth, and breaking away, he rushed 
into another room, where, closing the door, 
he dashed himself on the floor. 

Oh, vanity of human expectations! there 
he lay, the gay, the brilliant, the exulting 
Donaghue ! he who so lately seemed as if 
happiness was at his command, and with 
all the arrogance of lofty pretensions, 
jspurned, with fastidious pride, at the com- 
mon enjoyments of life ; there he lay, in 
all the agony of overwhelming aftliction, 
reft of all— of parents, fortune, hope— crush- 
ed to the very earth — uncertain whether 
another night might not see him compel- 
led to seek another place to hide his sor- 
rows in. 

Alas, poor youth ! already he seemed to 
experience the cold neglect attendant on 
altered fortunes, for minute after minute 
passed away, and yet still he lay, apparent- 
ly forgotten, in darkness and in stillness. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 227 

outstretched upon the floor. But he was 
not forgotten ; it was either a fear of an 
immediate intrusion on his grief, or else 
other duties, that prevented his faithful 
servants from immediately seeking him ; 
but when at length they came, how im- 
possible to speak what they felt at the state 
in which they found him ! 

Terence raised him in his arms from the 
floor ; all distinctions of rank were forgot- 
ten.-r-" And are you gone !" he cried, as he 
laid his hand upon his damp temple, and 
saw his eyes closed, as if sealed by death. 
" My master ! my friend ! companion of 
my infant days ! kind and blessed ! have I 
lost you for ever ?" 

His father, more collected, assisted to 
convey him to a sofa. They chafed his 
hands, and by degrees their terrible appre- 
hensions gave way. At length he faintly 
smiled, as if but half restored to conscious- 
ness, and — " My mother !" he faintly ut- 
tered. 

" Yes, your mother!'* cried the sobbing 
nurse ; " not the blessed saint we have lost 



228 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

could love you more ! but oh, jewel of .our 
hearts ! don't be killing us with grief, by 
letting us see you taking on so ! for what 
would become of us, if you were to follow 
the master and mistress ?" 

But we shall not dwell longer on what 
his first sufferings were, for the double 
and irreparable loss he had sustained. The 
last duties paid to his lamented mother, 
and informed, by inquiries made in Lon- 
don, that Altoir-na-Grenie still remained 
to him, he began to try and rouse himself 
to look into his affairs. But he was not 
allowed time for this ; a letter arrived from 
his mother's brother, general O'Donaghue, 
who, from a long coolness that had subsist- 
ed between him and his father, he never 
had had any great intercourse with, ac- 
quainting him, that, apprized of the terri- 
ble reverse of fortune he had experienced, 
he was ready to obtain him a commission ; 
and desiring, if the offer was accepted, that 
his answ^er might be given in person, as his 
regiment was under orders for foreign ser- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 229 

vice, so that a moment was not to be lost 
in arranging the business. 

That Donaghue had no hesitation in ac- 
cepting this offer, will readily be believed, 
when it is known that he had had in con- 
templation to volunteer into the service. 
He could not but rejoice at leaving a 
neighbourhood where every thing was cal- 
culated to keep alive his sorrows. Every 
where he missed the dear departed — and 
here was continually recalled the recollec- 
tion of that conduct, that had impressed 
him with eternal shame ; but for it, how 
different might now his situation have 
been! what a companion might he now 
have had, to supply the place, to compen- 
sate the loss of her he mourned ! what 
friends to participate in his sorrows, and 
sooth them by their sympathy ! but the 
punishment it met with was just, and he 
would not repine. 

The Cormicks were to remain at Altoir- 
na-Grenie, but there were two or three 
other servants he was obliged to part with ; 
for though Altoir-na-Grenie remained to 



280 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

him, its value was now indeed trifling. He 
wished to see them provided for before he 
left the place, but was at a loss what steps 
to take for the purpose, from having scarce- 
ly any acquaintance in the neighbourhood, 
for, from the fastidiousness of his former 
conduct, none now intruded on his sor- 
rows ; he ranged through his desolate 
courts, his ancient halls, without a voice to 
hail him. A few cold inquiries were sent 
to the castle, but evidently more out of 
respect to the deceased, than regard to him. 
He felt the general neglect acutely ; who 
can experience any thing of the kind with- 
out pain ? but it was a relief to his heart, 
to think that his not receiving a visit from 
Mr. Erin was, perhaps, alone owing to his 
having departed for the Continent with his 
niece. 

At length it occurred to him, that 
through the Magennises he might perhaps 
be able to procure situations for those of 
the establishment at Altoir-na-Grenie he 
was compelled to part with ; and there he 
accordingly decided on calling, from feel- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 231 

ing he had a claim for obligation on them. 
It is true sir Ulick had never called, but 
then he knew the baronet was not well a- 
dapted to pay a visit of condolence, and to 
the consciousness of this he chose to attri- 
bute not seeing him. 

But he was a little mistaken ; his for- 
tune had not experienced a greater reverse 
than their feelings towards him ; or, rather, 
one was the consequence of the other; 
and nothing could exceed their mutual 
gratulations, at the idea of having escaped 
forming any connexion with him. 

" Heavens ! what a thing it would have 
been," lady Magennis exclaimed, ** had Se- 
lina given any encouragement to his pas- 
sion r 

Here there was a slight titter from the 
two other young ladies. 

** The devil !** cried sir Ulick, as he walk- 
ed about the room ; " to have had a young 
brood of the blood royal of king Boru here 
to provide for, when there is such difficul- 
ty, as it is, in managing matters !" 

" Abominable ! upon my honour, sir UU 



232 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ick ; you quite provoke me by these con- 
stant allusions of yours to what is unplea- 
sant. I suppose, some day or other, we 
shall hear you publicly blurting out some- 
thing of the kind ; and a fine way it will 
be of advancing the interests of your 
daughters. There is colonel Mackenzie 
thinking seriously of Selina, I am certain ; 
but not, you may be sure," and her lady- 
ship was perfectly correct in the assertion, 
for the colonel was, in every sense of the 
word, an old soldier, " because he thinks 
you want the power of giving her a hand- 
some fortune." 

" Stuff!" exclaimed sir Ulick ; " upon 
my soul, my lady, one would suppose you 
thought no one had any brains but your- 
self!" 

" Well, but," interrupted one of the 
young ladies, " I wonder what Mr. Dona- 
ghue means to do with himself? whether 
to establish himself at Altoir-na-Grenie — 
that is, provided he can keep it — or return 
to London ?" 

" Oh, pooh ! not return to London, I 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 233 

dare say ; for, you may be sure, it was all 
up with him there before he came over 
here ; for, indeed, it is now evident his 
coming over with his mother was on a spe- 
culating plan : and how slily lady Jane 
managed not to entangle herself with him ; 
and Miss Erin too, in following her ex- 
ample, notwithstanding the pains his mo- 
ther artfully took to draw her into a con- 
nexion with him, though knowing the re- 
covery of young Erin was hopeless. Abo- 
minable ! really I have not patience with 
such art and such scheming ; but I have 
always found your sanctified kind of people 
the deepest. 'Tis positively enough to give 
one the same distaste to sentiment that sir 
Peter Teazle has ; stay or go, however, it 
must be all one to us, for as no eclat can now 
be derived from his acquaintance, I shall 
certainly cut it." 

The words were hardly uttered ere the 
door was thrown open, and he was an- 
nounced. Uncertain what he might have 
heard, the confusion his unexpected ap- 



234 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

pearance occasioned, rendered the first ci- 
vilities to him overstrained. 

" My dear fellow !" was the exclamation 
of the baronet, " I — I am so glad to — to 
see you out again ! We — we were just 
speaking of you ; and expressing our hope 
that — that you might settle amongst us — 
that we might have the power of " 

" Ridiculous ! ' cried lady Magennis, in 
a moment restored to herself, and fearful 
of letting sir Ulick proceed, lest a credit 
might be given to his professions, that 
might render the young man troublesome. 

The tone in which the exclamation was 
uttered drew the eyes of Donaghue upon 
her ; and from her he turned them on the 
young ladies, who, demurely seated toge- 
ther, looked like so many figures in an ex- 
hibition ; and, altogether, so great an al- 
teration appeared in the manner of the par- 
ty, that a surmise began to be formed that 
would have given a pang, had there been 
any esteem in the case ; but, as it was, he 
could not altogether help feeling one, 
when he thought of those whom he had 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 235 

neglected for such beings — the time he had 
trifled away with them, and the slights 
they had influenced him to shew^ to others. 
But he would not judge hastily — he might 
be mistaken ; and, accordingly, checking 
a rising sensation of contempt, he proceed- 
ed, after answering a few vague questions, 
to mention to sir Ulick that his visit was 
for the purpose of asking him a favour. 

Sir Ulick changed colour ; there was but 
one favour he could think of his wanting 
to ask, and that was the one, of all others, 
he was the least inclined to grant to any 
one. It is true he had the power of re- 
fusing, and refuse he certainly intended ; 
but then, in the present instance, an awk- 
wardness would attend the circumstance, 
that was rather disagreeable, and embar- 
rassing to his imagination ; for sir Ulick, 
placing much greater confidence in the sih- 
cerity of his friends than they certainly 
placed in his, had no hesitation in apply- 
ing to them, when any way particularly 
inconvenienced for certain little aids. Do- 
naghue was amongst the number of those 



236 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

whom be had often honoured in this way ; 
and though, from his carelessness, he was 
not certain whether he would actually re- 
member whether these loans were return- 
ed or not, yet that he would not forget 
his having obliged him with them, he was 
certain, and having a right in consequence 
to call upon him for a kindness. 

Ingratitude is so debasing, that even the 
very meanest of the mean shrink from be- 
ing detected of it ; accordingly, poor sir 
Ulick felt himself in a most distressing di- 
lemma. Something, however, must be 
said, though nothing was done, and ac- 
cordingly he began to stammer out the hap- 
piness it would afford him to attend to any 
request of Mr. O'Brien's ; but that " there 
was such difficulty in getting in the rents, 
threatening one with fire and sword, as 
these cursed Irish tenants did, if any coer- 
cive measures were had recourse to, that — 
that really " 

While at a loss to say what, the door 
opened, and a footman entered, to say Tha- 
dy Macguire was quite impatient for a re- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 237 

ceipt for the two hundred pounds he had 
just sent up to his honour. 

Was ever any thing so mal-a-propos f 
Sir Ulick turned round, and gave the poor 
fellow a look, that certainly, if it had had 
the intended effect, would have annihila- 
ted him. 

He was proof however to it, and was 
proceeding to repeat his message, when 
the baronet commanded him, in an exalt- 
ed tone, out of the room. — " The blunder- 
ing blockhead !" he cried ; " I wish, with 
all my soul, it had been as he said, for 
then " 

" I believe I understand you, sir Ulick," 
said Donaghue, with a supercilious smile; 
" but you are utterly mistaken — my busi- 
ness here," and he spoke with a kind of 
proud carelessness, " was merely to inquire 
whether you wanted any addition to your 
household, or knew of any other family in 
the neighbourhood that did, as I am about 
parting wuth some of the establishment at 
Altoir.na-Grenie." 

" Why no, I can't say I am aware of any 



238 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

chasm in our household at present," re- 
turned the baronet, beginning to respire 
again freely ; " but if I should — and I am 
sure I may promise for her ladyship " 

" Oh, assuredly !" she carelessly replied ; 
" but I protest I think I hear colonel Mac- 
kenzie's voice in the drawing-room," rising, 
as did also the young ladies. " Good bye, 
Mr. O'Brien : I shan't press you to stay, 
as, I dare say, a large party would not be 
agreeable to your feelings at present; but 
some other time, if you drop in, and we 
happen to be alone ■" 

Again Donaghue smiled superciliously. 
— " Your ladyship is very good!" he said; 
" but I rather imagine, some time will 
elapse ere I shall have the felicity of being 
able to profit by such goodness." 

" What, going to leave us ! May I ask 
for what place ?" 

" For London, in consequence of a let- 
ter from my uncle, general O'Donaghue." 

Her ladyship started, and betrayed the 
greatest emotion. The general was an old 
bachelor, reputed rich, and Donaghue the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 239 

only near relation he had, and whom of 
course, if he pleased, he might again make 
an object worth speculating on. — " And, 
bless me !" in a tone of confusion she said, 
" I thought you had no intercourse with 
the general, pardon me, in consequence of 
a misunderstanding between him and your 
father ; but I am so happy to find I was 
mistaken; and, notwithstanding what you 
have said, I hope we shall soon have you 
amongst us again. In the mean time, al- 
low me to assure you, that our sentiments 
for you can know no alteration ; and let 
us have the pleasure of thinking " 

" The same of mine. Assuredly — the 
estimation in which I hold your ladyship 
can know no diminution. There are some 
people for whom our sentiments can never 
alter, and lady Magennis and her amiable 
family are amongst the number." 

So saying, and leaving her ladyship to 
deliberate at her leisure, whether more was 
meant by these words than met the ear, 
Donaghue took up his hat, and made his 
parting bow, attended to the very hall-door 



240 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

by sir Ulick, and even bowed down to the 
very lowest of the steps, so profound was 
his respect for the name of general O'Do- 
naghiie, and whose figure he had indeed 
actually before him all the time he was pay- 
ing this obsequious court to the nephew. 

" What a world !" said Donaghue, as he 
was proceeding homewards ; " yet, after 
all, if we only mix with the vain and the 
frivolous, what right have we to complain 
of baseness, since we should have been 
idiots to confide in their sincerity ? I volun- 
tarily sought them, and have only, in conse- 
quence, met with what I had a right to ex- 
pect — for why should I suppose their na- 
tures would have been reversed for me ?" 

But where was Melville all this time ? 
for he was not amongst the base and the 
frivolous, the sunflowers of the world, who 
still turn to follow the rising luminary. 
Melville was pursuing a voyage to Lisbon 
with his uncle, whither, from being fond 
of travelling, the old gentleman had taken 
a sudden whim of going; and thus Dona- 
ghue was deprived of the consolation he 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 241 

should have derived from his sympathy ; 
yet he hardly knew how to regret the cir- 
cumstance, since, if jNIelville had continu- 
ed in the kingdom, he was convinced he 
would have come to him, with offers which 
nothing could have induced him to accept, 
yet it would have hurt the other to have 
refused. 

But he had yet another pang to experi- 
ence, that of parting with his faithful Te- 
rence, the playfellow of his infancy, and 
the attached attendant of his riper years ; 
but it must be done — Terence could now 
do much better for himself than by re- 
maining with him, and he could not think 
for any selfish gratification of marring his 
advancement in life, more especially as, in 
the profession he was entering, his services 
would not be required. 

Cormick bore the parting much better 
than he had expected; but this he was con- 
vinced was to spare his feelings. He 
might be reckoned romantic — perhaps he 
was ; of the many spots he went to take 

VOL. L M 



242 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 

leave of, the last was the grave of his pa- 
rents. He lingered at it, and involun- 
tarily he sighed at the little probability 
there now appeared of his ashes rest- 
ing with theirs. — " Yet what weakness," 
he cried, " to feel regret on such a subject! 
What matters it where dust, unconscious 
dust, returns to dust, while assured that 
space cannot hinder the reunion of our 
wafted spirits ? Peace to their manes !" 
he solemnly and tenderly pronounced, as 
he prepared to depart. " May I never 
forget the virtues that adorned one — the 
precepts she gave, the principles she im- 
planted ! and if there were errors at the 
other side, may they only be remembered 
to serve as beacons to guard me from si- 
milar ones !" 

Immediately on his arrival in London 
he waited on the general; and having sig- 
nified his grateful acceptance of his offer, 
the requisite arrangements were made for 
obtaining him a cornetcy. Donaghue ra- 
ther imagined it w^ould have been in the 
general's own regiment; but there hap- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 243 

pened to be no vacancy in it just then ; 
and Donagliue hardly knew how to regret 
the circumstance, from the stiffness of the 
general's manner. 

The fact was, the general, from having 
heard something of his former follies, was 
led to imagine he resembled his father in 
disposition, with whom, from the indigna- 
tion excited by his imprudence, he had 
long ceased any intercourse ; and, in con- 
sequence of the prejudice this excited, 
would probably not have troubled himself 
about him, could he have allowed himself 
to let the son of a dear and only sister re- 
main in distress and obscurity. But, for 
the present, he determined on limiting him- 
self to procuring him a commission — a de- 
termination he adhered to, though much 
struck, or, rather, highly interested by his 
appearance and manner ; and accordingly, 
on leaving town, which was in the course 
of a few days after the arrival of Dona- 
ghue, his regiment being on the eve of em- 
barkation, presented him with but just a 
M 2 



244 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

sym sufficient to provide his appointments, 
conceiving it not amiss sometimes to let 
young men, what is familiarly termed, bite 
upon the bridle. 

He had no sooner departed, than Do- 
naghue left the hotel, where he had joined 
him, for private lodgings, as better suited 
to his present circumstances, and wish for 
retirement during his present sojourn in the 
great city. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 245 



CHAPTER VI. 



** Ah ! little think the gay, licentious, proud, 

Whom pleasure, power, and affluence surround — 

They who their thoughtless hours in giddy mirth, 

And wanton, often cruel riot waste — 

Ah ! little think they, while they dance along, 

How many feel this very moment death, 

And all the sad variety of pain ; 

How many sink in the devouring flood. 

Or more devouring flame ; how many bleed 

By shameful variance betwixt man and man; 

How many pine in want and dungeon glooms, 

Shut from the common air, and common use 

Of their own limbs; how many drink the cup 

Of baleful grief, or eat the bitter bread 

Of misery j sore pierc'd by wintry winds, 

How many shrink into the sordid hut 

Of cheerless poverty. 

How many, rack'd with honest passions, droop 

In deep retir'd distress. 

Thought fond man 

Of these, and all the thousand nameless ills 
That one incessant struggle render life 
One scene of toil, of suff"'ring, and of care, 
Vice in its high career would stand appall'd, 
And heedless, rambling impulse learn to think.** 

Such were the sorrowful reflections of 



246 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Donaghue, as, dejected even to a feeling 
of desolation, he was slowly making his 
way through some of the crowded tho- 
roughfares of London, yet waiting the ap- 
pearance of his appointment in the Ga- 
zette ; and as carriage after carriage passed 
him, the splendid vehicles of pride and va- 
nity, he contrasted his altered situation 
with those of their owners. But as he 
gradually advanced into a lonelier street, 
he was roused from his meditations by 
discovering himself followed. He had 
many reasons for wishing to keep his pre- 
sent sojourn in London unknown, and, ac- 
cordingly, no sooner discovered this, than 
he quickened his pace; but in vain he did 
so — the faster he walked, the faster on his 
steps followed the foot behind. He then 
tried what crossing over would do; but still 
the other, whoever he was, was at his heels. 
At length, after having completely fa- 
tigued himself, by going up one street and 
down another, and serpentizing through 
an absolute labyrinth of odious courts, he 
suddenly stopped, and, in a tone of fierce- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 247 

ness, was about demanding the reason of 
such conduct, when, by the light of a lamp, 
he recognised the features of a young man 
of the name of Dashwood, one of his for- 
mer fashionable associates. — " What, Hea- 
vens ! is it you, Dashv/ood ?" he involun- 
tarily exclaimed. 

" Yes, it is me — my identical self!" re- 
plied Dashwood, as he shook hands with 
him ; "but a pretty chase you have led 
me, by not letting me have a right view of 
that phiz of yours at once, to let me know 
whether you were the man I took you for. 
What, in the name of all that is provoking, 
was your motive for doing so?" 

" Why, the fact is," said Donaghue, a 
good deal confused by the abruptness of 
the question, " being merely in town on 
business, and but for a short time— I " 

" Oh, pooh !" interrupted the other ; 
" didn't wish to let your friends know any 
thing about you. Upon my soul, that w^as 
devilishly unkind of you ! and I assure you 
I take it so." 

Donaghue stared at him, to see w hether 



248 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

he was in earnest, for their acquaintance 
had never amounted to any thing like 
friendship. He looked so, and he began to 
believe that he had more good-nature than 
he had once perhaps given him credit for. 

" In short," continued the other, " you 
cannot excuse your conduct ; nor will I 
forgive it, on any other condition than your 
consenting to come down to Richmond, 
to pass a few days there with me, whither 
I am just returning, my lady fair having 
established herself there till after Christ- 
mas." 

Donaghue tried to excuse himself, but 
in vain — pleading business, illness, and at 
last candidly a wish at present for solitude. 

The other laughed aloud at this. — 
" What ! you about becoming a bold dra- 
goon, and obtaining the power of scatter- 
ing double death and destruction about 
you, avowing an inclination for solitude, 
in this the very region of delight ! egad, 
that is a good one, but it won't do ! not 
quite so great a flat as you may suppose, to 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 249 

be SO easily imposed on— so come you shall, 
I am determined." 

Finding it useless to refuse, Donaghue 
at length consented to accompany him to 
Richmond, not without feeling a grateful 
sensation for his solicitude for his compa- 
ny, but, at the same time, a fervent wish 
that they had not met, so little inclined 
was he at present to encounter any of his 
former associates. 

They parted, with a promise on the part 
of Donaghue not to delay joining him. 
Accordingly, hurrying to his lodgings, Do- 
naghue put up what was requisite for a day 
or two, and sending for a hackney-coach, 
drove to Berkeley-square, where Dash- 
wood was only waiting for him to set off. 
But it is now time we should say some- 
thing of lady Jane ; and, while they are 
proceeding to the classic village of Rich- 
mond, we shall therefore do so. 

Her ladyship having conceived such a 
passion for Donaghue as induced her to 
think seriously of him, was all consterna- 
m3 



250 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

tion and dismay at the events that com- 
pelled her to give him up, for, stripped as 
he now was of fortune, to unite her fate 
with his was out of the question; but, 
grieved as she was on the occasion, the 
least of her regrets perhaps was not the con- 
sideration of the time she had lost on his 
account. One or two serious admirers, as 
she flattered herself, still remained, and 
quickly deciding which to choose, she soon 
succeeded in obtaining the proposal she 
was so anxious for, and, in less than three 
weeks after the departure of Donaghue 
from London with the remains of his fa- 
ther, she became the envied bride of Mr, 
Morley, a rich old banker, who a few 
months before had lost his wife, the com- 
panion of many a long year; and previous 
to which he had been casting his eyes about, 
from an unwillingness that there should 
be any interregnum in the reign of a queen 
over his family, for some one worthy of 
supplying her place. 

Lady Jane certainly abhorred his very 
idea, but her dislike to him did not origi- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 251 

nate in the disparity of their years ; on the 
contrary, his age was one of her induce- 
ments for the acceptance of his addresses, 
calculating from it that she should not 
lojig be troubled with him, and that, in 
the mean time, till the happy release for 
both, what between gout, or rheumatism, 
or asthma, or some of the other agreeable 
disorders incidental to his advanced period 
of life, she should be almost as much her 
own mistress as if she acknowledged not a 
lord and master. But though she could 
not think of sacrificing her pretensions for 
Donaghue, she was perfectly ready to give 
him every other proof of attachment he 
could require, her moral system being one 
that gave very extensive latitude to the 
inclinations. 

The moment she had secured the ban- 
ker, she would have written to Donaghue, 
to try to apologize and excuse her con- 
duct, but that she was afraid her letter 
would meet but with little attention, till 
the grief and distraction occasioned by re- 
cent events had a little subsided. Accord- 



252 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ingly she put off addressing him, till she 
unexpectedly heard of his arrival in Lon- 
don, when, unable any longer to control 
her feelings, the following letter was dis- 
patched to him : 



" To O'Donaghue O'Brien^ Esquire, 

" MY DEAREST FRIEND, 

" How impossible for any lan- 
guage to describe what I have felt on your 
account ! How still more impossible what 
I suffer at the thought of the light in which 
you may now perhaps consider me ! But I 
am the victim of parental avarice and am- 
bition. As I anticipated, I have had rea- 
son to deplore, on my own account as well 
as yours, what has happened. I may be 
blamed, I may be censured for this con- 
fession — ^but if I am, it can only be by the 
cold, the icy-hearted ; and how can such 
beings know any thing of the resistless 
power of such feelings as mine ! that life 
would not be endurable, under the idea of 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 25S 

having lost the regard of the only man I 
ever have loved, ever can love ! 

" My father no sooner heard of the sad 
reverse in your prospects, than, cruel, un- 
feeling man ! — why must I speak in such 
terms of the author of my being? — he 
forced a promise from me to give you up ; 
but, not satisfied with this, followed up his 
barbarous conduct, lest of any temptation 
to break it, by compelling me to become 

the wife of another, that oth«: But if 

you have ever heard of him, or seen him, 
you must be convinced that compulsion 
alone could make me yield myself to him. 
What are his riches to me? can they make 
me amends for what I have lost ? No — 

except by the hope they afford, that 

But I restrain myself 

" To let me think you give credit to this 
statement, and thus have some degree of 
composure restored to my distracted soul, 
you will let me hear from you. You will 
do more — you will let me see you, that I 
may indeed be satisfied, by receiving the 
assurance actually from your lips, that I 



254 TKADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

5till retain some little interest in your 
heart ! Oh, Donaghue ! whatever ,you may 
be suffering, your fate is still enviable 
compared to mine, for you are still at li- 
berty to indulge your feelings, to breathe 
forth the name you love in sighs, to em- 
balm it with tears; while I but I must 

not go on. 

" Should you be unwilling to call on 
me — and, indeed, all things considered, it 
might be as well you did not, since, if my 
father saw you at my door, I know the con- 
struction he would be likely to put on the 
circumstance, and the barbarous suspicions 
he might be the means of creating in an- 
other quarter — I can give you a meeting 
at my milliner's. Adieu ! and oh that I 
could with propriety subscribe myself, 
what in heart I am still as much as ever, 

" Your own 

" Jane ! 
" Piccadilly — Tuesday evening:' 



But Donaghue was not quite so credu- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 255 

lous of belief as her ladyship tried to flat- 
ter herself; he well knew the little influ- 
ence parental authority had over her; and, 
indeed, the idea of a spirited young wo- 
man, of seven-and-twenty, being absolute- 
ly dragged to the marriage altar, as if a 
poor trembling little simpleton of seven- 
teen, was too ludicrous to excite any thing 
but a laugh. The further insight which 
this letter gave him into her principles, 
could not fail of rendering him still more 
indignant with himself, for the influence 
he had allowed her to acquire over him — 
an influence to which he in a great mea- 
sure imputed-^ But, suddenly checking 

the feelings created by the reflection, he 
snatched up a pen, and returned the fol- 
lowing answer : 



To Lady Jane Morley, 



" MADAM, 



" I have been duly honoured 
with your ladyship's favour ; and, in reply, 
conceive I cannot better evince the inter- 



^56 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

est you honour me by alluding to, than 
by offering my congratulations on your 
change of condition, and expressing my 
wishes for its proving a cause of happiness 
to you. 

" Circumstances oppose my offering 
these congratulations in person ; they are 
not, however, the less sincere on that ac- 
count. With all those sentiments of es- 
teem your ladyship has a right to expect, 
" I have the honour to remain, 

" Your ladyship's devoted, 
« D. O'BiiiEN. 
" Stephens's Hotel, New Bond-street, 
" Wednesday morning'^ 



** Cold, insensible being !" was the en- 
raged exclamation of her ladyship, at this 
disappointing letter. Yet no — it might, 
it must be resentment that had dictated 
such a one, for her chains were not so easi^ 
ly to be broke, and her spirits revived at 
the idea. Could an interview be effected, 
she should be convinced of this, she was 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 257 

persuaded, and by the explanation that 
would then ensue, be able to bind him 
more firmly to her than ever ; and she ac- 
cordingly determined on repeating her re- 
quest for it ; but ere she could address an- 
other letter to Donaghue, he had left the 
hotel, without leaving any clue behind 
him by which he might be traced ; all she 
could learn was, that he still remained in 
town, nor meant to quit it till his appoint- 
ment had taken place. In consequence of 
which information, various emissaries were 
set at work, to try and discover him, but 
without success, till Dashwood was so for- 
tunate as to lay hold of him. His wife, a 
pretty fluttering little woman of fashion, 
considered as rather ornamental on a beau's 
arm in public, was the particular confident 
of lady Jane, and, through a hint from her 
ladyship, her husband was instructed to 
interest himself in the business. 

He was extremely ready to oblige her 
ladyship, in consequence of her readiness 
to oblige him, for though not absolutely 
the old banker's cashier, she still had suffi- 



258 TRADITION OF THE CASTLt:. 

cient access to the strong-box, to be able 
to accommodate a friend with a little of 
its contents, and had more than once cash- 
ed a bill for Dashwood that the old gen- 
tleman might have hesitated a little about 
discounting ; but she was not romantic 
enough, or, rather, she was too much a wo- 
man of the world, to expect favours with- 
out a return, and, but for the Dashwoods, 
she would have been reduced to the most 
terrible dilemma by his conduct; as, from 
having so much in his power to leave as 
he pleased, she did not like to positively 
quarrel with him, in taking her to Rich- 
mond, under the pretext of the foggy air 
of London in winter not agreeing with 
him, and there actually becoming so ill as 
not to be able to quit his chamber, to the 
utter exclusion of all company, as he would 
neither allow her to see any one, nor yet 
quit his room for an instant, if he could 
help it, feeling, somehow, an uneasiness 
about her, which he had never experienced 
about her predecessor, at least for the lat- 
ter years of her life. But no sooner had 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 259 

the Dash woods contrived to establish 
themselves, at the secret instigation of 
some one, in a house contiguous to theirs, 
so close indeed that the grounds of the re- 
spective mansions communicated, than her 
ladyship began to get subject to nervous 
attacks, insomuch that she was often borne 
from the chamber of her sick husband, in 
a state that totally precluded her return to 
it that evening ; she never quitted it, how- 
ever, without almost immediately reviving 
sufficiently to be able to get to her friends, 
with the assistance of her faithful abigail, 
where the pleasant party she was always 
sure of finding there generally completed 
her recovery. 

Whether she had had any previous warn- 
ing of an attack of the kind, the evening 
of Donaghue's arrival at Richmond, we can- 
not pretend to say; but no sooner was this 
notified to her, in a whisper, by the abi- 
gail, than she suddenly fell back in her 
chair, dropped of course the delightful 
book of sermons which, for their mutual 
edification, her husband had made it a point 



260 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

she should read that evening, and in this 
state was borne away, to the great dismay 
of the poor banker. 

Immediately on entering the house, Do- 
naghue was conducted by the master to a 
chamber, where a servant being summon- 
ed, he was left to dress for dinner. His 
toilet finished, he repaired to the drawing- 
room, where he found Mrs. Dashwood, 
and from whom he received a most flatter- 
ing reception. Her husband presently 
joined them, and soon after successive 
guests were announced ; and in the course 
of a short time a large party of fashion- 
ables, all well known to Donaghue, be- 
came assembled. 

He was trying to appear amused with 
the vaunted exploits of some of his former 
associates, when the opening of the door, to 
which his back was rather at the moment, 
caused him, involuntarily, to turn towards 
it, and to the almost occasioning him a 
slight degree of emotion, so little did he 
expect to see her, he beheld lady Jane 
Morley entering, attired in all the ele- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 261 

gance of fashion, and perhaps never look- 
ing better ; and she was allowed by every- 
one, that is, by all the men of ton and 
taste about town, to be a captivating crea- 
ture. Scarcely allowing herself to glance 
round the room, she eagerly approached 
Donaghue, to shake hands with him. 

Had he felt for her what she wished, he 
must have been gratified by her manner ; 
but as it was, it confused and agitated him, 
by the sentiments it too clearly revealed, 
and the strictures she feared it might ex- 
cite ; for he was perfectly aware of the ge- 
neral opinion that had prevailed of their 
being engaged to each other. To prevent 
as much as possible what he feared, he de- 
termined, since thus betrayed into her 
company, to be strictly on his guard, and 
accordingly, instead of accepting the invi- 
tation she gave him, both by her eyes and 
her gestures, to follow her to a seat, he 
kept liis station at a distance from her; 
and on dinner being announced, was about 
offering his arm to another lady, when the 
dexterous management of Dashwood pre- 



262 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

vented what he intended, and the hand of 
lady Jane was passed under it. — " Cold, 
ungrateful being !" she softly exclaimed at 
the instant ; but Donaghue affected not to 
hear her; and though compelled to occupy 
a seat beside her at table, took care to 
avoid letting her have an opportunity of 
rendering herself any way particular to 
him. 

Vain and infected as he had been by fa- 
shionable follies, yet he never had had the 
degrading ambition of wishing to have the 
reputation of a female injured on his ac- 
count; and now, when it so behoved him 
to keep his own unsullied, to avoid the 
slightest imputation of dishonour, how still 
more anxious was he naturally to prevent 
any thing of the kind ! He knew what 
the rigid principles of the general were, 
and that the least appearance of laxity in 
his would, to a certainty, occasion his 
throwing him off for ever ; and with her 
whose idea was enshrined in his heart, how 
still lower should he be sunk, if in addi- 
tion to what had already so irreparably in- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 263 

jured him in her estimation, he should 
allow it to be believed he was capable of 
any positively culpable act! 

But on his return to the drawing-room, 
he almost feared, from the looks of the 
lady, he should be no longer able to avoid 
her in the manner he wished. He saw, 
from the mistake her vanity had led her 
into concerning his real feelings for her, 
she was determined on coming, if possible, 
to what she conceived an eclaiixissement 
with him, and accordingly, in his own de- 
fence, sat down to cards, though nothing 
possibly at the moment could be more dis- 
agreeable to him ; but on seeing lady Jane 
shortly afterwards engaged at another table, 
he threw them up. By this time every 
other person in the room was occupied in 
the same way, and Donaghue having, of 
course, no one to particularly converse 
with, after sauntering from one table to 
another, at length strolled into the adjoin- 
ing apartment, and began amusing him- 
self with looking over some music-books 
that were scattered upon a pianoforte there. 



264 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Soon getting tired of this, he turned to 
a window, and drawing aside the curtain, 
beheld a scene of beauty that rivetted his 
attention. The Thames ran at the bot- 
tom of the garden, dividing it from the 
fine meadows at the opposite side, here 
and there diversified by elegant villas, ri- 
sing amidst all the pomp of foliage, silver- 
ed by the light of the moon, that shining 
brightly in a clear frosty sky, with myri- 
ads of stars, as if its glittering train, ren- 
dered the scenery partially visible.—-" How 
tranquillizing the mild light of this beau- 
tiful planet, its doubtful shadows and ten- 
der gloom ! so like the soft repose for which 
the troubled spirit pants !'* 

Donaghue unconsciously sighed as he 
made the observation — the sigh was softly 
echoed. He turned with quickness, and 
beheld lady Jane, and either through the 
surprise or agitation she occasioned him, 
involuntarily pronounced her name. 

" Ay, it is me," she said, reproachfully ; 

"the neglected — the ill-treated — the 

But did I ever think it would come to 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 265 

this ! that I should have had reason to up- 
braid Donaghue for slighting — for trying 
to avoid me ! But I see he will not for- 
give the wrong he accuses me of having 
done him — that to another cause than the 
one I have assigned for it he imputes my 
conduct." 

** I accuse you of having done me a 
wrong !" repeated Donaghue ; " pardon 
me, but you are utterly mistaken in the 
idea; — but, for Heaven's sake, lady Jane, 
consider where you are, and how liable to 
be overheard !" 

" I care not," she exclaimed—" you 
drive me to madness by this coldness ! — 
accuse me of having done you no wrong!" 

" No — there was no tie, no engagement 
between us that would justify my making 
such an accusation." 

" What, no tie between us ! not the 
strongest of all ties — the tie of mutual 
passion ! But perhaps I deceived myself 
-—perhaps, after all, your professions meant 
nothing ; and while I was allowing my af- 

VOL. I. N 



266 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

fections to be entangled, you were coldly 
maintaining a command over yours." 

" Really, lady Jane, this language dis- 
tresses me. Of intentionally deceiving 
any one, I can acquit myself. The sim- 
plest language and plainest meaning may 
sometimes be misconstrued ; but be that 
as it may, of what use now to speak of 
what it appears might have been sup- 
posed ?'* 

" Might have been ! and is this language 
I had a right to expect from the man for 
whom I have done so much — on whose 
account I have sacrificed myself to age, to 
decrepitude, to infirmity, to all that is ab- 
horrent to my soul ?" 

" On mine !" exclaimed Donaghue, in 
utter astonishment — " on my account sa- 
crifice yourself!" 

" Yes, ungrateful being as you are ! on 
your account — on yours alone — for the 
sake of obtaining the power of enriching 
you, did I consent to give my hand where 
I liave bestowed it — what else could have 
induced, could have prevailed on me to 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 267 

form such a union ? I might have been 
wedded to youth, to beauty, even equal 
to your own ; but no, I preferred age and 
infirmity, from the prospect they afforded 
of soon letting me be at liberty again to 
act as I pleased — to throw myself into the 
arms of the only man I ever have loved — 
ever can love. Oh, Donaghue ! forgive — 
for I will, I must believe, that to resent- 
ment is owing your apparent indifference 
— my conduct, in consideration of the 
cause, the motive of it ; and let us bind 
ourselves from this minute, in such a man- 
ner to one another, as shall prevent the 
dread of any further separation, after I am 
again free." 

" My dear lady Jane, again I must en- 
treat you to consider where you are — that 
there are invidious eyes and ears every 
where. Did my principles permit what 
you desire — pardon me, I have expressed 
myself perhaps as I ought not — or rather 
were you free to permit my forming such 
an engagement as you allude to, yet how 
N 2 



268 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

cruel, how ungenerous, should I consider 
myself, if, on the very eve of entering a 
profession that must subject any one inte- 
rested in my fate to a thousand anxieties, 
I were capable of doing so !" 

" Oh, this is mere evasion !" exclaimed 
lady Jane, in a tone of passionate resent- 
ment; " if you loved, you could not argue. 
No, you could think of nothing but the 
attainment of the beloved object, no mat- 
ter how, or by what means.">^x. t». 

" Indeed !" said Donaghue, with forced 
playfulness, as if hoping by it to induce a 
belief that he did not think her serious, 
and thus check these wild transports. — 
" Is not that opinion in contradiction to 
the poet's ? what says he ? — 

' Love should be pure, holy, harmless, as pilgrims' kissei^ 
on the shrine of virgin martyrs. — Holy as the thoughts of 
dying saints, when angels hover round thera. — Soch love 
should be, the zephyr not the whirlwind of the soul." 

*• Talk not to me of poets, writing too 
often from their heads, not their hearts; 
or if you give me their language, let it be 
that language that breathes of the passion 



TRADITIOX OF THE CASTLE. 269 

that consumes me. Oh, Donaghue — dear- 
est Donaghue !" and she half withdrew 
the handkerchief she had applied to her 
eyes — those, as she well knew, truly beau- 
tiful and well instructed eyes — that now, 
" like the dewy star of evening, shone in 
tears," and let her head sink upon his 
shoulder — " let me, let me imagine your 
heart now alive to that passion, or rather 
that another has not usurped that place in 
it I once occupied, and you will raise me 
from anguish unutterable to equal joy !" 

Donaghue became most cruelly embar- 
rassed. He fancied he heard a rustling at 
the door, and all the consequences that 
might accrue from her imprudence rushed 
at once upon his imagination. The idea 
was not endurable. Gently raising her 
head from his shoulder, he drew back, and 
in an impressive tone — " Lady Jane," he 
said, " for both our sakes this must be 
ended. The world must judge from ap- 
pearances, and the misinterpretation of a 
moment might do an injury that could 
never be repaired. You have my best 



270 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

wishes for your happiness, both here and 
hereafter. Should you be at hberty to 
form another engagement, I hope it may 
be one every way agreeable to you ; and 
now you must excuse my leaving you.'' 

" No, no," exclaimed lady Jane, catch- 
ing him by the arm ; " or if you think it is 
imprudent to remain any longer here to- 
gether, as least say that I shall see you a- 
gain before you quit this — that you will 
contrive to meet me to-morrow, where 
there will be no danger of any thing you 
now apprehend." 

" Impossible!" said Donaghue; " I am 
but a mortal — a mere mortal, lady Jane, 
and have none of that presumptuous con- 
fidence in my own strength, that would 
allow of my voluntarily rushing into temp- 
tation — no such meeting, therefore, can or 
must take place — on your account, as well 
as my own, I must decline it ;" and as he 
spoke, disengaging his arm from her grasp, 
by gently raising the white hand from it 
she had laid upon it, and on which he im- 
pressed a kiss (perhaps it was not to he 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 271 

avoided his doing so), he passed into the 
other room. 

Hither he was quickly followed by her 
ladyship, soothed into something like com- 
placency by the compliment implied by 
these words. He had allowed her then to 
be dangerous, and his acknowledgment of 
her being so was quite sufficient to revive 
her hopes, and determine her in persever- 
ing in her plans on him ; but an effectual 
hinderance was put to this by his departure 
the next morning before breakfast, with- 
out leaving his address behind him. 

The recent scene with lady Jane fully 
accounted for what had so surprised him 
— the solicitude of Dash wood for his com- 
pany, and the detection of his motive for 
desiring it, at once determined him on 
shortening his visit; accordingly, rising 
by daybreak, he sent for a chaise, and leav- 
ing a note for his host, accounting for his 
abrupt departure, by pleading the sudden 
recollection of business that could not be 
postponed, left the house long ere the fa- 
mily had a thought of stirring. 



272 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

The character of lady Jane was now 
fully developed to his view, and at its 
developement how did he congratulate 
himself on his having escaped an union 
with her ! Many can excuse what is wrong, 
when they conceive themselves the occa- 
sion of it, so seducing is implied flattery 
and adulation to the human heart; but 
Donaghue was not one of these — flattery, 
at the expence of every thing that ought 
to be held sacred, could not gratify a mind 
imbued with such principles as his. In a 
woman so completely overstepping the 
modesty of nature as lady Jane had done, 
there was something monstrous to his ima- 
gination ; and both from this, as well as 
that perverseness which is in the breast of 
men, more than in that of any other crea- 
ture, still making him slight that which 
is easy of attainment, and prize only that 
which is difficult, her ladyship had never 
appeared less attractive to him than at the 
very moment when she was avowing him 
to be the object of her passionate adora- 
tion — he blushed for her, both for what 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 273 

she had uttered, and forced him to say in 
reply. 

In opposition to her rose the enchanting 
image of Eveleen to his imagination — she 
who, with all the tempting freshness of 
youth upon her lips, yet knew so well 
how to correct the passion she inspired, 
and maintain and support the dignity of 
her sex. To dwell upon her idea was to 
dwell upon what ennobled and punfied, 
for who can dwell upon goodness, upon 
purity, and yet harbour any base or inor- 
dinate desires? While he felt that she 
could not think it profaned by his cherish- 
ing it, he felt that he could not be utterly 
wretched ; and how did he rejoice in hav- 
ing resolution to resist the spells that, if 
once overpowered by, would have depriv- 
ed him of this consolation ! 

Shortly after he was gazetted, and im- 
mediately after quitted London to join the 
regiment. On his arrival at quarters he 
made the usual application for a sei'\"ant. 
He found it was attended to, when on re- 
n3 



274 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

pairing to his room to dress for dinner, he 
perceived a tall, fine-looking young fellow, 
busied there in laying out his things. — 
" So you are the soldier I have got for an 
attendant," he said ; " may I ask your name, 
my good fellow ?" 

The other faced about, advanced one 
leg before the other, drew up his well- 
made figure to its full length, and throw- 
ing up his hand in the true military style 
— " Terence M*Cormick, an' please your 
honour." 

" Good God ! Terence, what have you 
done?" exclaimed Donaghue. 

" The blessing of my mother wouldn't 
have been on me, if I hadn't done what I 
have," replied Cormick ; " for many a long 
year your house has fed me and mine, and 
by that house, rise or fall, we will stand. 
Ah, then, do you think I'd have parted 
with you at Altoir-na-Grenie as I did, but 
that it was all the time in my noddle what 
I'd do? snug and easy, every step of the 
way, by sea and by land, I followed you 
to London, and there I lay till I knev/ 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 275 

the regiment you were gazetted to, when 
off I was, like a shot against a barn-door, 
to get myself enlisted, on the condition 
that I should be appointed servant to the 
new officer that was coming to join — faith! 
it's in my sleeve I couldn't help laughing, 
when at the time you were so bad on board 
the packet, and thankful to the steward 
for his attention to you, 'tis myself all the 
while that was about you. When he 
wanted to go — ' Ah, then be asy, you 
spalpeen !' I cried ; ' do you think I don't 
know better than you what to do for him, 
when, though he's six foot now, perhaps 
more, for aught I know, I have been with 
him before he was the height of a bog- 
rush r 

Donaghue rested his hand on his shoul- 
der for a minute — deep emotion impeded 
his utterance, then — " This proof of strong 
and faithful attachment binds me more 
firmly than ever to you, Terence," he cried, 
" You might, perhaps, have done better ; 
but since you have embarked in the same 
voyage with me, may to you, at least, it 



276 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

prove a prosperous one ! should it so to 
me, I shall not forget the requital that 
fidelity deserves." 

Donaghue was much pleased with the 
corps to which he was gazetted ; but ere he 
was well domesticated in it, if the expres- 
sion may be allowed, it received orders for 
foreign service, there being at this time a 
constant demand for fresh troops for the 
Continent, it being still there — " Cry ha- 
voc, and let slip the dogs of war." We 
shall not follow Donaghue into every 
scene he went through there, but content 
ourselves with briefly stating, till we take 
him to the plains of Waterloo, that there 
were few occasions in which he did not 
distinguish himself. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 277 



CHAPTER VII. 



" The dreadful business of the war is o'er, 
And Slaughter, that from yestermorn till even, 
With giant steps pass'd striding o*er the plain, 
Now weary, sits amonij; the mangled heaps, 
And slumbers o'er his prey." 



" The hunter hears the noise on his hill, and sees the bil- 
lows advancing to Ardven's shore. — Such were the words 
of Connel, when heroes met in the midst of their falling 
people. There was the clang of arms — there every blow 
like the hundred hammers of the furnace. Terrible is 
the battle of the kings, and horrid the look of their eyes. 
Their dark brown shields are cleft in twain, and their 
steel flies broken from their helmets. They fling their 
weapons down — each rushes to the grasp of his [foe. 
Their sinewy arms bend round each other; they turn 
from side to side, and strain, and stretch their large 
spreading limbs below. But where the pride of their 
strength was, they shook the hill with their heels, rocks 
tumble from their places on high, the green-headed bushes 
are overturned. At length the strength of Swaran fell, 
and the king of the grove is bound." 

" The fame of their exploits will remain 
behind, but will it console those who have 



278 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

to mourn their loss ? The aged parents, 
the tender wife, the orphan children — they 
hear the shouts of rejoicing multitudes, 
and their hearts respond to them with 
groans of anguish. That which has swell- 
ed the pride of the nation, has laid theirs 
in the dust. The beautiful, the brave — 
how many has one hour laid within the 
narrow house ! Oh, ambition ! fell dis- 
turber of the human race! how wide- 
spreading is the desolation that follows in 
thy train ! what lamentations dost thou 
cause ! through thy means how are the 
dearest ties of nature rent asunder — the 
social charities of life extinguished ! and 
for what ? for that which, if attained, must 
bring an accession of care, and can scarce- 
ly be possessed ere it must be rehnquished 
for the grave." 

These, and similar ones, were the re- 
flections of O'Brien, as he lay wounded on 
the plains of Waterloo. 

The regiment he belonged to, being 
light cavalry, had made several unsuccess- 
ful charges on the enemy, but not with- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 279 

out suffering severely ; which being per- 
ceived by the commander-in-chief, he or- 
dered some corps of heavy dragoons to 
their assistance. In some of the wheel- 
ings the troop O'Brien belonged to hap- 
pened, by accident, to be cut off from the 
main body, which was no sooner perceiv- 
ed by the enemy, than advantage w^as 
taken of the circumstance to attack them 
with the most desperate fury. O'Brien de- 
fended the little party under his command 
with the most determined courage and 
skill ; but what could such a handful of men 
do against such unequal odds ? they were 
cut down to a man, he alone escaping, but 
desperately wounded. In his way to rejoin 
his regiment, he, unfortunately for himself, 
observed a British dragoon defending him- 
self against two of the enemy; his huma- 
nity instantly got the better of his discre- 
tion, wounded as he was, and accordingly 
wheeling about his charger, he arrived to 
the succour of the soldier, at the very cri- 
tical moment just as a sword was about 
descending on his bare head, his helmet 



280 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

having fallen off, when pulling a pistol 
from his holster, he brought one of the 
assailants low, who no sooner fell, than 
his companion, seeing there were again 
two to one, but at the wrong side, clap- 
ped spurs to his horse, and was off like 
lightning. 

Donaghue, reining in his charger from 
pursuing him, turned to speak to the 
trooper whose life he had saved, but him 
also, with rather a sensation of surprise at 
his leaving him in this manner, after the 
service he had rendered him, he saw in 
full gallop towards the main body of the 
British forces. 

Donaghue was on the point of follow- 
ing, when one of the French emperor's 
aides-de-camp came suddenly upon him, 
and ere he had time to put himself in 
the least on his defence, gave him such 
a cut in his bridle arm, as obliged him 
to immediately drop the reins. Thus 
completely at the mercy of the enemy, 
he would probably soon have received 
his quietus from him, had not, at the in- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 281 

stant, a body of the Life-Guards appeared 
in full speed approaching the spot, which 
the other no sooner perceived, than he 
prepared to fly; but as he did so, either 
out of bravado or wanton cruelty, he dis- 
charged a pistol at Donaghue, but, luckily 
for him, just at the instant, his horse, 
previously wounded, and rendered hardly 
manageable by the circumstance, had made 
a violent plunge forward, in the act of 
doing which it reared, and thus received 
in its own forehead the ball intended for 
that of its master. The creature instantly 
fell, and in the agonies of death made one 
roH over bim. The Life-Guards galloped 
on, imable to spare a moment to afford 
assistance, " Death or victory !" being the 
cry at the moment, and Donaghue, power- 
less to render himself any, saw nothing 
but the former before him. 

Pain and loss of blood soon reduced him 
to a state of insensibility ; on recovering 
from it he still found himself stretched 
upon the same spot, but no longer alone, 
for on every side his ears were assailed by 



282 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the most doleful sounds of human lamen- 
tation, and completely overcome by their 
effect on his feelings, he again fainted 
away. When again he revived, it was the 
dawn of morning, and either it was the 
case, or to his clouded eyes it seemed to be 
so, that 

*• It rose slowly, as her sullen car 

Had all the weight of death and sleep upon it." . 

The scene of horror he now beheld 
mocks description. — " With what ease, 
what carelessness, do we read and talk of 
battles!" involuntarily thought the suf- 
ferer, as his senses returned ; " but that 
would cease to be the case were a field of 
battle once seen. The most callous, the 
most thoughtless, must shrink from the 
thoughts of it, were such a scene as this 
once presented to their view — could they 
but now gaze upon these plains of Water- 
loo, discoloured by carnage, and covered 
quite over with the dead and dying, the 
latter earnestly begging, but without be- 
ing able to obtain it, but for one drop of 
water to cool their parched lips !" 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 283 

Never could Donaghue forget the dis- 
mal bowlings, the dreadful screams, the 
shrieks of madness and despair, that here 
resounded round him ; a French officer, in 
particular, extended on the ground not 
far from where he himself lay, tore his 
hair, beat his breast, and raved in all the 
madness of despair for water. So heart- 
rending were this man's cries, that Dona- 
ghue, forgetting in them his own suffer- 
ings, made an effort to obtain him relief, 
by wrenching out of the dead grasp of one 
of his late brother soldiers a canteen, con- 
taining some water; but in the act of 
stretching over the body to hand it to him, 
a deadly sickness came over O'Brien, and 
he fell, apparently lifeless, on the corse. 

In this state he must have continued 
some time, for on again opening his eyes 
the day was advanced. Almost instinc- 
tively he cast them towards the spot where 
the object of his recent humanity had lain ; 
still he lay there, but his sufferings were 
at an end — his cold breast was now as in- 
sensate as the clod against which it was 



284) TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

pressed. — " But mine," groaned Dona- 
ghue, " when will mine be ended ? this 
protracted suffering is indeed to experi-^ 
ence all the pangs of death." 

Despair began to freeze his blood, for 
hope had fled, so long had he been allow-, 
lowed to remain on the field of battle ; it 
appeared indeed a place that both friends 
and foes alike wished not to return to. 

But new horrors were now presented to 
his view, by the savage depredations of 
these human furies that, like the blood- 
scenting vultures, hover about a field of 
battle. Renewed cries soon proclaimed 
the work they were about : a mortal sick- 
ness again came over O'Donaghue, as he 
heard these cries ; and as he felt his senses 
receding, he believed it was to revive no 
more : but fortune, it appeared, had not 
yet done with him — again he revived ; by 
this time it was night, 

" When nature is in sables drest, 
Tempestuous winds in IkjIIow caverns rest, 
Impending rocks with slumber seem to bow, 
And drowsy mountains hang their heavy brow ; 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 285 

The weary waves roll nodding on tlie deep, 

Or, stretch'd on oozy beds, they murmur in their sleep." 

But not with stillness had it descended 
around him; still the cries, fainter and 
fewer indeed, but perhaps more horrible 
on tliat account, that had overpowered 
him, were heard, declaring the savage 
work of spoliation still going on ; and 
what his own fate might be he knew not, 
as he saw some of these furies approaching 
him; but just as they were stooping over 
him, to ascertain whether he still breathed, 
not that his doing so would have prevent- 
ed what they intended, a trooper suddenly 
rushed in amongst them, and by well di- 
rected blows, laid on on every side, with 
no light or sparing hand, quickly put 
them all to flight. Donaghue had just 
sufficient sense to ascertain that in this 
dimly- seen soldier he had a deliverer, ere 
he fainted away. In this belief he was 
not mistaken — it was indeed his faithful 
Terence, by this time promoted to the 
rank of corporal, that had come to his as- 
sistance ; another of the dragoons accompa- 



286 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

nied him ; and between them both, by the 
aid of Donaghue's sash, they succeeded in 
bearing him to a hut, or cabin, not far 
from the scene of action, when a messen- 
ger was dispatched for doctor Rosebud, 
the regimental surgeon, who immediately 
obeying it, rescued the poor corporal from 
almost distraction, by the assurance that, 
with proper attention, there was very little 
doubt of his master getting over his wounds, 
provided he was removed to better quar- 
ters. 

How to obtain these for him, however, 
was the question, the road to Brussels be- 
ing at this time nearly impassable. Cor- 
mick pondered, and pondered, and at last 
an idea occurred to him that he hoped 
would settle the matter : religion, on the 
Continent, has much weight in an intro- 
duction for favours; the corporal was a 
shrewd fellow, and having observed this, 
determined to try if he could not profit 
by the observation. 

Not very distant was a large castellated 
mansion, belonging to, or rather now oc- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 287 

cupied by, a person of the most rigid no- 
tions with regard to religion, which the 
corporal having ascertained, he repaired 
forthwith to it, and demanded an audience 
of count Blanc. The servant seemed to 
hesitate, in consequence of his being a 
stranger, to take in this message ; but no 
sooner had he recognised the British uni- 
form, than he hastened to obey hira, and al- 
most instantly after Cormick was ushered 
into an antichamber, where the count pre- 
sently attended him. 

Cormick, having apologized for the li- 
berty he had taken, proceeded to state that 
the cause of his intrusion was to solicit 
shelter beneath the roof of the count for a 
young British officer of great distinction, 
till such time as he could be removed with 
safety to head-quarters in the city. The 
young gentleman, he further added, was 
placed under his especial care, by his pa- 
rents, people of the first rank in Ireland, 
with strict injunctions that should any 
thing unpleasant happen, he should take 
care to see that it w^as in the house of a 



288 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

good Catholic he lodged him, as should 
he die in that of any other, they would be 
miserable — " And believe me, my good 
sir," in a consequential tone he cried, " that 
even if I had not been so told, I should 
have done myself what they wished of my 
own accord, for I am myself a true Mile- 
sian, both in faith and blood; my great- 
great-great — God only knows how many 
great-grandfathers having come over be- 
fore I ever saw the light, or generations 
before me, with the great prince that 
peopled all Ireland." 

During the time he was speaking, the 
count, from beneath dark bushy eyebrows, 
that gave a peculiar fierceness to his coun^-t^^ 
tenance, examined Cormick with the most " 
scrutinizing attention, and appeared hesi- 
tating about what reply he should make. 
Noticing which, Cormick advanced closer 
to him. — " And you should be highly 
pleased, monsieur le compte," he said, " at 
the compliment that has been paid you, in 
soliciting that which we might have ob- 
tained without any trouble, and indeed 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 289 

what we are well entitled to, for having 
saved both your life and property." 

The hint implied in these words was 
not thrown away — the count immediately 
signified his readiness to accommodate the 
young officer in his chateau ; and thither 
accordingly Donaghue was removed, with 
all possible dispatch. 

The delight of Cormick and doctor 
llosebud, when they saw him in posses- 
sion of a noble suit of apartments, was in- 
expressible; and for the dexterity which 
the former had displayed in obtaining 
them for him, the latter declared he de- 
served to be made purveyor-general to 
the troops. 



VOL. I. 



290 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 



CHAPTER VIII. 



Can human force endure 



The various mischiefs tl.at besiege us round ?" 

It must appear strange that Donaghue 
should have been allowed to continue so 
long apparently forgotten on the field of 
battle, amongst the dead and dying, so at 
least thought Cormick, and that of course 
it was necessary to give him some expla- 
nation on that head, that he should not 
be accused of ingratitude. 

Accordingly, one evening, soon after 
Donaghue was able to sit up, he thought 
he observed him looking very uneasy and 
dejected, remarking which — " An' please 
your honour, I look what 1 am," replied 
the corporal — " very unhappy." 

" Indeed ! I am sorry to hear that ; what 
has made you so ?" 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 291 

" The fear that your honour may think 
me a good-for-nothing spalpeen, for hav- 
ing let you remain so long on the field, 
without coming to your aid." 

" Oh ! if that be all, make your mind 
easy, for a thought to your prejudice never 
entered my mind — it is not now I want 
to know what your regard for me is." 

" Yes, but your honour, I can't be asy 
till I have explained the cause of this to 
you." 

" Well, if it gratifies you to do so, I 
am ready to attend to you." 

" Blessings on your honour for that !" 
said the corporal. " Well then, to begin, 
your honour ; we might just as well have 
charged a stone wall as those cuirrassiers, 
as your honour knows; what with the 
weight of their horses, what their cover- 
ing of iron, we had no more chance with 
them, than a mouse would have under the 
foot of an elephant, and few of us, I be- 
lieve, would now have had the power of 
telling this, but for the Life-Guards com- 
o 2 



292 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ing to our assistance, and who, by saint Pa- 
trick ! soon made them sing a different song, 
by cracking their lobster-shells for them. 
I happened to be amongst the wound- 
ed, but that wouldn't have kept me from 
seeking your honour before my wounds 
were dressed, but that doctor Rosebud 
told me some officers of the Life-Guards 
had seen your honour killed, and lying 
dead on the field of battle; and so, as the 
blood was flowing fast at the time, T al- 
lowed them to be bound up ; but as soon 
as they were, off I set to get your honour's 
body, that I might bury it. Praised be 
the holy saints, I was spared that heart- 
breaking duty ! But with all my eager- 
ness to search for this, I feared I should 
never be able to reach the plains of Water- 
loo again, for I had been carried back to 
Brussels. What with one thing, what 
with another — stoppages here — then the 
pain of my wounds — then the sickness of 
my heart, I could never get above three 
yards at a time, without being obliged to 
halt or sit down; and to be sure it's then I 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 293 

didn't bemoan myself, more especially when 
the more I looked at the road, the more 
impassable it seemed, from the slush and 
the mud at the sides (the middle of it only- 
being paved, as your honour knows), and 
the overturned carriages, and dead and 
dying men and horses that were scattered 
about it, to say nothing of those that were 
galloping as for life and death along it ; but 
at last, by the blessing of God, I got to 
the end of my journey, and when I did. 
and found your honour living, by the 
Powers ! if it had made me suffer more 
than I could have been able to tell, let me 
live ever so long, by saint Patrick, the joy 
of that moment would have made me a> 
mends for it !" 

" That I am sure of," said Donaghue : 
" and, under Providence, I certainly con- 
ceive I owe the preservation of my life 
to you, for had not you arrived at the 
very moment you did, I have no doubt 
those she-devils would have given me my 
quietus'' 

" Faith, nor I neither; but I think I 



294 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

paid them nately for what they intended ; 
and more nor that, I made my report of 
them to the commander-in-chief, and sure 
enough he has them in pound ; and doesn't 
your honour think they can be tried by a 
court-martial, for robbing on the king's 
highway, as the plains of Waterloo must 
now to be sure be considered, for after 
fighting for them as we have done, the 
devil is in it if the king of England hasn't 
a right to call them his !" 

Donaghue could not help laughing at 
the idea — " I will not take upon me to 
decide either of the points,** he said ; " all 
I know is, what the ladies merit, and 
which I should have no hesitation in say- 
ing, if asked." 

" But your honour would have laugh- 
ed," said the corporal, after a little fur- 
ther discourse on the subject, restored to 
all his wonted spirits by the load which 
this explanation had removed from his 
mind, " had you heard the caution given 
me by the man whom I sent to sum- 
mon doctor Rosebud to your honour, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 295 

not to let so mad a man have any thing 
to do with my master — * Why do you 
think our doctor mad, my good fellow ?' 
I asked. — * Becase,' said he, * the moment 
1 delivered the message — " Alive !" cried 
he ; ** surely you are not in your senses, 
you damned dog I" then throwing down 
the dressings he had in his hand, he ran 
out for his horse, and on his being told, as 
he was leading him out, an officer would 
bleed to death before he could return — 
" If he does," said he, " I'll have you all 
hanged — wrap plenty of linen round the 
wound, and there's no danger ;" and with- 
out stopping to hear another word, set ofiP 
at a full gallop." 

But as the doctor will be often before 
the reader, we may as well make him ac- 
quainted with him at once. He was 
whimsical, impatient, and fretful — unable 
to avoid breaking in on the conversation 
of others, but not of a temper to forgive 
an offence of the kind himself; jealous in 
the extreme of attention, but appeared to 
feel the height of gratitude for the most 



296 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

trivial favour ; yet could not be restrained 
by even a real sense of obligation from 
expressing himself as your greatest enemy^ 
if he only imagined (and most of his grie- 
vances were imaginary) he had the slight- 
est cause for anger. It is true his resent- 
ment did not last long, for he was of a for- 
giving temper ; but the worst of it was^ 
he forgave himself as easily as he did others, 
and thus was careless how he gave offence. 
He meant no ill, but, like others, could 
not always resist the force of inclination; and 
though he had mixed much in the world, 
was credulous in the extreme, and ready 
to pass judgment upon the actions of 
others, without giving himself a moment 
for consideration ; notwithstanding all 
which, however, he was reckoned a good- 
natured, harmless, eccentric, pleasant man. 
He was about the middle age, and with 
regard to his pei'^on, thin and meagre; 
there was rather a wildness in his counte- 
nance, and his eyes, which were very pro- 
minent, were so badly set in his head, that 
when speaking to one person, he always 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 297 

seemed to be looking at another ; added 
to which, his delivery was rapid, his ges- 
ticulations those of the most violent 
Frenchman ; and, like him, to an inordi- 
nate portion of curiosity he united a rea- 
diness to be amused w^ith the merest 
trifles; for instance, coming into his pa- 
tient's chamber one morning in high glee, 
with an open paper in his hand — " Well, 
O'Brien," he said, chuckling as if in great 
delight, " I think I have brought some- 
thing with me that will make you forget 
recent matters for awhile. What do you 
think this paper is, which I have just pick- 
ed up in the court below ?" 

" When I know the contents you shall 
hear, doctor." 

" Oh ho ! will that be the case, Mr. 
Wiseacre? but come," first glancing to see 
that Cormick Avas not within hearinc:r. 

o- 

" you shall have the morceau^ and a pre- 
cious one it is ;" and so saying he began to 
read as follows : — 



o 3 



298 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" To Mr, Pat Disney, 

" Of BaUintifod^ near Altoir-na-Grrniey the CastU of hh 

Honour^ O' Donaghue O'Brien^ Esquire, County, 

Ire/and. 

" DEAR PAT, 

" This comes hoping, with a kind 
salutation, that you and all friends are 
well as your relation, who now, out of 
love, and by way of relaxation, sits down 
to amuse you with a bit of a narration. 

" But first of our travels. Of the sa- 
credness of nun's flesh we have had no 
manifestation ; and as to what you've heard 
of fasting friars, 'tis all botheration— they 
all love women, wine, and a little sly re- 
creation, just as well as us lads of a less 
holy vocation; to wit, father Murphy's 
pretty niece, though no relation — but mum 
— far from me be any base insinuation. 

" Boney, now it appears, had come to a 
determination of fighting the English, 
when Brussels was their station, with eve- 
ry hope and pious wish for their utter ex- 
tirpation — ' For,' says he, * to secure me 
in this my usurpation, Russia, Prussia, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 299 

and all of them, must be sent to damna- 
tion ! that may flourish at least the pre- 
sent French generation, who, like devils, 
will now fight at my instigation. 

" He had good grounds for this his de- 
claration, for they all fought with the 
greatest desperation, as if bent, as to be 
sure they were, on our extermination. Oh ! 
had you seen — but were I to tell you all 
without reservation, you'd certainly accuse 
me of great exaggeration — suffice it to say, 
we all fought without cessation, till there 
was scarce one alive to give this relation ; 
and then I went to search — oh ! what was 
my consternation, to find the best of mas- 
ters almost without animation, after laying 
about him as he did to rare admiration ! 

" Blucher followed on them, flying with- 
out intermission, till he left the invincibles 
in a most woful condition. But I almost 
forgot — I hope no want of due commend- 
ation will prevent my dear master from 
having a place in the forthcoming instal- 
lation. 

" We are in snug quarters now, a kind 



300 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 

of old fortification, where we make our- 
selves quite at home, and kindly welcome 
to every thing, not forgetting the wine 
cellar, I won't say to the owner's great 
mortification ; but, entre nous, that is 
French for — between ourselves, I believe, 
poor soul ! he's had, from the knights of 
the sword, some little provocation ; but let 
that pass. Our next move will be Paris, 
that epitome, as they say here, of all that's 
grand in creation, at the thoughts of see- 
ing which I feel no little exultation ; and 
where we shall find monsieur in a fine 
rage and agitation, at being obliged to 
strip the Louvre, an old palace — I explain 
as I go on, Pat, for your better informa- 
tion — of pilfered property, pictures, sta- 
tues, and what not, of rare estimation, to 
the great joy of those who had to mourn 
their transportation. But I must now 
conclude, with love to all friends, first 
taking occasion to assure all concerned 
about me I keep out of temptation, and 
as far as I can, avoid dissipation ; and shall 
be, while life remains, or the slightest puU 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 301 

sation, yoi^r friend, my dear Pat, as well 
as relation, 

" Terence M'Cormick, 

•* Corporal in regiment of Light Diajitvjns." 



" There !" said Rosebud, when he had 
concluded, " what do you think of that ? ' 

" Why, that Cormick is a better scribe 
than I imaghied." 

" Pooh ! it wasn't about his handwri- 
ting I was speaking, but his style." 

" Why, perhaps original in its way." 

** Ay, egad the fellow has some fun in 
him." 

" Yes, and he could not be in better 
hands than yours, doctor, to make him 
display it." 

" Why, yes, I do love mirth — laughter, 
that makes glad the heart of man." 

" Ay, but it must be previously glad, 
before laughter can have any effect on it." 

" Oh, pooh, no ! let it only once yield 
a little to cheerfulness, and, my life on't ! 
care is banished." 



302 TTIADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" Ah ! this is fine talking." 

" Fine talking ! don't let me hear you j 
attempting to contradict me ; you, a fine 
dashing fellow, that have only to be seen 

to be -and, like another Othello, will 

now be able to speak of what is so touch- 
ing to female hearts, * of moving accidents 
by flood and field:' if I had your youth, 
and your other qualifications for charm- 

ing " 

" Now that we are on the subject, doc- J 
tor," said Donaghue, " I have sometimes ! 
wondered that a man of your social habits j 
never thought of changing your state." j 

" Pooh ! that is the very reason I never \ 
did. I knew I was quite of too convivial \ 
a disposition to think of any thing of the 
kind, and so early gave up all thoughts of 
it. No, no — I knew it would never do 
for me, after passing a pleasant evening j 
with a set of friends, perhaps singing — j 
* My wife shall dance and I will sing,' to 
return home, to get a matrimonial lecture 
read to me for staying out beyond what ] 
was considered a proper hour; indeed, ! 



TRADITION' OF THE CASTLE. 303 

from what I observed of the cares and dis- 
quietudes occasioned by near connexions 
and great intimacies, I almost determined, 
ere far advanced in life, to avoid contract- 
ing any friendships." 

" But a determination which I am sure," 
said Donaghue, gratefully, " I have rea- 
son to know you did not adhere to." 

" Why, yes, perhaps so," replied the 
other, with some little emotion ; " but 
indeed I hope I never was deficient in the 
capability of forming them, though I 
thought it the safest plan to do so, for I 
was not slow in observing the greater part 
of life's troubles were not on our own ac- 
count, but that of others — that it was in 
the power of one person to make a hun- 
dred miserable, by partaking of his per- 
sonal afflictions, but that he could make 
only one happy, by partaking of his per- 
sonal pleasures. For instance, a man of a 
philanthropic temper becomes acquainted 
with those about him, his acquaintance 
with some produces friendship, and friend- 
ship occasions sorrow. Every trouble of 



304 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

mind, or disease of your friend, affects 
you. It is true you also participate in his 
pleasure, as far as it can be communicat- 
ed ; but these are not in equal proportions. 
Should your friend increase his possessions, 
you are not the richer; but if he is in 
want, you are poorer: if he is in health, 
as a thing of course, you do not rejoice; 
but if he is sick, you mourn : if he has an 
agreeable wife, you have none of his plea- 
sure ; but if he loses her, at least half his 
pain is poured into your bosom. And sup- 
pose life passes without any exertions of 
friendship, but merely in a belief that, if 
required, they would be made, I see my 
friend advance in years, he loses his per- 
son and strength, death sets his mark up- 
on him, and at last claims him for his own. 
What I see in him, he sees in me; and all 
these sensations are multiplied, according 
to the number of our intimate connexions. 
Fully sensible of this truth, I very early 
in life determined to have no friend at all 
— a determination which the unsettled life 
the profession I entered into occasioned. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. SOS 

helped me in some degree to keep ; but 
which," stretching out his hand in the 
kindest manner imaginable to him, " I 
felt tempted to break the moment I began 
to know you, though why," laughing, " I 
can't for the life of me tell." 

As soon as Donaghue was able to travel, 
he prepared to follow the army to Paris, 
to the great regret of Rosebud, who was 
not yet able to leave Brussels, on account 
of the number of wounded that still re- 
mained under his care. 

To describe what Donaghue felt on en- 
tering this great city, even more from the 
reflections it excited, than the observations 
it afforded him an opportunity of making, 
would be impossible. All the horrors that 
had thrilled him in the reading rose to his 
imagination at the moment, deadening the 
sensations he must otherwise have experi- 
enced ; but as this subsided, he felt indeed 
the liveliest pleasure at finding himself in 
a place so justly celebrated, and forming 
so striking a contrast to those he was ac- 
customed to. His eye roved, unsated. 



306 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

over its ancient piles — his foot, untired, 
trod its streets — and he felt as if the curio- 
sity and interest it excited could never be 
sufficiently gratified; but such must ever 
be the feeling of an anxious and inquisi- 
tive mind, on finding itself in any cele- 
brated place, entirely new to it — we gaze 
with breathless eagerness around us, and 
feel as if a new world w as opening to our 
view. 

But society, so long the boast of France, 
was certainly not then what it had been 
represented to him ; but after the violent 
convulsions the kingdom had so recently 
experienced, it would have been wonder- 
ful if it had. The ferment occasioned by 
the changes and counterchanges that had 
so rapidly succeeded each other, had not, 
as yet, by any means subsided ; but it is 
not immediately after the passing away of 
the storm that the sea ceases to be trou- 
bled; the spirit of party still prevailed 
every where, and jarring interests were 
the consequence ; its turbulence was even 
carried into the public places, creating 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 307 

continual uproar, not merely between the 
conquered and the conquerors— those who, 
keenly remembering former insults, seized 
the longed-for moment of retaliating for 
them — but between the Parisians them- 
selves. To the grandeur of the Thuilleries, 
the most interesting to O'Brien of all the 
public structures in Paris, from the recol- 
lections connected with it, he did justice; 
but still, as has been observed by a tour- 
ist, there was a silent gloominess round it 
that affected the spirits, such as could 
scarcely have been expected about the re- 
sidence of a court. 

He rejoiced to have arrived ere the spo- 
liation of the Louvre had commenced— 
that building, so worthy on its own ac- 
count of a visit, yet, notwithstanding the 
beauty of its architecture, ard the reflec- 
tion of its having been the favourite palace 
of the immortalized Louis le Grand, al- 
lowed to be neglected and defaced. 

As he alternately contemplated the re- 
spective piles, what recollections were re- 
called — what scenes of crime, of horror. 



308 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

and voluptuousness, rose to his imagina- 
tion ! As he dwelt on them — with con- 
trasted feelings on the enormities of a Ca- 
therine de Medicis, and the varied amours 
of Louis the Fourteenth, a thousand hor- 
rible shadows and unreal mockeries seem- 
ed to pass before him — the flitting phan- 
toms of the actors in those scenes, once so 
renowned in their day, but long since 
passed into air, leaving nought but their 
remembrance behind. 

O'Brien generally resorted to one parti- 
cular table-d'kofe, from observing that he 
was always sure of finding the best com- 
pany there. In the course of his visits to 
it, he was at last struck by the singularity 
of finding himself always an object of fixed 
attention to a gentleman who always sat 
opposite to him, as if on purpose to have 
a better opportunity of w^atching him. At 
last, one evening, as he was repairing from 
it to one of the cafes, the stranger, follow- 
ing him with quickness to the door — 
" Pardon, sir," said he, " this interruption, 
but if my eyes do not deceive me, you are 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 309 

lieutenant O'Brien, of regiment of 

light dragoons ?" 

O'Brien bowed. 

" Ay, ay," cried the other, " my heart 
has been for some time telling me this, 
that you were the person to whom it owed 
the greatest obligation." 

" Me the person, sir !" said Donaghue ; 
" pardon me, but really I cannot call to 
my recollection ever having had the ho- 
nour of meeting you elsewhere than here, 
as vou seem to intimate." 

" I can soon, however, convince you to 
the contrary. This, however, is no place for 
any particular explanation ; but if you 
will do me the honour of accompanying 
me to my lodgings, you will soon find 
what I say to be the fact. In the mean 
time, know I an\ the trooper whose life you 
so gallantly and humanely defended, at the 
risk of your own, at the late battle of 
* Waterloo." 

Donaghue had too many reasons for re- 
collecting that circumstance, to have ever, 
for a moment, forgotten it ; but even if he 



310 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

had had any previous knowledge of the 
stranger, he would scarcely have recog- 
nised him, from the alteration effected by 
the change of habiliments, both in his ap- 
pearance and apparent rank of life — that 
of the former was now such as to justify 
an opinion of the latter being that of a 
gentleman. 

There seemed to be something curious, 
if not romantic, in the affair; and more 
out of curiosity perhaps than any other 
feeling, he suffered himself to accept the 
stranger's invitation. 

In their way to the hotel where he 
lodged, he informed Donaghue he was a 
Spaniard, known by the title of don Cal- 
lan — information that did not by any means 
tend to lessen the impatience of the other 
for what further he had to hear. On their 
arrival a table Vv-as spread with wine and 
fruit, and they were left alone. Don Cal- 
lan having begged his guest would please 
himself-—" And is it really the case," he 
cried, suddenly turning his eyes full up- 
on Donaghue, and keenly observing him. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 311 

" that you did not in the slightest degree 
recollect my features ?" 

" Assuredly ; it would be strange in- 
deed if I could recollect what I had never 
before observed." 

" Never ! never do you say?" in a strange 
hurried wild kind of manner; " oh, recall 
those words, senor I look back — consider !" 
Then seeing that Donaghue was staring 
at him, as if uncertain what to think — 
" I beg your pardon — excuse me," as if 
suddenly recollecting himself; " have the 
goodness to impute any thing that may 
appear extraordinary in my words or be- 
haviour to — to the effects of a terrible 
wound I long since received here," putting 
his hand to his forehead in evident confu- 
sion. 

" Certainly ; but you seem flurried, se- 
nor— pray compose yourself; I shall regret 
your recognition of me, if it occasions you 
any unpleasant agitation." 

" And can it do otherwise — can it do 
otherwise ?" cried the other, starting from 
his chair, and traversing the apartment in 



312 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the greatest disorder ; " can I behold him 
whom I have — that is, I mean, the person 
who has recalled to my mind the degrada- 
tion I was obliged to submit to for a sea- 
son, for — for we Spaniards, senor," resu- 
ming his seat with a ghastly smile, " are a 
proud race; and to have been compelled 
to appear as a common soldier for a time 
— yet was it not what I merited, or rather 
would not the condition of a galley-slave 
be more suitable to my deserts ! for — for — 
oh ! I am an unhappy man, senor !" and 
throwing himself back in his chair, he co- 
vered his face with his handkerchief — ** I 

have that at my heart " 

Donaghue became utterly at a loss what 
conjecture to form — whether to impute to 
remorse or madness the strange conduct 
he witnessed ; yet, if to the former, how 
in any way could he be concerned in awa- 
kening it, as appeared to be the case ? all 
that he could decide on was, that he would 
shorten his stay, and, as much as possible, 
avoid any further acquaintance with the 
Spaniard. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 313 

The latter, uncovering his face, and a- 
gain his piercing regards turned upon him, 
quickly discovered his perplexity, and in 
consequence — " Senor," said he, " I see I 
have disturbed you, and I have to apolo- 
gize for it ; but in consideration of what 
I have mentioned, I hope I shall not find 
it difficult to do so ; but pray take wine, 
the cruel disorder I have been attacked by, 
has rendered me remiss in attention to 
you. As I was observing, senor, I have 
that at my heart that might well excuse 
and account for, independent of any thing 
else, any thing that appeared strange or in- 
consistent in my manner. A — a sense of 
unmerited injuries — but my story is a brief 
one — with your permission I will relate it, 
as the best mode I can take of explaining 
that I do not complain without reason." 

Donaghue bowed, and the other thus 
proceeded — " If there are revolutions in 
empires, how much less is it to be won- 
da*ed at that there should be revolutions 
in families, though I have reason to boast 

VOL. I. p 



314 TRADITION OF THE CASTLlil. 

of mine, being descended in a right line 
from those illustrious Goths who so long 
resisted the irruptions of the barbaric 
Moors ; yet, through some unexpected vi- 
cissitudes, I was compelled to embark in 
mercantile concerns, which, however, I had 
no reason to regret, from the success that 
uniformly crowned every undertaking; so 
that, in comparatively a short time, the 
fame of my wealth reestablished me on 
the eminence from which I had been com- 
pelled to descend, and gave me no small 
influence in tlie state; in a w^ord, my cof- 
fers frequently supplied the emergencies 
of government, and powerfully aided in 
rendering that battle successful, which we 
fought with our hearts as well as swords, 
for the restoration of our riglitful king. 
But, just Heavens ! what was my recom- 
pence for my patiiotism, and my rejection 
of the splendid offers made me by the usur- 
per of the throne ? scorn and neglect, in 
consequence of the defaming voice of a 
villain about the court, who being under 
obligations to me, which he had not the in- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 315 

clination to discharge, adopted this mode 
of trying to rid himself of his creditor, en- 
tertaining but little doubt that his accusa- 
tion of underhand and treasonable prac- 
tices against me would cost me my life, or 
at least occasion my banishment. ^ly ba- 
nishment it certainly occasioned, but not 
through the sentence of a prejudiced court, 
but the suggestions of my own resent- 
ment. I precipitately left the country; 
but had hardly done so, ere I repented 
the measure, from the consideration of 
having left ail my property behind me, at 
the mercy of my enemies. But the die 
was cast — the misconstruction I was sen- 
sible the circumstance was liable to, ren- 
dered return impossible, and nothing re- 
gained but to resume those arms for my 
support, which I had previously taken up 
in the cause of an ungrateful king. To 
decide under whose banner I would enlist, 
was the only point for consideration ; but 
this was soon determined — to the brave 
and generous English I quickly decided 
p 2 



316 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

on attaching myself, feeling as if I should 
find myself less a stranger with them than 
with others; this not merely from the 
knowledge acquired of them through their 
services in the Peninsula, but also in their 
own country, whither my trading con- 
cerns took me more than once, and to 
which circumstance, my repeated visits to 
that favourite isle of the ocean, you are 
to ascribe, senor, my speaking the lan- 
guage with the fluency I do, so as often 
indeed to be mistaken for a native of it." 

And here it is to be understood, that 
after addressing Donaghue in French, and 
conversing with him some time in that 
tongue, he suddenly slid into English, 
speaking it indeed with a facility rather 
surprising to Donaghue in a foreigner. 
Observing he paused, he took the oppor- 
tunity of expressing his sympathy in his 
wrongs, adding, they were indeed enough 
to " weigh a royal merchant down." 

*• Enough ! just Powers ! to force the 

descendant of a noble Goth but I will 

not trespass upon your patience — what 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 317 

immediately followed my joining the stan- 
dard of your great captain, you know ; but 
as I have taxed your sympathy, it is but 
fair to state that, with regard to pecuniary 
matters, I have no further claim on it. 
Through means too tedious to detail, Fer- 
dinand was convinced of the injustice he 
did me, the result of which has been my 
recall to Spain, and the restoration of the 
w^hole of my immense property." 

This was a finale to his story which Do- 
nagh.ue, from the preface, had little ex- 
pected, and he expressed himself to that 
effect, protesting, since matters had ended 
in this way, he did not think don Callan 
should allow himself to be affected as he 
was by past events. 

" What, not by the recollection of in- 
juries?" 

" Certainly, not injuries atoned for, and 
which, according to your own statement, 
were the result of imposition, not ingrati- 
tude." 

" Then it is your opinion injuries re- 
dressed should be forgiven ?" 



318 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" Assuredly — it must be the opinion of 
every Christian." 

*' But are there not some that the spirit 
must rebel against forgiving — of so black, 
so base a nature, that the boiling blood 
must rise up in tumult at the bare idea of 
being asked to pardon them ?" 

" There may ; but still, if atoned for as 
far " 

" Ay, there's the rub, for atonement, as 
I take it, is but another word for restitu- 
tion ; and there's something in that so hu- 
miliating, so to give back, to disgorge, 

to " 

" With these sentiments, your gratitude 
to your king must indeed be very great !" 
said Donaghue, sarcastically. 

" My king ! my king ! why what has ray 
king done for me ?" 

" That which you seem to think so dif- 
ficult — made restitution to you." 

" Oh ! ay, given me back my own.*' 

" Well, and what is restitution but that 
— giving a man back his own." 

'* True ; but then supposing, senor, a 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 319 

man is not conscious of being robbed, what 
necessity is there for forcing him to know 
he has been, by making any restitution to 
him ?' 

" That is a question which I should 
conceive a man's own conscience could best 
answer. If I am sensible of having done 
a man a wrong, it is not because he is ig- 
norant of the circumstance that I am not 
bound by every law of reHgion and mo- 
rality to make him atonement for it ; and 
it seems to me indeed as if the less suspi- 
cious he was of the injury, the more im- 
perative on me was the obligation to re- 
dress it" 

** Well, senor, I must confess " 

** Excuse me," said Donaghue, coolly, 
and rising as he spoke, he pushed aside his 
chair, still more undecided than ever as to 
what opinion to form of his entertainer ; 
" our opinions on this subject, as well as 
many others, probably might differ. Adieu ! 
I leave you, happy to think you are re- 
stored to your proper rank in society." 

Don Callan, now evidently under the 



320 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

greatest alarm, but without any appear- 
any of that wildness he had before evin- 
ced, threw himself between him and the 
door. — " Senor," he said, " I see yon are 
displeased ; and should I allow you to 
leave me with that impression on my mind, 
I shall be miserable. Violent agitation 
frequently occasions inadvertencies in 
words and manner that disgust— -let not 
that be the case now ; 1 pray you to know^ 
me a little better ere you decide upon my 
unworthiness for your further acquaint- 
ance ; either consent to stay longer now, 
or, if it suit your humour better, come 
back to supper, when I hope I shall be 
better able to evince my gratitude for the 
honour of your company than I have now 
been." 

Donaghue wished to refuse, but knew 
not how, so overwhelming w^ere his en- 
treaties, and at length reluctantly con- 
sented to return to supper. From his ho-? 
tel he repaired to the garden of the ThuiU 
leries, where, tlirowing himself upon c«ie 
of the numerous benches provided there 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 321 

for the accommodation of the curious and 
the idle, his thoughts soon became di- 
verted from his new acquaintance, by the 
variety of different objects that passed in 
review before him, almost from all na- 
tions; and evincing, not merely by cha- 
racteristic traits, but in some instances by 
a peculiar style of costume, the country 
they belonged to, a kind of masquerade 
scene was presented to his view that high- 
ly amused him. 

He was completely engrossed by it, when 
he received a smart slap on the shoulder. He 
turned round, expecting to see one of his 
brother-officers, and beheld his friend, doc- 
tor Rosebud. — " Well, here I am," cried 
the doctor, as they shook hands, " with a 
return in my pocket, not of the killed and 
wounded, but the well and healing, come 
to have a scamper with you and the other 
lads about the neighbourhood. Egad ! this 
seems the very place for me, all mirth and 
no care — shows at the comer of every 
street, jugglers, mountebanks, dancing 
P 3 



322 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

dogs, skipping girls — every thing seeming 
as if it was a holiday. No wonder the 
Frenchmen appear as if they were mad ; by 
Jove ! I believe I should run wild with 
pleasure if I remained here." 

And indeed, what between joy at meet- 
ing again a person he so much liked (for 
his likings and dislikings were all in the 
extreme), and pleasure at finding himself 
in a place of which he had heard so much, 
he appeared to have done this already, in- 
somuch that he soon began to attract no- 
tice, which Donaghue perceiving, hurried 
him from the spot; but he still went on 
in the same manner, and more than once 
Donaghue was compelled to entreat him 
to be less vehement in his tones and ac- 
tion, if he did not wish to be followed by 
crowds ; but in vain — the feelings of the 
moment were not to be restrained, and to 
give utterance to them in a quiet way, was 
out of the question. 

Having strolled, or rather raced, for the 
doctor was rapid in every movement from 
one place to another, in and out of various 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 323 

cafes, and over great part of the Palais 
Royale, which, above all places, was that 
which Rosebud most wished to see, till 
the evening was far advanced, Donaghue 
was obliged to mention his engagement 
to him, to account for leaving him. — " But 
we shall meet early in the morning, you 
know," he said, for the doctor had secured 
apartments in the same hotel with him, 
" and then I am yours for the remainder 
of the day." 

Rosebud inquired where he was going, 
and on learning the particulars of all that 
had occurred between him and the Spani- 
ard — " Egad !" he cried, '*' you shall take 
me with you, for a pleasant supper is ex- 
actly what I like to conclude a pleasant 
day with ; besides, I have long been wish- 
ing for an introduction to a real Spaniard 
— to hear him, like an old Jew, talk of 
the number of hats he has in his family; 
I want also to see whether this fellow's 
gratitude is sincere to you, which I am 
rather inclined to doubt, from his not hav- 
ing come forward sooner to seek you ; un- 



324. TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

der such obligations as he was to you, he 
shouldn't have allowed a minute, instead 
c^ weeks, to elapse, after obtaining the 
povrer of evincing it, without searching 
you out." 

" My dear doctor," said Donaghue, " I 
must entreat yoii to recollect that you are 
not to expect every man to resemble your- 
self;" and, alarmed by this observation, he 
proceeded to dwell on what he conceived 
the extreme irritability of don CaUan's 
nerves, in consequence of the unfortunate 
wound he had received, and the caution 
that was therefore necessary to be observed 
in hie company. 

The doctor listened with attention to 
him, but only replied by a nod ; and, du- 
bious of having had any effect upon him, 
Donaghue almost began to repent of hav- 
ing acceded to his proposal of taking him 
to the Spaniard's. 

On their arrival, the doctor was intro- 
duced as his particular friend, and met 
with a very polite welcome from don 
.Callan. Mutual compliments having pass- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 325 

ed, and the Spaniard again proceeding to 
express the great pleasure it afforded him 
to receive a friend of Donaghue's — " Oh ! 
that of course, senor," said Rosebud, abrupt- 
ly — " that of course ; it would be very- 
strange, ver)' sur]irising indeed, if you 
were not happy, and gratified to see any 
one iiKany way connected with a person to 
whom you owe the obligation of having 
saved your life, and who, on your account, 
incurred such sufferings, as I, who had 
him under my care for upwards of a month 
ivithout any hopes of his recovery, can 
well testify. You look surprised, don 
Callan, at my vehemence, but I always 
speak warmly when I am interested, and 
I certainly am interested, highljr so, in 
having the generosity of my young friend 
here estimated as it ought to be." 

" My God, doctor !" cried Donaghue, 
in a tone of impatience. 

The doctor gave his usual " Pish I" when 
interrupted in any thing he was intent on, 
and thus proceeded — " But it is not on his 
account alone, don Callan, I am speaking 



326 THADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

in this manner, but also on yours, in order 
to afford you that opportunity which, as 
a noble Spaniard, I am sure you must re- 
joice at, of clearing yourself from the im- 
putation of ingratitude, such as, I rather 
apprehend, you have incurred, by not 
sooner seeking out your preserver, but 
which, T am happy to find, you have now 
amply the power of exonerating yourself 
from." 

** Really, doctor," still more discompo- 
sed, cried Donaghue, " I must entreat '* 

" And I must entreat," said the doctor, 
" that we have none of these high flights. 
Don Callan, as a man of the world, will, 
I dare say, readily agree with me, that 
services from those we have no right, as 
utter strangers to us, to expect them from, 
deserve requital." -^ 

" Assuredly ; and none can more tho- 
roughly feel what I owe your generous 
friend than I do. Sacred Heaven ! do I 
not owe to him the preservation of a life 
I was by no means prepared to resign ?" 

" Ay, very likely," said the doctor. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 327 

coolly ; " few of us are ready to be whip- 
ped off in a moment ; but in a case of that 
kind, don Callan," in a moment losing his 
recent seriousness, at the idea of being 
able to obtain some amusement for him- 
self at the expence of the Spaniard, '•' you 
are better off than we of a different per- 
suasion are, from the snug place for halt- 
ing at you have in the next world, till it 
is seen what the prayers of your friends 
below can do for you ; but, after all, don 
Callan, allow me to ask you gravely, as a 
man of sense — by that I mean a man who 
has seen a good deal of the world, and, of 
course, it is natural from the circumstance 
to suppose got his mind enlightened — 
whether you really can, or do believe, that 
once gone, any thing that can be after- 
wards done for you in this world can be 
of service to you in the next?" 

" God forbid I did not !" replied don 
Callan, shuddering ; " for if 1 did not, how 
could I bear to dwell on the narrow escape 
I have so recently had from sudden death?" 

" Oh, well!" with something very like 



328 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

a sly sneer, " there may be reasons for ren-r; j 
dering it comfortable to some people ta 
believe in the efficacy of other people's 
prayers; and so every one to their way of 
thinking, don Callan," giving him a smart 
slap on the shoulder, for Rosebud was not 
one of those who require a long time to . 
get acquainted ere he conceives he may? 
take liberties; and the greater the surprise 
these were calculated to excite, the morew 
he was always inclined to take them. 

To the great relief of Donaghue, supper^ 
was now announced ; the respite, however,'<^ 
it afforded either him or the other, from 
the tormenting Rosebud, was of short con- 
tinuance. Nothing could divert him from i ■ 
the object he had in view, and accordingly^ 
he soon reverted again to the incidents of 
the recent battle. — " All things considered, 
don Callan," he resumed, " I can't help*i 
being surprised at your so readily recog- 
nising the features of my friend, though 
a very slight inquiry would have sufficed 
to let you know who it was you owed the 
preservation of your life to; they must 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 329 

have made a very strong impression on 
you, to allow you to recollect them so im- 
mediately, considering the circumstances 
under which you first saw hifti." 

" What ! with the leisure, the opportu- 
nity I had for contemplating them ! would 
it not have been rather wonderful if the 
reverse had been the case?" 

** The leisure ! the opportunity ! why 
what the deuce ! I thought you never saw 
him till at the moment he interposed be- 
tween you and the rascally Frenchmen 
that were on the point of cutting you 
down ?" 

" No, certainly — assuredly not," replied 
the other, but changing colour, and in ex- 
treme agitation — " no, never — never, till 
that moment." 

** And the devil's in it if that was a mo- 
ment," said the doctor, " for taking a cool 
survey of any one ;" and he was proceed- 
ing to follow up the observation by fur- 
ther laughter, when Donaghue checked 
him, by significantly putting his hand to 
his forehead. 



330 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" No, never, never — I never saw him 
till then," went on don Callan ; " so it 
must have been my gratitude that pre- 
sented me with his likeness in my sleep." 

" And a very good one, faith, it seems 
she drew," observed the doctor, dryly, and 
who, had his life almost depended on it, 
could not have turned from the bent of 
his humour ; " but it is to be hoped she 
will exert herself in some other way, that 
she will not stop at shadows." 

" I understand you, senor," said the 
Spaniard, reddening ; ** and believe me, no 
one can entertain a higher sense of obliga- 
tion than I do to your friend ; and did t-- 
know — could any mode be devised '* 

" Oh ! if that be all you are at a loss 
for, I will soon settle that point," said 
Kosebud, eagerly drawing his chair closer 
to his host's, and lowering his voice — " You 
are as rich as a Jew, I understand, and 
don't know what to do with your money. 
Now do you lodge a certain sum of mo- 
ney, we'll say three thousand guineas, 
with the agent of my friend's regiment, to 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 331 

purchase him the first vacant troop that 
occurs, and you will do what you ought, 
and of course lighten your feelings." 

" I — I rejoice at the suggestion ; but 
then the result — what may not be the re- 
sult of rendering him thus — are we not 
already on dangerous ground ?'* 

" By the Lord, 1 hope not !" cried Rose- 
bud, beginning to think this manner of 
the Spaniard all a trick to avoid coming 
to the point ; " you don't imagine, don 
Callan, that there is another gunpowder 
plot hatching here?" 

" Come, 1 must interpose," said Dona- 
ghue ; " 1 hope, don Callan, you take all 
my friend here has been saying, as I am 
sure he meant it should be taken, in the 
light of a jest ?" 

" You do !" said Rosebud, sneeringly ; 
" how I admire your delicacy ! but, faith, 
I believe," drawing away his chair from 
don Callan, " you won't be disappointed." 

Donaghue saw he was hurt, and well 
knowing his irascible temper, set about 
giving such a turn to the conversation a$ 



33^ TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

he thought might amuse him. He had 
travelled a good deal, and loved to talk of 
what he had seen, and accordingly gra- 
dually led to the subject ; but it would not 
do — Rosebud saw his drift, and thinking 
he was treating him as a child, and that 
the Spaniard also thought the same, from 
a smile he saw stealing over his visage, he 
would not allow himself to be put into 
good humour. Having sat gravely listen- 
ing for some time — " Well, now I sup- 
pose you are done," he cried, on his paus- 
ing; " should I ever be inclined to pub- 
lish my travels, I shall apply to you for 
assistance, you seem to understand the 
art of embellishing so well. — However, I 
have not by any means, don Callan, seen 
the wonders this gentleman has chosen to 
assert ; but I have travelled far enough to 
see that violent professions mean nothing, 
and that the gratitude of a man who, hav- 
ing the power to do so, yet delays to prove 

it, is not worth a fig — not " 

'' Good God, doctor !" again impatient- 
ly exclaimed Donaghue, fearful, notwith- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 333 

standing the uneasiness he evinced, some 
suspicion might be created of a collusion 
between them ; then again recollecting 
the easiness with which he was offended, 
he suddenly altered his tone, and — " I was 
thinking," he said 

" And so was I," deliberately said Rose- 
tod,' " that it was not very polite in you 
to be interrupting me when I was speak- 
ing." 

" It gets late," said Donaghue. 

" So much the better," replied the other, 
" but that won't do either, for don Callan, 
I am sure, is too polite and too hospitable 
not to wish for our company as long as we 
choose to favour him with it ; and late to 
bed and early to rise, is my maxim, life be- 
ing too short to lose half of it in stupifying 
oneself by sleep." 

Donaghue, perceiving he was not to be 
moved till he pleased himself, and fearful, 
if he listened much longer to him, he 
might not be able to maintain that com- 
mand over himself he wished, now plead- 



334 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ed the heat of the room as a pretext for 
repairing to a balcony in the outer one. 

He had no sooner withdrawn, than the 
Spaniard, in a low and confidential tone, 
addressing himself to Rosebud, and with 
a perfect collectedness of manner — "I 
should be dull indeed of comprehension," 
he said, " if I did not perfectly understand 
your recent hints and allusions ; but allow 
me to ask, did you not style your friend 
a soldier of fortune ? — how then " 

" I see your mistake,' cried Rosebud, 
in an altered tone, ** and it was a very 
natural one; but, senor, in our country, 
and our language, the expression literally 
liieans a person who has nothing but his 
sword to depend on. ^ly young friend 
was born to very different prospects ; but 

either through imprudence or but you 

are ill, senor !" seeing don Callan turn of 
an ashy whiteness. 

" No, not now," said the other, as he 
passed his hand across his forehead — " not 
now," as if fearful, without this assurance, 
he would call for assistance ; " I am sub- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 335 

ject to sudden faintnesses, but they are 
over in a moment — proceed, I pray you." 

" Why, I was about saying, senor, that 
either through imprudence, or villainy of 
some kind or other, my young friend has 
seen a noble inheritance vanish from his 
grasp. 1 am not much given to extrava- 
gant commendations, but, upon my soul^ 
I cannot speak what I think of him ; and 
did it depend on me — but what is the use 
of saying what I would do for him, when 
I am scarcely better off myself than he is !" 

" Well, don't despair," said don Cal- 
lan, extending his hand in the most friend- 
ly manner to him, and which, in an in- 
stant, won the warm heart of the doctor, 
accessible to the slightest proof of kind- 
ness or regard^ " there are those who pos- 
sess amply the power of serving him, with 
perhaps an equal inclination; but from 
his possessing, as I see, all the sensitive- 
ness of real pride, I perceive too much de- 
licacy cannot be observed in the business. 
Leave the management of it to me, nor 
doubt my sincerity; trust me," and he smiled 



336 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

with peculiar, perhaps with villainous sig- 
nificance, " I never will lose sight of him 
till I have accomplished what I intend." 

" With all my soul," cried the exulting 
Rosebud ; " I am sure the affair could not 
be in better hands." 

" Why, I flatter myself I shall manage 
it so that you will never hear a complaint 
out of his lips on the subject ; but I ^all 
say no more than merely this — that it will 
not be my fault if he is not speedily freed 
from every trouble." 



TEADITION OF THE CASTLE. 337 



CHAPTER IX. 



^* The maa whose life is muocent and plain, 

Free from all vice, and free from every stain, 

Of just report, untouch'd by dread or shame, 

Fears not, though man his noble acts defame. 

He's like a rock, which in itself confi-ies, 

And stands 'gamst all the rage of storms and udes; 

Strong in his virtue, fears no mortal arm, 

For gracious Heaven protects the good from harm." 

From the above evening the doctor and 
the Spaniard became nearly inseparable ; 
and from the confidence evidently esta- 
blished between them, Donaghue had not 
the smallest doubt that every movement 
of his was revealed to the latter. He 
knew the motive for this, but still he was 
hurt at the thought of such efforts being 
made to interest a stranger for him ; and, 
in consequence, to avoid all imputation of 
concern in the circumstance, in proportion 

VOL. I. Q 



338 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

to Rosebud's advances to intimacy with 
don Callan, his decUned ; but not on one 
account alone was this the case — in despite 
of all his arguments with himself, he con- 
ceived against this man a prejudice, he 
himself thought, of the most extraordi- 
nary nature, for his manners were speci- 
ous, and his appearance not disagreeable ; 
yet so it was, he could not conquer his 
dislike to being in his company, feeling 
always in it a kind of uneasiness and re- 
straint, as if in company with some one 
whom a secret instinct was warning him 
to shun. 

His regiment being among the number 
which the termination of the war occa- 
sioned to be put on the peace estabUsh- 
ment, he no sooner found himself placed 
on the half-pay list, than he decided on 
returning to Altoir-na-Grenie: this was a 
decision which, of course, he could not 
keep from Rosebud, who had avowed his 
intention of following, or rather accom- 
panying him wherever he went, and to 
whom, spite of all his oddities, he every 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 339 

day got more and more attached. . In ac- 
quainting him with it, however, he en- 
treated him to keep it a secret from don 
Callan, that is, the exact time they pro- 
posed leaving Paris, lest he should take it 
into his head to make one of their party, 
for he could not endure to be any longer 
haunted by him, and in no other light 
could he consider the manner in which 
the Spaniard traced his steps, and attached 
himself to him wherever he went. 

But whatever were the virtues of Rose- 
bud, he certainly could never be extolled 
for keeping secrets, and to keep the pre- 
sent one would indeed, he conceived, be 
the height of folly, by not only, probably, 
being the means of depriving them of a 
very agreeable companion, but of inducing 
don Callan to relinquish his kind inten- 
tions towards Donaghue, from the offence 
it was natural to suppose, departing with 
such secresy must give him ; he therefore 
determined not to be so great an enemy 
to his friend as to do what, in this instance, 
q2 



340 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

he desired, more especially as he was ut- 
terly ignorant of his motives for the re- 
quest; but at the same time, as he did not 
wish to disoblige him, he determined it 
should appear as if it was by chance he 
let that, which he wanted him to conceal, 
transpire. 

He succeeded in this artifice to admira- 
tion, so that Donaghue, though extremely 
provoked, could still not evince any anger 
at what seemed so entirely the effect of 
inadvertence. 

" Leaving Paris so soon ?" said don Cal- 
lan, evidently greatly disconcerted — " and 
is there a positive, an absolute necessity, 
for your returning so immediately to Eng- 
land? for if there is, it will defeat a plan — 
a scheme. The fact is, being on the point 
of setting out for Spain, it was my inten- 
tion to have solicited your company thi- 
ther, that on my own territory T might 
have had the felicity of paying you those 
attentions which the unsettled state I have 
been in here has precluded. I have a plea- 
sant castle near Seville, the season is pro- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 341 

pitious for travelling, and surely it is not 
speaking too arrogantly of my own coun- 
try, to say, that a journey to it could not fail 
of proving highly interesting to enlight- 
ened and acconfiplished minds. Let me 
not, therefore, senors, I pray, be disap- 
pointed in the fond expectation I have 
cherished, of being favoured with your 
society, in a place where I could properly 
prove my sense of the obligation it confer- 
red upon me. Your compliance wuth my 
request will be a means, I flatter myself, 
of satisfying you that I am not altogether 
unworthy of your friendship, or," and he 
looked significantly at Rosebud, " any 
confidence that may have been placed in 
me. 

Rosebud, perfectly comprehending his 
look, and transported besides at the bare 
idea of visiting a place he had not yet 
seen, at once declared his readiness to ac- 
cept the invitation, and that he knew of 
nothing to prevent his friend fi-om follow- 
ing his example — " For we single fellows," 
he cried, almost capering about the room 



342 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

with delight, " are quite at liberty, as my 
friend sir Abel Handy says, to go where 
we please — Bath or Seringapatam, all one 
to us ; and come, my boy," slapping Do- 
naghue on the back, " whether you will 
or not, you must cross the Pyrenees;" 
and, partly from his wish to oblige him, 
and partly from the horror he had of re- 
turning to his desolate home, Donaghue 
consented to the journeyirj ^^ 

Just as they were about stepping into 
the carriage provided for travelling, Rose- 
bud observed a crowd near the door. This 
was sufficient to detain him, so great was 
his curiosity, even though he had been 
setting out on business that would have 
admitted of no delay ; accordingly, making 
his way through it, he saw a fellow mount- 
ed on a kind of stage, one hand holding a 
pill-box, and the other flourishing in the 
air, while he thus went on — " And who 
are your enemies ? — the English, the Aus- 
trians, you suppose ; but I say no, nor 
yet the Moors, nor the Turks, nor — — but 
the worms, the little worms that are 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 343 

feeding on you before their time, and 
which this nostrum, that would be the 
means of saving a whole army, can alone 
destroy." 

** I protest," said Rosebud, whom, as al- 
ready observed, the merest trifles amused, 
" that fellow has some cleverness ; I think 
he should be appointed physician-general 
to the French forces." 

" He!" said don Callan, in a tone of 
some surprise ; " and why, pray, may I 
ask?" 

** Why, didn^t you hear him say he had 
a specific would save a whole army?" 

" He ! the scoundrel ! it is astonishing 
to me these quacks are not put down every 
where." 

Pooh, pooh! and why so?" demanded 
the doctor ; " why shouldn't they be al- 
lowed to live as well as other quacks? for 
there are quacks, don Callan, in every bu- 
siness, in every line, and every profession, 
in life ; in short, the rich have credulity, 
and the poor wit to take advantage of it, 



344 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

and thus the balance is struck between 
them." 

Don Callan, who had travelled a good 
deal, and who appeared as perfectly col- 
lected as either of his companions, now 
proved himself a really entertaining com- 
panion. The conversation chiefly ran on 
the country they were journeying to, and 
with which he was so thoroughly acquaint- 
ed, as to be able to give some very inte- 
resting particulars of it, as w^ell as amu- 
sing instances of the traits by which the 
natives of the different provinces are dis- 
tinguished. 

" The Biscayan and the Andalusian are 
those that amuse me most," said Rosebud, 
*' the former so merry and so frank, and 
the latter equalling in impudence and ex- 
travagance the Gascon — surpass him in 
rhodomontade he could not." 

" No, that would be impossible indeed/' 
assented the Spaniard. 

" As a proof of which," rejoined Rose- 
bud, whose memory was a repository 
of scraps, collected in all directions, and 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 345 

which he delighted in producing on all 
occasions, " I'll tell you this anecdote: — 
A Parisian drew in the streets on one of 
them (these Gascons), by whom he had 
been insulted. The Gascon, calling a chim- 
ney-sweeper who happened to be passing 
at the instant, gave him a sous, saying — 
* Here, take this, and go to the sexton, 
and tell him to ring a knell, and come im- 
mediately for that dead body.'—' Lord, sir !' 
replied the messenger, * it seems to me 
the gentleman is in good health.' — * Very 
likely,' said the Gascon, ' but did you not 
hear him challenge me ?" 

« Very good indeed," cried don Callan, 
laughing heartily, to the no small delight 
of the relater — " very good indeed !" 

" Well, if you like that," resumed the 
doctor, who was now in his element, ** I 
think you will like this still better : — A 
Gascon having called on the minister Col- 
bert at an unseasonable hour, was ac- 
quainted he could not be then seen, as he 
was engaged at table with particular com- 
q3 



346 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

pa^y ; but he insisted that the attendant 
should go in, and inform him that a per- 
son waited with a message from the king. 
The minister ordered him to be immedi- 
ately shewn in. Approaching the table, 
he asked aloud — * Gentlemen, with per^ 
mission, which of you is Colbert?'—* I 
am the person,' said the minister, * what 
is it you require T — * Oh ! no great affair,' 
said the other — * a trifling order of his 
majesty to pay me five hundred crowns.' 
Colbert, who was in a humour to amuse 
himself, desired the Gascon to take a seat 
at table, ordered him a cover, and pro- 
mised to expedite his business after din- 
ner. The Gascon accepted the offer with- 
out the least ceremony, and ate voracious- 
ly. Having dined, the minister sent for 
one of his secretaries, who took the order 
to the treasury. Here one hundred pis- 
toles were counted out and given to him; 
on which he observed — * The sum was one* 
hundred and fifty.' — * True,' replied the 
secretary, * but fifty are retained for your 
dinner.'— * Fifty !' repeated theGascon,*fifly 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. S47 

pistoles for a dinner! where I dine I pay 
but twenty sous.' — ' That I very well be- 
lieve/ repHed the secretary; * but you do 
not dine with the minister Colbert, and 
that is the honour for which you must 
pay.' — ' Oh, very well !' replied the Gas- 
con, * since that is the case, keep the whole, 
it is not worth my while to accept one 
hundred pistoles ; I will bring one of my 
friends to-morrow, and we will eat up the 
remainder.' The discourse was reported 
to Colbert, who admired the Gascon, or- 
dered the whole sum to be paid him, being 
all his wealth, and did him many good 
services." 

** But of all the provinces, I conceive 
Grenada must be the most interesting," 
said Donaghue ; " how often, as I have 
been reading descriptions of it, have I 
sighed to be wandering amidst the courts 
of the Alhambra, and the gardens of the 
Generalif — enjoying the refreshing sight 
of the limpid waters of one, and inhaling 
the delicious fragrance of the other ! that 
balmy air, the purity of which is attested 



348 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

by the complexions of the fair Andalu- 
sians. Yet what melancholy must mingle 
with the pleasure the sight of it could not 
but afford ! To see it so altered, so little 
realizing those glowing descriptions we 
have received of what it was in former 
times, when from its numerous gates it 
could pour forth an army of upwards 
of thirty thousand men — when all was 
life and bustle, beauty and magnificence, 
health and industry ; but the triumph 
over it has been of superstition, and 
what desolation ever marks its triumph 1 
how mercilessly does it extirpate all that 
the poet loves to contemplate — that the 
heart of feeling delights to dwell on ! but 
the glow of imagination, the pleasure de- 
rived from associating ideas, are unknown 
to it; it knows nothing of that myste- 
rious pleasure, if I may use the expres- 
sion, which a soul of sentiment experi- 
ences in tracing the feelings, the taste, tlie 
genius, of an interesting people, in the 
works which they have left behind them ; 
all plead in vain — the records of departed 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 349 

greatness — the wonderful efforts of man's 
comprehensive genius — all are destroyed 
or defaced, to make room for sloth and 
ignorance, for sensuality and bigotry. Had 
the Spaniards pursued a different system 
of policy, and really been influenced by 
religion, I mean that religion that incHnes 
to peace and goodwill to all, how many of 
the tracts now given up to waste and bar- 
renness would have been regions of beauty 
and fertility! But I beg your pardon, don 
Callan," said Donaghue, suddenly recol- 
lecting himself, " my observations, I am 
aware, are not what they ought to be to 
you, but in the warmth of feeling, people 
sometimes are hurried beyond what they 
first intended; you will therefore have the 
goodness to excuse me." 

" Excuse you !" repeated Rosebud ; " to 
be sure he will: do }ou think that don 
Callan has seen so much of the world, 
without knowing that every man has a 
right to have an opinion ?'' 

" Assuredly," assented the Spaniard ; 
" and indeed I perfectly agree with your 



S50 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

fHend, that Grenada now forms a melan- 
choly contrast to what it once was. Its 
glories have literally passed away with its 
old inhabitants — its streets are choked with 
filth — its woods destroyed — its aqueducts 
crumbled to dust — its territory depopula- 
ted — its trade lost — in a word, every thing 
but the church and the law is in a most 
deplorable state. 

" Oh, the deuce a fear of the church- 
men or lawyers !" cried Rosebud, " if a fat 
bit can be got by hook or by crook, they 
will contrive to obtain it for themselves. 
What a set of locusts your priests to be 
sure are, don Callan ! and then all their 
mockeries and mummeries " 

" My dear doctor," interrupted Dona- 
ghue, in an expostulating tone. 

" Oh, pish !" exclaimed Rosebud; " what, 
as I have just said, do you think don Cal- 
lan has mixed so much in the world with- 
out being accustomed to hear men speak 
their sentiments ? I suppose you don't 
want me to lose the charter of an English- 
man ; at all events, as my friend Mr. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 351 

Coates says, I'll crow while I can. On 
this side of the Pyrenees, at least, we are 
safe, let us say what we may; on the 
other, indeed — though even there, I be- 
lieve, people have not got too enlighten- 
ed to render the disclosure of their senti- 
ments dangerous." 

Don Callan smiled. Donaghue caught 
the smile, and it did not please him. He 
checked, however, any indications of this, 
justly conceiving it would indeed be un- 
reasonable and ridiculous in the extreme, 
to be angry with a man because the ex- 
pression of his smile was not agreeable to 
you. 

" What a pother, don Callan," said 
Rosebud, who loved extremely to hear 
himself talk, " has been made about the 
name of your country ! for my part," and 
he spoke in a tone of importance, " I agree 
with my friend Galen, who supposes * Hes- 
peria,' from which all its modern names 
are derived, to have been formed from the 
Phoenician word sapan, or sapena, signi- 
fying a rabbit, with which animals the 



352 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 

country was once overrun, so that we may 
call you, don Callan, a coney- catching 
race." 

A riot and noise in a small village 
through which they were passing, attract- 
ed the travellers' attention. Rosebud, 
with his usual impatient curiosity, instant- 
ly dispatched the corporal to know what 
was the matter. He shortly returned, and 
acquainted them that it was all about love, 

" Love !" repeated Rosebud. 

" Yes, an' please your honour, doctor ; 
they told me they had seized one of the 
lovers, who had broke his vows, and were 
dragging him to punishment." v^l 

" Dragging him to punishment ! Well, 
to be sure, this is most extraordinary!" 
said Rosebud ; " but every place has its 
own ways and customs; and to be sure 
this is a much more summary way of pro- 
ceeding than that we have recourse to in 
our country, for punishing a perjured 
lover, by bringing an action against him 
for a breach of promise. Heaven help 
them ! what would become of half of the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. S5S 

Lovelasses of London, if they were in such 
a place as this !" 

" Ah ! it's not what you think, doctor," 
said the corporal ; " it is really for making 
love to a true sweetheart, and not for de- 
serting her, that they are going to punish 
the lover here." 

" Well, I really can't understand it," 
said the doctor, in great distress. — " Pray, 
sir," addressing a man of respectable ap- 
pearance, " can you inform me what is 
the meaning of this riot?" 

" It began, monsieur," replied the stran- 
ger, " I understand, by one of these love- 
leaguers breaking his vows." 

" Love-leaguers, sir, did you say ?" de- 
manded Rosebud, eagerly. 

" Yes, monsieur; have you never heard 
of the love-league as established in this 
town ?" 

" No, never," returned the doctor, " but 
would be greatly obliged by any informa- 
tion on the subject," laying his hand as he 
spoke on the arm of the stranger, as if 



354 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

afraid else he might leave him without 
gratifying his curiosity. 

" You must know then, monsieur, short- 
ly after the return of Louis the Eigh- 
teenth, for the purpose of marking that 
happy epoch by something singular and 
grand, a set of young men, call them 
whimsical, fanatics, or what you please, 
entered into a league, to which they swore 
eternal truth, which they called ' the lo- 
vers' league,' for the purpose, they avowed, 
of proving the excess of their passion, by 
an invincible resistance to every rigour 
of the seasons. In obedience to their in- 
stitutes, they wore little clothing in win- 
ter, and very much when the heat is at 
the greatest ; in winter, flowers and foliage 
garnish their fireplaces — in summer, large 
fires are made; they have thus gone on, 
in this extravagant manner, until the 
greater part of these lovers have died of 
cold, or been smothered by heat, declaiming 
on the constancy, force, and effervescence, 
of their flame. The person who began 
this riot forgot himself so far as to be 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 355 

tempted, in consequence of having made 
too free with the juice of the grape, to in- 
dulge himself a little by making love to a 
pretty young girl he admired, and accord- 
ingly some of the leaguers set on him for 
breaking his vows, while others of them 
took his part." 

" Well, by Jove, this beats all the mad 
pranks I ever heard of before!" exclaimed 
Exjsebud ; " why, those of don Quixote, 
in the black mountains, were nothing to 
it. Body of me! as my friend Sancho 
says, did any one ever hear the like of this 
before?" 

" Pardon me, monsieur," said the stran- 
ger — " in the reign of Philip the Fifth, 
such a society or league existed, and this 
they have taken for a precedent." 

" Good Heavens ! good Heavens ! and 
so because my neighbour runs mad, or 
plays the fool, I am to do the same ? But 
adieu, monsieur !" kissing his hand, and 
waving it with a flourish, " adieu ! and 
accept the assurance of my high conside- 
ration for your obliging information." 



356 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

But notwithstanding the friendship that 
now appeared established between him 
and the Spaniard, a thousand little bicker- 
ings took place between them, the jealous 
temper of Rosebud making him fancy a 
thousand causes for offence ; sometimes he 
imagined he was laughed at — sometimes 
not sufficiently attended to when speak- 
ing — sometimes that he was treated as 
a petulant boy ; and on these occasions 
he was always ransacking his brain for 
something spiteful to say. Don Callan, 
however, seemed to take all in good 
part, and to appear vexed at Donaghue's 
seeming to think the reverse the case, 
by interfering so often as he did, espe- 
cially when the doctor chose to make 
the religion of their companion the sub- 
ject of ridicule and invective. 

But at length the journey drew to an 
end, and they reached the ancient city of 
Seville in safety, after a journey sufficient- 
ly pleasant to make amends for any fa- 
tigue it occasioned. Don Callan having 
lodged them in one of the chief inns, then 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 357 

took leave for a few days, in order to get 
his castle prepared for their reception, the 
length of time he had been absent from 
it making him much fear it was not ex- 
actly in a state for immediately receiving 
guests. 

His departure would have left them en- 
tirely to themselves, but that Rosebud, in 
racing about to tell every body where they 
were going, was intrusted with the deli- 
very of a letter from a gentleman there to 
a relation in Seville, in which he men- 
tioned the doctor and his young friend in 
such terms as induced don Alonzo de Guz- 
man to wait on them immediately, with a 
polite offer of his services, and an invita- 
tion to a tertulia on the following even- 
ing. The entertainment known by this 
name must be too well known to every 
reader, to render any description of it ne- 
cessary here; suffice, it highly delighted the 
strangers from its novelty, and corrected 
some errors they had been under, particu- 
larly with regard to the gravity and jealousy 
of the Spanish gentlemen, and the reserve 



358 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

of the ladies in public ; nothing could sur- 
pass the vivacity of the latter, nor the af- 
fability of their manners ; nor the pleasure 
which the former appeared to derive from 
witnessing their good-humour and general 
condescension. 

A concert succeeded the repast, and du- 
ring the interval between it and the ball 
that was to follow, the company dispersed 
about the gardens, which were very ex- 
tensive, and partially illuminated with the 
greatest brilliancy. In a short time Dona- 
ghueand the doctor were left by themselves, 
but they did not long continue together, 
for the doctor, finding Donaghue inclined 
to take the way to a retired part of the 
garden, suddenly left him for that which 
was more to his taste, from being the ge- 
neral centre of attraction. The walk into 
which Donaghue strolled was thickly 
planted with orange, lemon, and palm- 
trees, rendering it totally dark, but at the 
same time making, from this circumstance, 
the stars that shone above appear infinitely 
more brilliant. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 359 

Donaghue quite enjoyed the place, and 
was sinking into a train of pleasingly-pen- 
sive reflections, when voices from an ad- 
joining arbour broke on his reverie, and 
from the flirting conversation which he 
overheard here, as well as in some other 
sequestered spots, the error above alluded 
to was still further corrected, and a good 
deal of laughter produced between him 
and Rosebud the next morning, by find- 
ing, when they compared notes, that dis- 
coveries, or rather detections of a similar 
nature, had been made by both. 

But every thing, of a trifling nature at 
least, was soon forgotten in their eager 
impatience to view the city, and the re- 
marks it elicited, together with the beau- 
tiful plain on which it is situated ; but the 
Guadalquiver, on the banks of which it 
stands, no longer gives that life to it which 
it did in former times, w^hen the galleons 
here discharged their rich freightage from 
Mexico and Peru ; but while other cities 
are literally running into the country, it 
is worthy of remark that this is not larger 



360 TRADITION OF THE CASTLfi. 

than when left by the Romans. But 
though the situation is pleasant, the town 
itself is badly laid out, the streets being 
narrow and crooked, containing, however, 
some handsome houses, but very much in 
the Moorish plan, there being large courts 
with fountains in the centre, surrounded 
by galleries, in which the families gene- 
rally live in summer, under tents. 

The suburbs are fine, and the favourite 
promenade, called the Alamada, a very 
delightful one, shaded as it is with fine 
rows of trees, and adorned with seats and 
fountains. The extensive palace of the 
Alcazar, its beautiful fountains, its cool 
corridors, the grandeur of the royal apart- 
ments, the flights of marble stairs, and 
galleries composed of the same precious 
materials, all laid claim to the admiration 
of the travellers; but still more interest- 
ing was its garden to them, from the spe- 
cimen it afforded of what an Arabian one 
is, having been laid out by the Moors, 
and allowed to continue as they left it : 
deplorable indeed would have been the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 361 

taste that would have attempted any alte- 
ration in one so adapted to the climate. 
The parterres, planted with evergreens, 
richly blended with orange-trees, shelter, 
in many places, the most delicious baths, 
supplied by marble fountains ; while by 
means of small pipes in the joinings of the 
marble with which many of the walks are 
paved, a constant coolness is diffused 
through them, grateful in the extreme 
beneath such a sun. 

The saloon, containing a collection of 
Roman antiquities, from an ancient city 
called Italica, a few miles distant from Se- 
ville, and celebrated for being the birth- 
place of the emperor Trajan, did not either 
escape their attention, and without pro- 
fessing to be antiquarians, they were much 
gratified by what they saw there. 

The doctor and O'Brien spent some time 
in viewing the cathedral, a fine building 
in the Gothic style, with the figure of a 
woman on the top of the steeple, called 
the Giralda, which turns round with the 

VOL. I. K 



362 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

wind. The steeple is very lofty, and Do- 
naghue ascending it, was enchanted with 
the view it presented of the beautiful and 
fertile plains of Seville, with its delicious 
gardens and orange groves, enlivened by 
the Guadalquiver. 

Before the choir of the cathedral is the 
tomb of Christopher Columbus, with this 
simple inscription, comprised in these 
words — " To Castile and Arragon Colum- 
bus gave a new world." 

" It is short," observed the doctor, " but 
still as ex])ressive as the high-sounding 
ones too often presented to the eye on the 
mausoleums of the rich, and puts me in 
mind of the ' O rare Ben Jonson!' in 
Westminster Abbey ; for my part, I have 
always thought, of all flattery, that of mo- 
numental flattery the most ridiculous, for 
those concerned in it cannot be gratified 
by it, while others laugh at it." 

" It is very true," returned his compa- 
nion ; " and, as has been observed by a wri- 
ter of elegance, ' Philosophy may sigh, or 
smile, at the weakness or vanity which 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 363 

leads to a thing of the kind ;' but are there 
not a thousand weaknesses in life that we 
cannot help respecting, from the motive 
to which we attribute them ; and is not 
this, the weakness that occasions us to be- 
deck the tombs of those w^e love in such 
a manner as may prevent their being 
passed over with neglect, one of them? 
but if we examine and investigate, we 
shall find that there is not that folly attach- 
ed to the idea of those splendid repositories 
for the dead, which are to be found in all 
parts of the world, since a sufficient rea- 
son could be assigned for them. For in- 
stance, the Egyptians entertained the be- 
lief that the body, after tliree thousand 
years, was again to be animated — is it won- 
derful, therefore, that they should conceive 
no cost too great for the preservation of 
those remains, that, at the end of a stated 
period, they expected to see again spring 
into existence, or to do honour to those 
they imagined only slumbering for a 
while ? To this belief we may attribute 
R 2 



364 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE* 

the mighty pyramid of Cheops; and re- 
garding it in this light, we cannot con- 
template it as the effort of a madman, to 
attain immortality by a heap of stones. 
But it is insisted on, at the present day, 
that all monuments had a physical utility, 
and it has been observed, for I quote the 
observation of another, ' Ought it not to 
be considered, that there is for nations a 
moral utility of a much higher nature, 
which was studied by the legislators of 
antiquity ? for is there nothing to be learn- 
ed from the sight of a tomb ? if any lesson 
is taught by it, why should we complain 
that a king resolved to render that lesson 
perpetual? Majestic monuments consti- 
tute an essential part of the glory of every 
human society; unless we maintain that 
it is a matter of indifference whether a 
nation leaves behind it a name or no name 
in history, we cannot condemn those struc- 
tures, which extend the memory of a 
people beyond its own existence, and make 
it contemporary with the future genera- 
tions that fix their residence in their for- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. S65 

saken fields. Of what consequence is it 
then, whether those edifices were amphi- 
theatres or sepulchres ? Every thing is a 
tomb wHth a nation that is no raore. When 
man is gone, the monuments of his life 
are still more vain than those of his death 
— his mausoleum is at least serviceable to 
his ashes, but do his palaces retain any 
portion of his pleasures?" 

They visited the monastery of St. Fran- 
cis, situated in an extensive square, adorn- 
ed with a fountain, casting up sheets of 
limpid water. The building is large, and 
its church magnificent. The high altar, 
adorned with paintings and sculpture, par- 
ticularly attracted their attention, and a- 
mongst the former, one representing the 
fainting of queen Esther, and Ahasuerus 
extending the royal sceptre to her, Dona- 
ghue thought he could never sufficiently 
admire. But all this was not seen in one 
day, nor, once seen, was the interest exci- 
ted to be gratified without repeated visits. 
Some days elapsed, and still no don 
Callan, nor any message from him. The 



S66 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

from behind the altar, and slipping a fold- 
friends were too agreeably engaged to feel 
any anxiety about seeing him, but they 
could not help thinking it odd that there 
was no message of inquiry from him, to 
learn how, as strangers, they were getting 
on, and still stranger that no one seemed 
to know any thing about him ; however, 
they accounted for this by supposing he 
had never mixed much with the immedi- 
ate inhabitants of Seville. 



CHAPTER X. 



" For neither man, nor angel, can discern 
Hypocrisy, the only evil that walks 
Invisihle, except to God alone." 

The delight which Donaghue took in 
viewing the interesting picture of Esther, 
drew him to take another view of it, one 
morning, by himself As he was contem- 
plating it in fixed admiration, a man, com- 
pletely enveloped in a large cloak, stole 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 367 

ed paper into his hand, instantly vanished 
from his view. 

The doctor joining him at the instant, 
prevented his immediately ascertaining 
the contents of this mysteriously deliver- 
ed billet ; but the curiosity it excited was 
too great not to induce a speedy return to 
the inn, when retiring to his own cham- 
ber, he hastily opened it, and to his great 
surprise read as follows : 



" Monastery of St. Francis. 

" SIK, 

" An EngUsbman having by 
chance heard of your arrival in this city, 
although unknown to you, claims your as- 
sistance as a countrj^man, to extricate him 
from a situation of the most imminent 
peril, such as he has every reason to ap- 
prehend may prove fatal to him, if not 
speedily rescued from. The bearer will 
explain particulars, time not allowing of 
his explaining more himself 

" To O'Donaghue O'Brien, Esq," 



368 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

But where was the bearer? why, since 
he must have known he was referred to 
him, disappear with such suddenness, thus 
in a degree disappointing the confidence 
that had been reposed in him ? But with- 
out puzzling himself further on the subject, 
Donaghue immediately decided on return- 
ing to the monastery. By the time he re- 
turned to the church, he found it nearly 
deserted ; he looked keenly at the few that 
remained, in hopes of receiving a sign 
from some one of them ; but no one ap- 
peared to notice him particularly, and af- 
ter lingering some time before the high 
altar, he returned to his lodgings, but with 
a determination of revisiting the church 
in the evening ; for his humanity was all 
on the alert to know how he could render 
the required service. 

On entering his chamber to change his 
dress for dinner, he kicked something be- 
fore him ; on looking to see what, he per- 
ceived it was a paper in which the billet 
had been wrapped, and picking it up, dis- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 369 

covered the following lines written with a 
pencil on it : — 



" When the bearer of this under- 
took what is alluded to in the billet, he 
was by no means aware of the danger he 
was likely to incur from the promise he 
made ; but though, from being now perfect- 
ly apprized of it, he can no longer think of 
fulfilling to the expected extent the pro- 
mise he so rashly made, yet still anxious 
to serve an innocent man, he suggests to 
the senor O'Brien that father Lawrence, 
confessor to the monastery of St. Francis, 
might, by proper management, be ren- 
der instrumental to what is desired. Of 
course caution, it must be evident, is re- 
quired ; but for the better guidance of the 
senor, he deems it not amiss to hint, that 
the father is accessible to money.*' 



The whole of dinner-time Donaghue 
K 3 



370 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

cx)uld think of nothing but how he could 
proceed in this perplexing affair ; in vain, 
however, he puzzled himself on the sub- 
ject, and at last he came to the determi- 
nation of consulting with the corporal, of 
whose shrewdness he was well aware ; for 
as to doing so with Rosebud, that was out 
of the question, from the rashness and 
precipitancy of his temper, which never 
allowed him to take a moment for consi- 
deration ere he acted, let the matter be 
what it might. 

After hearing his communication, Cor- 
mick remained for some time in deep co- 
gitation, then suddenly striking his fore- 
head — " I have it," he cried, " I have it, 
your honour, by St. Patrick !" 

" Explain," said Donaghue. 

" Oh ! that, your honour, would take 
up too much time now; only that I think, 
if the affair is left to my management, I 
shall be able to get hold of the confessor." 

** Well, I am perfectly ready to intrust 
it to you," said Donaghue. 

" Very well, your honour ; then let me 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 371 

have a few pieces, and I'll instantly set 
about what I have schemed." 

Donaghue presenting him with his 
purse, desired him to take what he re- 
quired. The corporal obeyed him, and 
Donaghue, without delaying him to ask 
further questions then, rejoined the doc- 
tor, but could not prevent his thoughts 
from being occupied in conjecturing what 
the plan of Cormick was, or avoid anx- 
iously inquiring about him, from time to 
time. At last he learned he had come in, 
and was then busy in his room, preparing 
for a person he expected to see. On hear- 
ing this, Donaghue made an excuse to 
the doctor for not accompanpng him in 
his promenade about the town, and im- 
mediately repaired to his own chamber, 
which, adjoining Cormick's, would, he 
knew, permit him both to see and hear 
whatever passed there, and at what he 
witnessed he certainly was a good deal di- 
verted, from the specimen it gave him of 
the corporal's roguer\\ 

It seems a letter was written bv Cormick 



372 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

to the confessor, stating that a person then 
lying ill at the Angel inn wished to see 
him immediately, for the double purpose 
of receiving his ghostly consolation, and 
putting into his hands a sum of money, 
which he had vowed to St. Francis, in 
hopes of its being the means of inducing 
him to aid their prayers for their recovery; 
and at the moment of Donaghue's enter- 
ing his room, the corporal was preparing 
for the reception of the pious father, by 
laying out a table with diflPerent kinds of 
wine and fruit. 

Father Lawrence at last came ; he was 
a man about four feet high, and nearly as 
broad as he was long, and rather reeled 
than walked into the room. His rosy 
jowls hung low, and the shortness of his 
neck made his head appear to be sunk be- 
tween his shoulders. His eyebrows were 
dark and bushy, and projected far over a 
pair of small grey sharp eyes, that twinkled 
like stars of a frosty night, and appeared to 
have a most extraordinary facility in ob- 
serving surrounding objects ; and from the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 373 

colour of his visage it might have been 
supposed, but for his vow of abstinence, 
he sometimes mixed wine with his water, 
and that to its purifying effect were owing 
the large carbuncles that were cast out on 
his nose, not certainly to the rendering 
l^is aspect more amiable. 

" Peace be to this house !" he cried, on 
entering ; " but how is this ?" casting his 
scrutinizing eyes round the apartment ; 
" I thought I was summoned here to a 
sick or expiring man, but I see no one 
here answering that description." 

" True, holy father, true," cried the 
wag Cormick ; " when I got that note 
wrote to you, I thought it was all over 
with me ; but good St. Francis heard my 
prayers, and, as you see, has almost mu 
raculously restored me to myself, blessed 
be his holy name for his kindness ! for I 
was not altogether prepared, I must con- 
fess, for a journey yet a while to the other 
world ; and indeed the knowledge of this, 
holy father, makes me wish to have a little 
talk with your reverence : but come, fa- 



374 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ther, be seated, for I clearly perceive, in 
your haste to be in time to do your duty, 
you have walked so fast as to lose your 
breath." 

" Ah no, son ! but I am old — I am in- 
firm," sighed the confessor, as he took a 
seat at the table, and cast a leering glance 
over it, " and weak, and faint, from peni- 
tence, mortification, and fasting." 

" So it seems indeed," said the corporal, 
as he filled out wine ; " any one might 
see that, that looks at you, w^asted away 
as you are ! But come, father," present- 
ing him with a glass, " here's to our bet- 
ter acquaintance. I can see by your reve- 
rence's looks it will go against your grain 
to touch it ; but worn out, dwindled away 
to nothing as you are with fasting, you 
must needs now and then require a cor- 
dial of the kind ; and indeed, holy father, 
if it was for nothing else, you should take 
some care of yourself, for the sake of the 
poor penitents under your holy care, for 
where would they find such a spiritual di- 
rector as yourself?" 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 375 

" Ah! that's all very true, my son. 
Heaven knows indeed, as you say, I want 
something to strengthen my weak body, 
raise my sinking heart, and comfort me 
altogether ; but then I so wish to mortify 
— however, it smells so enticingly — that 
is, I mean — however, not to appear un- 
gracious to a person whom, there is reason 
to believe, holy St. Francis esteems, I will 
just put my lips to it." 

" Is it to your liking, father?" asked 
the corporal, as soon as he perceived he 
had got to the bottom of the glass, which 
was by no means a small one. 

" To my liking ! why, I — I protest, my 
son, I cannot well tell what the taste of it 
was, having swallowed it without think- 
ing about it." 

" Then try it again, father." 

" Well, my son, since you wish for my 
opinion," and another bumper was dis- 
charged down his throat, hke the first; 
after which—" Well, my son, I must con- 
fess, as a body may say, I think the taste 
of it very delicious, but perhaps that's 



376 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

only owing to my not being accustomed 
to any thing of the kind. But see here I 
after your good-nature, if I have drank to 
your better health ! Well, my son, you 
shall not have to reproach me with such 

unkindness, and so 1 didn't use to be 

so unmannerly." 

" No, no, I dare say not, father, in mat- 
ters of this kind," cried the corporal, as 
he replenished his glass for him ; " but 
come, father, take care of yourself, I beg, 
for I want to have a little chat with you ; 
I want to speak to you about an act of 
charity I vowed, if it was agreeable to 
you to concern yourself in it." 

" Agreeable, my son !" rubbing his hands 
in manifest delight at the idea thus held 
out of his soon being allowed to touch the 
needful — " is it not the very comfort of 
my heart, and joy of my soul, to hear any 
one speaking of charity? more particu- 
larly when, by letting me be the means 
of distributing it, I know their pious in- 
tentions will not be defeated." 

" Well, father, to explain — but first let 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 377 

US wet our whistles," cried the corporal, 
evidently beginning to get a little eleva- 
ted — " In that awful hour, when I expect- 
ed every moment would be my last, I 
made a vow to St. Francis " 

" A vow, my son !" eagerly repeated 
the confessor. 

" Yes, father, to give five pieces to the 
confessor of his monastery, to bestow in 
charity, for his sake, as he pleased." 

*' Indeed ! well then, my son, if you 
were thinking for twenty years, you could 
not have done any thing more agreeable 
to him, for he is one of the most benevo- 
lent of the saints." 

" 1 am glad to hear that, father, that 
what I did must be agreeable to him. 
Here they are — the five pistoles." 

Father Lawrence eyed the gold with a 
greedy eye, but hesitated to take it. 

" What are you hesitating about?" im- 
patiently demanded the corporal, pressing 
the money on him. 

" It is against my vows, son, to — to di- 
rectly take money ; but then," catching 



378 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the corporal by the arm, as in surprise he 
started back, " I — I don't refuse it ; but 
the way is to let it seem as if I found it, 
so you must let it drop on the floor." 

" Oh ho ! is that the way of cheating 

the 1 beg pardon — there it is — one, 

two," and he deUberately counted the five 
pieces as he let them fall. 

" Very good, my son, very good !" cried 
the confessor, as he nimbly picked them 
up, and snugly deposited them in his 
pouch ; " depend upon it they shall be 
properly disposed of; and not only that, 
but assure yourself you shall have my 
prayers with St. Francis, to recompense 
you for this whenever you shall meet." 

" Ah, father ! the time for that is so 
uncertain, that if you could be prevailed 
on, in his stead, to do me a kindness now, 
I should be very well satisfied, and for 
which I have five pieces more I could lose 
as readily as those you just found." 

" Explain, for really you have so gain- 
ed upon me, so won my warm heart, that 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 579 

if I can oblige you, you may depend on 
it : but didn't I hear something drop ?" 

" I beUeve not, Lawrence, but you soon 
will — one, two, three, four, five ! Now, fa- 
ther, you must know " 

" But first," interrupted the confessor, 
" remember that all that passes between 
us is a secret." 

" Trust me for that," said the corporal ; 
" but to go on — Now, father, you must 
know that my master is a most liberal 
gentleman, for this money was his, and 
the only return he requires for it, and 
more perhaps, is, that you would procure 
him an interview with the prisoner you 
have in the monastery." 

The confessor started — " The prisoner 
at the monastery ! How ! why ! what ! how 
did you come to know any thing about 
that man ?" 

" Tut ! what signifies telling ? but if it 
was the devil himself one wanted to see, 
I think, after all that has passed, you 
shouldn't refuse to oblige one." 

^* The devil himself! Lord save us! 



S80 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

don't mention the wicked one again before 
me, my son; but what interest has your 
master in this man's fate?" 

" Why, as all things that pass between 
us are to remain a secret, you must know, 
most reverend Lawrence, that that man 
is my master's brother." 

" You don't say so ?" said the confessor, 
eagerly. 

" By St. Patrick, but I do !" replied the 
corporal, scarcely knowing, by this time, 
what he was saying. 

" Then perhaps he had something to 
say to the affair — was one of the party 
maybe ?" 

" You may say that." 

" Well, well, this is a discovery ! and 
his brother, you say ?'* 

" No more doubt of it than there is of 
your being entitled to be sainted for your 
sanctity; and so you wouldn't have the 
cruelty, I'm sure, not to let him see his 
own relation !" 

The confessor seemed to muse; then, 
after a pause of some minutes — " Well, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 381 

son," he said, ** since you say your master 
is so generous, and will be so sure of re- 
warding any kindness, he shall see his bro- 
ther ; here, give him this," taking a small 
crucifix from his bosom, " let him attend 
matins, and remain near the high altar, 
and when the service is over, a person 
will be in readiness, on the sight of it, to 
conduct him where he wishes." 

" Ah then, come to my arms, my jewel !" 
cried Cormick, starting up in no small ec- 
stacy, at the thought of having succeeded 
so well in his stratagem ; " one would 
think you were an Irishman, you are so 
good-natured." 

As he spoke he made a reel, or rather 
dart forward, to embrace the priest, but 
who, not exactly liking this manifestation 
of kindness, drawing back a little at the 
instant to avoid it, Cormick fell upon him 
with such force, as brought both to the 
ground, whence it was not without diffi- 
culty, after completely rolling over one 
another, they were able to rise. 

The moment father Lawrence had re- 



382 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

tired, Donaghue entered the apartment 
to secure the crucifix, and see the corporal 
was got to bed. He would have remon- 
strated with him on the falsehood he had 
been guilty of, but for the uselessness of 
any expostulation with him at present; 
and this not merely from the abhorrence 
in which he held imposition of all kinds, 
but not knowing, in the present instance, 
the mischief it might be the means of oc- 
casioning; and the consideration of this 
would assuredly have caused him a good 
deal of uneasiness, but that he was incli- 
ned to think the selfishness of the confes- 
sor would not permit him to allow any 
thing disagreeable to accrue from it. 

Exactly as the clock struck twelve, he 
repaired to the church of St. Francis, now 
brilliantly illuminated, and crowded with 
people. 

Immediately after service the crowd be- 
gan to thin, and Donaghue then approach, 
ed the high altar; but, minute after mi- 
nute elapsed, and all, save a few straggling 
devotees wandering about the aisles, or 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 38S 

kneeling at different shrines, had departed, 
without bringing any one to him, and he 
was beginning to think the confessor would 
fail in his promise, when a small door was 
cautiously opened, and father Lawrence 
appeared at it, eagerly looking about him. 
Donaghue directly took the crucifix from 
his bosom, and held it up to him. The 
recognition was acknowledged by his be- 
ing immediately beckoned to the father. 
Having passed through the door, he was 
conducted in silence through part of the 
cloisters, to an apartment, where the con- 
fessor left him, but returned in a few mi- 
nutes with the prisoner, and then again 
retired. 

The stranger was so completely enve- 
loped in a large cloak, that it was utterly 
impossible for Donaghue to catch a glimpse 
of his face, and appeared greatly agitated, 
insomuch that Donaghue was obliged to 
entreat him to endeavour to compose him- 
self, and recollect the expediency of losing 
no time in letting him know how he could 
be serviceable to him, or rather in what 



384 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

way he should proceed to effect his libe- 
ration. 

This remonstrance had the desired ef- 
fect. The stranger informed him, that 
though an Englishman, as already stated, 
he had for many years been a kind of natu- 
ralized Spaniard, his religion inducing him i 
to take up his abode in the country, and, ! 
of course, amenable to all its laws, of which 
circumstance a person deeply in his debt ■ 
took advantage to represent him as an ene- 
my to the government, and in consequence 
of which unjust accusation he should have j 
been arrested, but that he discovered the 
danger he was in just time enough to es- 
cape it by taking sanctuary in the monas- | 
tery of St. Francis, till such time as he ! 
could fly the country ; but where he had i 
not long been, ere, by means too tedious | 
to enter upon, he ascertained the artifices 
of his enemy having even there prevailed \ 
against him, by inducing the superior to \ 
decide on giving him up. — " The ensuing i 
night," he continued, in terrible agitation, j 
** is the one fixed on for this treachery ; so ' 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 385 

that if prompt measures are not taken, I 
am a lost man. In flying to save my life, 
all my property was left behind, but if you 
will generously furnish your servant, who 
has already played his part to admiration, 
with the means of still further interesting 
the confessor in my behalf, I make no 
doubt of obtaining my liberty." 

This was readily promised ; and, to be 
brief, the corporal managed matters so well 
with father Lawrence, that he succeeded 
in obtaining the prisoner his liberty, and 
conducted him, the next night, from the 
monastery to the inn, where it was de- 
cided he should remain for a few days, by 
which time it was concluded the search 
after him would be pretty well over. Cor- 
mick put him in possession of a snug 
chamber, and having provided him with 
refreshments, left him to himself, taking 
care to lock the door himself, and, for fear 
of accidents, putting the key in his pocket. 

After this precaution, his consternation 
at the discovery of the ensuing morning 

VOL. I. s 



386 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

may well be imagined. On the return of 
Donaghue from a ramble before breakfast, 
he found him in utter dismay at the flight 
of the stranger, or rather at having, in 
consequence of it, had any thing to say to 
him, protesting that he must either be the 
old one himself, or else a conjuror, to have 
effected it from a chamber secured on the 
outside, and with the windows of it at a 
considerable distance from the ground. 

Donaghue, though he could not con- 
jecture how he had contrived to get off, 
had no superstitious fears, however, to be 
awakened ; but he certainly felt indignant 
at the base requital this conduct was for 
the risk they had run on his account, im- 
puting it, as he did, to a distrust of their 
sincerity. 



END OF VOL. I, 



Printed by J. Darling, Lcadenhall-Street, London. 



NEW PUBLICATIONS 

PRINTED FOR 

^. K, JYEfFJ}I»AJV ^ CO. 



AT THE 



LEADENHALL-STREET, LONDOxV. 



i: s. d. 

Love, Mystery, and Misery, by A. F. Holstein, 2 vols 10 
The Modern Villa and Ancient Castle, or the Peer and 
Alderman, by^Miss Byron, Author of the English- 
woman, Sec. 3 vols 15 

Festival of St. Jago, by the Author of the Private His- 
tory of the Court of England, 2 vols 10 

Arthur Fitz-Albini, 3d edition, 2 vols 9 

Louisa, or the Cottage on the Moor, by Mrs. Helme, 

8th edition, 2 vols 10 

Woman, or Ida of Athens, by Miss Owenson, 4 vols.. 110 
Nocturnal Minstrel, or the Spirit of the Wood, by Mrs. 
Sleath, Author of the Bristol Heiress, Who's the Mur- 
derer ? &c. 2 vols 10 

The Grey Friar and Black Spirit of the Wye, 2 vols 10 

Euphronia, by Mrs. Norris, 3 vols. 15 

Houses of Osraa and Almeria, or the Convent of St. li- 
defonso, by the Author of the Children of the Abbey, 

&c. 3 vols 18 

The Beau Monde, or Scenes in High Life, 3 vols. ... ., 15 
Caroline of Lichtfield, a new edition, translated by Tho- 
mas Holcroft, 3 vols 15 

Memoirs of an American Lady, by the Author of Letters 

from the Mountains, 3d edition, 2 vols OliO 

Love, Hatred, and Revenge, a Swiss Romance, by T. P. 

Lathy, 2d edition, 3 vols 15 

Devil upon Two Sticks in England, by the Author of 
Dr. Syntax's Tour in Search of the Picturesque , &c. 
.5th edition, 6 vols,.,. ...... , •....•...,, 1 10 o 



[4 



NEW PUBLICATIONS. 

£ s. d. 

Arthur Mervyn, by C. B. Brown, 3 vols 16 6 

Matron of Erin, an Irish Tale, by the same Author, §d 

edition, 3 vols 16 6 

Strathallan, by Miss Lefanu, 3d edition, 4 vols 1 4 

Lucilla, or the Reconciliation, by Miss Sandham, Au- 
thor of the Twin Sisters, 5cc. 2d edition, 2 vols 10 

Castles of Athlin and Dunbayne, a Romance, by Mrs. 

RadclifFe, new edition 5 

Felix Alvarez, a Spanish Tale, by Alexander R. C. Dal- 
las, Esq. 3 vols 18 

The Recess, or a Tale of other Times, by Sophia Lee, 

6th edition, 3 vols 16 6 

Albert, or the Wilds of Strathnavern, by Elizabeth 

Helme, 2d edition, 4 vols 1 

The Irish Necromancer, or Deer Park, a Novel, by Tho- 
mas H. Marshal, 3 vols 16 6 

Fears and Cares, or an Uncle and his Nephew, by E. D. 

Carr, 3 vols 16 6 

Varieties of Life, by the Author of Sketches of Charac- 
ter, 2d edition, 3 vols 16 6 

Maid of the Hamlet, by Maria Regina Roche, 3d edit. 

2 vols 10 

Hermit's Cave, or the Fugitive's Retreat, an Historical 
Romance, by Zara Wentworth, Author of the Recluse 
of Albyn Hall, 4 vols 100 

Scenes at Brighton, by Innes Hoole, Esq. 3 vols 15 

Harley Radington, by Miss D. P. Campbell, 2 vols 10 6 

Sicilian Romance, by Mrs. RadclifFe, new edition, 2 v. 9 

Freebooter of the Alps, a Romance, by James Grif- 
fin, 2 vols 11 

Bigotry, or the Warning Voice, a Novel, 4 vols i 4 

De Willenberg, or the Talisman, a Tale of Mystery, by 
L M. H. Hales, Esq. Author of the Astrologer, &c. 
4 vols 1 2 

Conversation, or Shades of Difference, a Novel, by Mrs. 

Heron, 3 vols 5. . 16 6 

Cospatrick of Raymondsholm, a Westland Tale, by the 
Author of Redmond the Rebel, and St. Kathleen, 3 v. 1:^ 
TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 



Printed by J. Darling, Lcadenhall-Street, Loiidou. 



THE 



TEADITION OF the CASTLE ; 

OR, 

SCENES IN THE EMERALD ISLE. 

IN FOUR VOLUMES. 



BY 

REGINA MARIA ROCHE, 

AUTHOn OF 

THE CHILDREN OF THE ABBEY, VICAR OF LANSDOWN, MAID OF THE 
HAMLET, 8cc. 



" Ob Erin, my country ! though sad and forsaken, 

In dreams I revisit thy sea-beaten shore; 

But, alas ! in a far foreign land I awaken. 

And sigh for the friends who can meet me no more." 



VOL. II. 



london: 

PRINTED FOR 

A. K. NEWMAN AND CO. LEA DE N H ALL-STKEET. 

1824. 






THE 

TRADITION OF THE CASTLE 



CHAPTER I. 



.**^^*.*sr.*^r*sr^^^*^•*^»^*>»■** 



■Ere the bat hath flown 



liis cloister'd flight; ere to black Hecate's summons 
The shard-born beetle, with his drowsy hum, 
Hath rung night's yawning peal, there must be done 
A deed of dreadful note." 

Endeavouring, however, to dis- 
miss the ingratitude he had met with from 
his thoughts, Donaghue was conversing 
with Rosebud, after dinner, when an un- 
usual noise in the hall made him dispatch 
the corporal to inquire the cause. 

Whatever was the matter, however, the 
corporal, instead of coming back to ac- 

VOL. II. B 



2 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

qua'nt them, soon seemed to take part in 
it himself, for his voice was shortly heard 
elevated above that of every other person ; 
and what appeared still more surprising, 
the tumult seemed approaching their apart- 
ment. 

On finding this, Donaghue started up, 
and throwing open the door, beheld the 
corporal, with his back to him, half-way 
up the stairs, opposing the advance of a 
small party of soldiers. — " What's the 
matter? What's the meaning of all this?" 
demanded Donaghue, advancing into the 
gallery. 

"Oh, nothing, please your honour!" 
replied Cormick ; " but that after denying 
your honour, I don't see what right these 
fellows have to come up ; and by the Lord 
they shan't, if I can help it! What, 
though I haven't got my arms about me, 
they shall find it's not such an easy matter, 
as they may imagine, to pass an Irishman 
against his will ;" and so saying, without 
further ceremony, he threw himself upon 
one of them, and, tripping up his heels in 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 3 

a trice, succeeded in wresting his firelock 
from him, and with which he was then 
proceeding to lay about him in every di- 
rection, when Donaghue interfered, and 
peremptorily commanding him to desist, 
again desired to know what all this meant? 

The party had, by this time, gained the 
landing-place; and he who appeared the 
head of it replied to this interrogation, by 
presenting a paper to the view of Dona- 
ghue, containing instructions for his arrest, 
by order of the Holy Inquisition. 

" Good God !" exclaimed Donaghue in- 
voluntarily, reading the paper aloud, " here 
must be some mistake ! In the first place, 
if I were even cognizable to such a tribu- 
nal as the Holy Inquisition, I have done 
nothing to provoke its vengeance ; and in 
the next, are you aware, my friend," ad- 
dressing the soldier, " that as a British 
subject and a British officer, I am not to 
be injured or insultecj with impunity?" 

" I am aware of nothing," cried the 
man, with the most immoveable expres- 
B 2 



4 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

sion of countenance, " but what my duty 
demands." 

" Then you must be rendered so," said 
the doctor, now in sudden indignation, 
losing the terror with which he had at first 
been overcome. " You must be made 
sensible, that an insult to a British officer 
is a thing that will not be passed over." 

" I am not so ignorant as not to know 
that," w^as the reply, but with a sneer; 
" it yet remains to be proved what right 
your friend here has to that title which he 
pleads for protection. We have positive 
assurance that he has none." 

" My God ! what treachery is here !'' 
exclaimed Donaghue; " who is it that 
can have been contriving to do me an in- 
jury, or rather on what account, for, stran- 
ger as I am here, how can 1 have provoked 
the enmity of any one !" 

" 'Tis no use, senor, your puzzling your- 
self on the subject, or rather trying to 
feign ignorance as to the cause of what has 
happened; the trick is stale, and won't 
pass. You are my prisoner, and may as 



TPADITION OF THE CASTLE. 5 

well accompany me, without further de- 
lay or resistance, since accompany me you 
must at last." 

" No," cried Donaghue, indignantly, 
*' I cannot, I will not give way to so un- 
just an order. I demand to be taken be- 
fore one of the magistrates of the place; 
and if I cannot satisfy him, 'tis then time 
enough to have recourse to force." 

" Whatever you are," said the soldier, 
with cold and even insolent solemnity, " it 
is evident you are a stranger here, or you 
would not have dared to insult the Holy 
Office by what you have suggested — ap- 
peal from it!" and he seemed to shudder at 
the thought ; and as if, after an offence 
so heinous, it would be eternal reproba- 
tion to have another moment's hesitation, 
he beckoned his comrades to advance and 
do their duty. 

" Then, by the Lord ! if they are desired 
to do their duty, I must do mine also," 
cried the corporal, and, rushing forwaixl, 
threw himself between them and his mas- 
ter. 



b TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Donaghue, apprehensive for his life, 
tried to push him aside, but in vain ; he 
was wrought up to madness, and was 
about braving the soldiers, when a sudden 
blow on the temple levelled him with the 
floor, and he was immediately bound and 
borne off. 

They were leading Donaghue after him, 
when Rosebud, pushing through them, in 
an agony of sorrow clasped him to his 
breast — " And oh, wo the day," he cried, 
" in which we entered this accursed place ! 
But it was all my doing — through my 
persuasion it was owing — and well my life 
shall pay ; for O'Brien, my dearest lad 1 
should evil betide you in consequence, I'll 
never survive you. But take courage! 
I'll raise heaven and earth to extricate you 
out of the dungeon of horrors into which 
they are dragging you !" 

" Come, come, senor, these invectives 
won't serve the prisoner," exclaimed the 
chief of the party; and rudely pushing the 
distracted doctor aside, they carried off 
Donaghue without further opposition. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 7 

Donaghue most anxiously wished to 
know what had become of the corporal, 
but could receive no satisfaction. A car- 
riage was in waiting at the door, into which 
he was obliged to ascend, and the soldiers 
mounting on the outside, it drove off. 

It was dusk when it stopped at an im- 
mense pile of buildings, enclosed within 
fortified walls of a height that was terrific. 
The entrance was through a succession of 
long, black, vaulted gateways, each more 
dismal than the last, as if to give a hint of 
that progressive despair that here seized 
the sinking heart. 

On emerging from the last, the carriage 
rolled heavily over the hollow pavement 
of a silent court, and stopped before a gate 
of iron, in the centre of the building. The 
soldiers now dismounted, and a knock be- 
ing given on the gate, a wicket was open- 
ed, and a man in a black habit appeared 
at it. The prisoner was then motioned to 
alight, and, obeying, was handed over to 
this person, who, on his stepping within 



8 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the door, immediately closed it, and all 
this without a word passing at any side. 

A chill came over the soul of Donaghue 
at the instant, that made his heart sink 
within him. Common dangers and com- 
mon terrors he could have braved, with as 
much steadiness as any one; but there was 
something in the undefined ones he ap- 
prehended here, a sepulchral stillness in 
the place, that made him almost think he 
felt the cold air of the grave blowing on 
him, that struck horror to his feelings. 
But he quickly rallied himself, yet not 
without almost regretting that he had not 
made a still greater resistance to the order 
that had dragged him here. Yet, after 
all, of what avail, but to have probably 
lost him his life, since he might have been 
sure that no one would have attempted to 
give him any assistance, whatever their 
real feelings might have been for him. 
To what he owed the predicament he was 
in he could not possibly conjecture; but 
he was not equally at a loss in surmising 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 9 

to whom, feeling an internal conviction, 
that it was owing, either to the treachery 
of don Callan, or the stranger he had been 
the means of freeing; and now the, to 
himself, unaccountable dislike he had 
conceived to don Callan, recurred to his 
recollection, with a sensation of the most 
poignant regret, at not having obeyed 
the kind of warning it implied to shun 
him. Yet it was not his own fault that 
be had not done so ; and if ever he could 
have admitted the idea of fatality, it would 
have been in this instance. 

But his reflections were soon interrupt- 
ed, by being motioned to follow the man 
who had received him. As Donaghue 
obeyed the sign, he found himself advanc- 
ing into an immense hall, divided into long 
passages, or aisles, by rough stone arches, 
and through which, in different directions, 
several figures, all arrayed in black, were 
seen, by the faint light of a few glim- 
mering lamps, placed, as if at random, 
against the cold discoloured walls, glid- 
b3 



10 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ing, but with steps so noiseless, that, to a 
disturbed imagination, they might well 
have passed for unearthly creatures ; and 
all this to strike terror into the devoted 
victim. — " Horrible institution !" thought 
Donaghue; " worthy alone, indeed, of 
demons, from the arts it has recourse to." 
In the centre of this apartment was an 
immense grating, fitted into the flooring, 
which was of black marble. Towards this 
Donaghue was conducted ; and here there 
was a pause, evidently, to him, for the 
purpose of letting him examine it. In- 
stinctively he looked down, and beheld a 
kind of dungeon beneath. Scarcely had 
he ascertained what he saw, ere the most 
dismal sounds of human suffering broke 
upon his ear. At the sound, several of 
the officials started forward, and, by their 
united efforts, raising the grating, a bier, 
with the body of a man stretched on it^ 
was pushed up, still working in the ago- 
nies of death. It was directly carried off; 
but almost instantly replaced by a mise- 
rable wretch, who, with shrieks that echo- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 11 

ed through the place, was dragged for- 
ward from one of the recesses of the hall, 
and being placed on the bier, was bound 
to it with cords, and then let down into 
this infernal pit of torture. 

Hardly had he vanished from the view, 
ere the most appalling sounds issued from it, 
some of them resembling those occasioned 
by broad-wheeled waggons rolling over 
flint stones, and grinding them to powder ; 
and as they reached the ear of Donaghue, 
mingled with the shrieks of human suffer- 
ing, all the horrors of the car of Jagger- 
naut rushed to his recollection. The 
groans of expiring nature, in a field of 
battle, wrung his heart with anguish — the 
groans of expiring nature, under the hands 
of torture, sickened it with a feeling not 
endurable; a mist spread itself before his 
eyes, and he would have fallen, but that 
one of the officials, perceiving his change 
of colour, caught him timely by the arm. 
By this man his staggering steps were 
supported to a small dark room, at a dis- 



12 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

tance from the hall, and where, as soon as 
he revived, he left him. 

After remaining quiet herefor some time, 
Donaghue ventured to open the door, and 
by the glimmering light that pervaded the 
outer chamber, clearly perceived that the 
place where he was, was a kind of box, or 
closet, partitioned off from the other. The 
closeness of such a place conveying an idea 
of suffocation, O'Brien left it ; and advanc- 
ing to the narrow opening that admitted 
the light, which allowed him to see what 
it was, he beheld a large hall of great 
splendour. From the chamber where he 
was there was a descent of broad matted 
steps, and at the opposite end a similar 
ascent ; at the top of this was a curtain of 
black velvet, descending from the lofty 
ceiling to the floor, and on which an im- 
mense cross was worked in silver. Before 
this sat six inquisitors, in the superb dress 
of the Holy Office, and at a little distance 
from them their clerks, or secretaries, to 
take the answers or depositions of those 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 13 

who were examined; three branches of 
silver, dependent from the dome, diffused 
an equal and brilliant light through this 
apartment, so that, notwithstanding its 
size, every object was clearly distinguished. 

But the attention of Donaghue was 
quickly diverted fi-om every thing else, 
by the unexpected sight of Cormick, led 
in between two officers. He looked wild 
"and haggard, but still as if more bewil- 
dered than frightened. His sight was a 
terrible shock to Donaghue, as he had 
flattered himself he was left behind ; and, 
on both their accounts, the detection of 
his error occasioned the greatest agitation, 
as he not only trembled to think of what 
might be inflicted on Cormick, but was 
also alarmed at the idea of his, perhaps, 
being betrayed into uttering what he ne- 
ver intended. But there was no alterna- 
tive but patience, and he endeavoured to 
collect himself, to listen to Avhat was to 
ensue. 

The corporal being brought forward, 



14 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

one of the inquisitors, in a loud, harsh 
tone, ordered a book to be presented to 
him, that he might be sworn. — " Swear," 
he cried, " by the sacred symbol on that 
book — swear to reveal the truth, the whole 
truth, and nothing but the truth ; and ne- 
ver, either directly or indirectly, by hint, 
word, or suggestion, reveal what you may 
either see or witness here, in any man- 



The corporal trembled, and hesitated to 
comply ; on perceiving which — " ^wear, 
wretch !" repeated the inquisitor, in a 
voice of thunder. 

" I — I will," stammered out Cormick ; 
" that is, provided your honours' reve- 
rences first satisfy me, that by doing as 
you want, I shall not — the Lord be our 
defence and shield ! — bind myself, in any 
way, to the devil !" 

" Peace, fool, and swear !" 

" Blessed saints guide and protect me !" 
said Cormick, as he kissed the book. 

His name, religion, country, and station 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 15 

in life, were now demanded, and all his 
answers being given, and duly entered, it 
was asked whether he knew the nature of 
the accusation against him ? 

" No, how should I," was the reply, 
" when I don't know that there is any 
thing I can be accused of?" 

" Presumptuous wretch ! but if there 
were not doubtless daily sins and iniqui- 
ties to accuse you of, is there not the ac- 
cusation against you of having assaulted 
the servants of this Holy Office, whom it 
was your bounden duty to have obeyed 
with fear and trembling ?" 

" As to being my duty, that is one 
thing," said Cormick, coming a little to 
himself; " but as to obeying them with 
fear and trembling, that's the way in 
which, I am sure, they must be obeyed, 
whether one likes it or not." 

" This insolence again, and you shan't 
have the power of repeating it !" said one 
of the inquisitors ; " this is no jesting bu- 
siness, I promise you." 

Cormick gave what appeared to be an 



16 TEADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

involuntary shrug, and then endeavoured 
to assume a properly submissive look. 

" Are you not guilty," was demanded, 
" of the assault of which you have been 
just accused ?" 

" Why, as to that, your reverences, I 
don't know how that may be," said Cor- 
mick; " for, in the first place, I didn't 
know at first that the soldiers belonged 
to your reverences; and when I did, it 
was but natural I should stand up for my 
master." 

" Oh, it was your master, then, that in- 
stigated you to attack them ! That's right, 
proceed with the truth, and rely on ensur- 
ing safety at least to yourself" 

" My master !" exclaimed the corporal, 
in a tone of evident alarm — " he instigate 
me ! No, such were not my words or 
meaning." 

" Wretch ! this prevarication, after hav- 
ing sworn to speak the trutli ! Beware 
how you forget again the solemn oath 
you have just taken ! and, without far- 
ther hesitation, acknowledge all you 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 17 

know' of the crime your master has com- 
mitted." 

" Crime !" repeated Cormick — " crime ! 
crime is as distant from him as, I am a- 
fraid, heaven is from some of us here !" 

" What, insolent again !" exclaimed an 
inquisitor — " away with him !" 

" Stop, brother," interposed another; 
" let your just indignation be suspended; 
we will examine him a little farther, to 
endeavour to get the truth from him, ere 
we give him to punishment." Then turn- 
ing to Cormick — " To come to the point 
at once, know you aught, wretch, of the 
monastery of St. Francis ?" 

Cormick started ; then, evidently mak- 
ing an effort to appear collected — " Why, 
yes, your honours — that is, I — I have the 
pleasure of being acquainted with father 
Lawrence." 

*' And is that all ? is father Lawrence 
the only medium through which you 
know any thing of the convent ?" 

The corporal, it was now evident, be- 
came alarmed; it was plain to O'Brien, 



18 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

that an idea of the prisoner there having 
been the occasion of what had since hap- 
pened, had occurred to him ; and that he 
hesitated in consequence what reply to 
give. Whilst dehberating, the curtain 
behind the inquisitors was a Uttle drawn 
aside, and a gUmpse of father Lawrence 
was caught, holding up a dagger in a 
threatening manner to Cormick. Again 
Cormick started, and — " Blessed powers !' 
he cried, " what's to be done !" 

"Have you not already heard, wretch?" 
was the reply, in a voice of thunder. 

" Yes, but then " And again the 

curtain, which had been slowly dropped, 
was raised, and the figure of the confessor, 
as before, or still more threatening, again 
presented to the view of Cormick. 

His distress now became great indeed. 
In short, he felt as if he had got between 
two fires, to escape one of which he must 
inevitably run upon the other ; clearly per- 
ceiving, from the knowledge it was evi- 
dent to him the inquisitors had obtained 
of the affair of the prisoner, honesty would 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 19 

be the policy with them, he felt inclined to 
speak the truth ; but, from the conviction 
that if he did so, he should, inevitably, 
from the menacing looks of the confessor, 
and his having the power of obtaining ac- 
cess to this abode of horrors, fall a victim 
to his vengeance. In the most agonizing 
perplexity he rubbed his forehead; in- 
clined to be candid, yet convinced, if he 
followed bis inclination to be so, it would 
not be long ere the dagger of the confessor 
was lodged in his heart ; and still equally 
certain, if he were not, of being stretched 
on the rack of the Inquisition ere another 
hour. 

Something, however, he saw must be 
said, and accordingly — " Why, an' please 
your reverences, there was, to be sure, a 
man. But then, whatever we did — that 
is — that I did — was entirely out of good- 
nature ; and so " 

" Oh yes, we observe — whatever your 
master, as you say, did for him. But how 
was access obtained to this man? that's 
the question." 



20 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

« Why, please your reverences but 

there he is !" exclaimed Cormick, at again 
beholding the confessor, with a more me- 
nacing aspect than ever, holding up a 
bloody dagger to him — *' Blessed saints! 
how can 1 satisfy both parties? Your re- 
verences desire me to disclose the truth, 
and the confessor tells me, every moment, 
if I do he'll murder me !" 

" The confessor ! there's no confessor 
here. But this is a trick — this is affecta- 
tion of madness. The truth this instant, 
or away with him to the question !" 

*'Oh, blessed St. Patrick!" cried the 
distressed corporal, " what's to be done ? — 

If your reverences will but look " He 

paused, under the sudden persuasion of its 
being useless for them to do so, from the 
conviction of the confessor, if it was not 
the devil himself that had assumed his 
shape, having some hiding-place to retreat 
to, and that, consequently, they must be 
still farther exasperated against him for an 
assertion that must then appear so false. 

" This is trifling beyond what was ever 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 21 

before tolerated !" exclaimed one of the 
inquisitors, now rising in extreme indigna- 
tion ; " I protest against its being any 
longer permitted ! Officials, do your duty." 

At this dread command, two spectral 
figures, rendered still more hideous by 
their clinging garments of black, approach- 
ed to seize poor Cormick. He started 
back, as they attempted to lay hold of 
him ; all the horrible stories he had heard 
of the infernal place rushed to his recollec- 
tion. Death, in any common form, he 
could have met, perhaps with as much 
coolness as any one; but to die by inches 
— to be torn, mangled, dislocated— nature 
sickened at the thought, his brain reeled, 
and he fell senseless on the ground. 

In this state he was carried off, leaving 
Donaghue in one that may easier be con- 
ceived than described. With difficulty 
had he checked himself from rushing to 
his assistance; nothing but the conviction 
that the effort to render him any would 
be defeated, and that, by making it, he 
should probably accelerate his fate and his 



22 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

own, prevented him. What would that 
be? but he should probably know too 
soon. 

Nearly overpowered, he retreated to the 
place he had come from. He had not 
been here long, when one of the officials 
appeared with a lamp, and motioning him 
to follow, conducted him through several 
cold, cheerless, labyrinthian passages, to a 
wretched cell, containing a pallet, with a 
pitcher of water, and a small loaf beside it. 

O'Donaghue endeavoured to command 
himself, but when he observed his con- 
ductor about leaving him, the effort was 
vain ; rushing between him and the door, 
he eagerly demanded, was there no chance 
of his ever again beholding his unfortunate 
servant ? 

" No, none — not in this world ! never, 
but in hell, will you again see him !" was 
the reply, with a look that seemed to say, 
there was exultation in the thought of in- 
flicting torture; and pushing him aside, 
the wretch darted from the room, and se- 
cured the door. 



TUADITION OF THE CASTLE. 23 

" Demon !" exclaimed Donagbue ; " but 
all are fiends alike here ! fiends, wearing 
the semblance of human forms ! for none 
others could glut themselves with the in- 
fliction of unnecessary torture." 

His anguish, at the idea of the poor cor- 
poral's fate, was for some time hardly en- 
durable, aggravated as it was by the re- 
flection of being the cause of it; but at 
length he began to encourage hope, the 
last stay of the wretched, to trust that 
it was not as had been represented, 
that either to wanton cruelty, or misap- 
prehension, was owing the assertion that 
had so tortured him •, but supposing the 
worst, there was an end of further suffer- 
ing, and there was comfort in the thought — 
his brave and faithful Cormick was beyond 
the infliction of further tyranny *, and if 
he still lived, he was still under the care 
of an almighty and superintending Provi- 
dence, that, in a moment, could rescue him 
from the hands of his tormentors. 

Wonderful is the effect of Divine con- 
solation ! When all is dreariness and horror 



24 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

within us, from the want of human consola- 
tion, what would become of us, if we had 
not this to turn and cling to? AsDonaghue 
gave way to these reflections, his mind be- 
came softened and calmed ; still, however, 
it was in a state that precluded repose, 
and he accordingly continued pacing the 
narrow limits of his cell, now and then 
stopping to gaze on the sky, which was all 
that he could see from the height of the 
narrow grating that supplied the place of 
a window ; but the faint light it emitted 
soon became overcast, through a coming- 
storm ; the wind rose to a hurricane, and 
torrents of rain shortly began to descend ; 
and Donaghue, being then in utter dark- 
ness, threw himself upon his wretched 
bed, where, by degrees, sleep stole over 
him, occasioning a short respite from pain. 



Sacred rest, 



Sweet pleasing sleep, of all the powers the best. 

Oh, peace of mind, repairer of decay ! 

Whose bulm renews the limbs to labours of the day." 

Vivid lightning, flashing across his 
eyes, roused him from this ; he had hardly 



!rilADItION OF THE CASTLE. 25 

opened them, when he fancied he beheld 
father Lawrence at the foot of the bed, 
with a dim lamp in his hand, earnestly re- 
garding him. Yet it seemed so improb- 
able that it should be him, that Donaghue 
knew not how to credit his sight, and, 
more than once, in consequence, rubbed 
his eyes, to be convinced they were not 
deceiving him, but still the figure of the 
confessor stood before him. — " Can it be?'* 
at length he cried, " or is it the vision of 
a distempered imagination ?" 

" No," was the reply ; " you imagine 
nothing that is not the fact; 1 am that 
basely deceived man, the confessor to the 
monastery of St. Francis, whom you, and 
your wicked servant, laid your plotting 
heads together to impose on, through hear- 
ing of my simplicity, and kindness of dis- 
position, and good nature. So heinous an 
offence as that of endeavouring to ensnare 
the unsuspecting and harmless could not 
escape punishment. Your wicked abet- 
tor, or agent, has already met with that 

VOL. 11. c 



26 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

fate his villainous imposition merited ; 
and, trust me, it will not be long ere you 
receive the same. Since, then, all in this 
world is over with you, my son, I have 
come, out of Christian charity, to exhort, 
and advise, and implore you, as you value 
your immortal soul, to endeavour to make 
your peace with the next world, by reso- 
lutely refraining from any thing that may 
be likely to occasion any further trouble 
to an innocent man, who, as you well 
know, was led, or rather drawn in, to do 
what he did, entirely out of pure benevo- 
lence. In short, to criminate me, while 
it could do you no good here, must, from 
the injury it might be the means of doing 
me, but incense Heaven still more against 
you ; let me therefore, for your own sake, 
conjure you to let nothing wring any con- 
fession from your lips respecting me; and, 
in return for your promise to that effect, I 
am now ready to accord you my forgiveness 
for the past, and assure you of my prayers 
for the speedy releiase of your sinful spirit. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 27 

from that grievous purgation it must ex- 
pect in the next world." 

" I thank you, father," replied Dona- 
ghue, composedly, " for your offered con- 
solation, but cannot think of practising 
the deception that could alone obtain it 
for me ; since, if I promised to act as you 
desire, I should assuredly deceive you, as 
it is my fixed and unalterable determina- 
tion, should they attempt to insult or out- 
rage me farther than they have already 
done, in this diabolical place, to candidly 
state every circumstance that occurred 
since my arrival in Seville. It appears to 
me, that treachery has been employed to 
place me here, to fathom and discover 
which, there is nothing like truth ; and 
I would not indeed insult the Being I 
worship, by a fear that adhering to his 
commands would involve me in still great- 
er peril. Is it not to doubt his care, and 
justly to forfeit it, to suffer ourselves to 
forsake the broad road of integrity, for the 
crooked and winding ones of human sub- 
c 2 



28 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

tlety ? Let what will, therefore, betide 
either of us from the truth, that, and that 
alone, shall be spoken." 

" Wretch ! infatuated wretch !" cried 
the confessor, in extreme agitation ; " but 
since admonition will not avail, there is a 

way " and, as he spoke, he thrust his 

hand into his bosom. Donaghue compre- 
hending what he meant, and who, indeed, 
had all along been on his guard, instantly 
sprung from the bed. The confessor start- 
ed back as he did so, and, ere Donaghue 
could seize him, vanished from the room, 
leaving him again in utter darkness, for 
the storm had not yet subsided, and 

" Twas yet low ebb of night, wlien not a star 
Was twinkling in the muffled hemisphere; 
But all around in horrid darkness mov'd, 
As if old chaos were again return'd." 

He remained listening for some time 
with suppressed breathing ; but the mea- 
sured step of the watchful sentinel, pacing 
the ramparts of the prison, was the only 
sound he heard ; all was as 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 29 

" Still as the bosom of the desert night, 
As fatal planets, or deep plotting friends." 

After such a visit, however, it was not 
to be supposed he could think of remitting 
his vigilance; he accordingly continued 
in a state of watchfulness till the dawn of 
morning began to pervade the cell; he 
then again threv/ himself on the pallet. 

The day wore away without his seeing 
any one, and perhaps the terrible listless, 
ness it left him was more difficult of en- 
durance than downright positive pain 
would have been. The night advanced, 
and still no one appeared, and various 
were the conjectures to which this appa- 
rent forgetfulness of him seemed to give 
rise. He would at length, perhaps, have 
sought refuge from his weariness in 
sleep, but for the visit of the preceding 
night; but, in consequence of that, he 
conceived he should, probably, be provok- 
ing, or at least incurring, destruction, if 
he did not continue on his guard. He 
was accordingly pacing the cell, when 



so TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the door suddenly opened, and an official 
stood before him with a light. — " Oh, you 
are up !" said the fellow ; " well, so much 
the better, there will be no delay in your 
following me." 

Donaghue made no reply, nor asked 
any question; he had no doubt of his 
being now about to be brought before the 
inquisitors, and, with a silent prayer to 
Heaven for strength and constancy to en- 
dure whatever might ensue, proceeded to 
follow his conductor. They passed, Avith 
extreme celerity, through numerous gal- 
leries and chambersy till at last they be- 
gan to descend flight after flight of dark 
and noisome stairs, rendered so by the 
slimy damps that covered and hung about 
them. After proceeding till Donaghue 
thought they must be descending into the 
very bowels of the earth, he suddenly 
paused, and — " Surely," he said, " this is 
not the way to the hall of examination ! 
have the inquisitors any other place for 
examining prisoners ?" 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 31 

" Come on," was the reply; " this is 
not a place in which questions are allowed 
to be asked or answered." 

Donaghue still believing it useless to 
resist, again moved on. He had not got 
much farther, when the air became so chill 
about him, as to make him shiver with 
cold. — " Whence can this cold vapour pro- 
ceed ?" he demanded of his guide, regard- 
less of the observation he had just made. 

" From Purgatory," was the answer, 
with a sardonic laugh. " No wonder you 
shake, for you are just on the point of en- 
tering a region of ice, in order to make 
still greater the contrast of that of fire." 

Donaghue involuntarily looked round 
him at the instant, and found himself at 
the entrance of a large cavern, evidently 
hewn out of the living rock. The roof 
was arched, and from the sparry substance 
of which it was composed, flashed with a 
thousand splendours, as it caught the rays 
of the torch. It seemed to rest upon un- 
equal pillars, so wrought and fashioned as 
to give the place something the look of a 



32 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Gothic cathedral ; between many of them 
were deep trenches, and to many were 
affixed large rings of iron, too fearfully 
proclaiming the horrible purpose for which 
the place was intended. 

Donaghue shuddered, and from a suspi- 
cion that was now beginning to seize him, 
would have hesitated to advance, but that 
while he had paused to look round him,, 
the guide had hurried forward, and he saw 
if he did not hasten to follow, he should 
be left in total darkness ; he accordingly 
hastened to overtake him, and succeeded 
just as he had gained the entrance to ano- 
ther cave. But hardly had Donaghue set 
his foot within this, ere all the pictured 
fires of the infernal regions seemed to 
burst around him, accompanied by reper- 
cussions, that appeared as if they would 
shiver the place to atoms. For a minute 
Donaghue was unable to recover from the 
astounding effect which the scene had 
upon his senses. Looking then for his 
conductor, he perceived he had quitted it 
by a door at the further extremity, which 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. S3 

he was then in the very act of preparing 
to barricade, while, at the same instant, 
the one by which he had gained admission 
slipped to, with a violence that seemed to 
declare human force would be unavailing 
to open it again. The horrible idea of 
suffocation instantly occurred to the ima- 
gination of Donaghue, and, with the velo- 
city of lightning, darting through the sul- 
phureous flames, burst open the door a- 
gainst the villain, as he had nearly closed 
it. — " Traitor !" he cried, grasping him by 
the throat, " I see what was intended; 

but " Then perceiving him making 

an effort to get something from his breast, 
he thrust his own hand into it, and drew 
forth a dagger — " But, by my immortal 
hopes, I swear," he cried, as he secured the 
weapon, " if you do not directly extricate 
me from the toil in which you have en- 
tangled me, and confess by whom it was 
you were induced to decoy me hither for 
destruction, this instant shall be your last!" 
" Spare my life, senor," cried the trem- 
c3 



34 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

bling caitiff, seeing there was no hope of 
being able to free himself from the hold 
of Donaghue ; " for your own sake, have 
mercy ! for, without a guide, 'twere vain 
attempting to extricate yourself from 
these dismal catacombs. We are now on 
a level with the Guadalquiver, and, ac- 
quainted as I am with all the intricacies 
of the place, in a few minutes, if you but 
hearken to my prayer, you shall be re- 
stored to liberty, and informed of all I 
have the power of disclosing. If inclined 
to do so, let us not tarry longer here, if 
you regard your safety, lest the influence 
of these mephitic vapours should prove 
fatal." 

" Conduct me then," said Donaghue, 
but still firmly grasping him by the arm ; 
" and beware what you do ; for I swear, 
should you make the slightest effort to 
disengage yourself from me, to raise your 
voice, or in any way let me think you still 
harbour evil against me, that instant this 
dagger,** and fire darted from his eyes as 
be spoke, " shall be sheathed in your heart 



!"• 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 35 

They went on, and, after various wind- 
ings, Donaghue began to feel reviving 
confidence within him, from the different 
air' he at last began to breathe. Hardly- 
had he noticed this, when they turned 
into a narrow passage, terminated by an 
iron door. Here they stopped, and the 
guide applying his force to the fastenings, 
in a few minutes it flew open, and the 
cold grey sky of early morn, with the 
Guadalquiver reflecting the soft shadows 
of the dawn, were given to the transported 
sight of Donaghue. 

Thus restored to life — to liberty, what 
was his adoring gratitude ! in adoration 
he could have thrown himself on the 
ground ; but it was requisite to learn the 
treachery that had been practised against 
him, in order that he might know how to 
be on guard; and accordingly checking, 
for the present, the impulse of his feelings, 
he turned to the wretch^ whom he still 
held, to demand the promised explanation 
from him. 

" On my soul, senor," began the caitiiF, 



S6 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

in reply, " all I know I'll tell you, but 
that is but little. Why, or wherefore, or 
through whose means, you were brought 
hither, I know not ; but that you have a 
bitter enemy in father Lawrence, the con- 
fessor to the monastery of St. Francis, is 
evident, and against him, therefore, I warn 
you. Through means of a friend here, 
he gained secret access to this place, for 
the positive purpose of effecting your and 
your servant's destruction, in one way or 
other, in consequence of your being ac- 
quainted with something which he con- 
ceived hostile to his safety. Your servant 
did not long survive his removal from the 
hall of examination. How he died, or ra- 
ther, by what means, it boots not now to 
say ; and there is every reason to imagine 
your fate would not have been much 
longer delayed than his was, had not this 
very day the Inquisition been again de- 
clared abolished by the Cortez, and an or- 
der been received from them for the en- 
largement of all the prisoners. Father 
Lawrence, still lurking within the walls,. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 37 

no sooner learned this, than, intent on 
your destruction, he consulted with his 
friend, and between them it was devised 
that you should be secreted till night, and 
then conducted hither, to be left to perish. 
I was chosen to be the instrument of this 
barbarous design ; that it has failed, you 
may thank yourself, or rather that Provi- 
dence, that, for the purpose of enabling 
you to frustrate, endued you with such 
courage and quickness. This, senor, is 
all, I again swear, upon my soul, I have 
to disclose to you. I have kept my pro- 
mise to you ; from the Holy Office, now 
no longer in existence, of course you have 
nothing further to dread, and, as a gene- 
rous cavalier, now restore me to that liber- 
ty io which I have restored you." 

Ere the request was well preferred, the 
hand of Donaghue had begun to slacken 
its hold, so completely subdued was he by 
the cruel and untimely death of the poor 
corporal — " My brave, my faithful Cor- 
mick!" he cried, with a quivering lip, 
" how does the idea of your fate damp the 



38 TRADITION OP THE CASTLE. . 

joy of this blessed moment ! But if your 
freed spirit can look down, it must give it 
pleasure, I think, to see your memory em- 
balmed with tears, and know you must 
live for ever in the heart of a grateful 
master !" 

A little recovering from his emotion, he 
glanced towards his conductor, to say 
something by way of admonition to him, 
but he was gone. Slowly Donaghue pio- 
ceeded ; the alacrity of joy was deadened 
by sorrow ; yet gradually, as he advanced, 
his mind became soothed in a degree, and 
calmed by the influence of the gentle dawn, 
the soft flow of the river, the purity of 
the yet cool air, and the awaking music 
of the birds, all seeming to declare what 
the benevolent intentions of the Deity 
were towards man, and what a paradise 
even this earthly scene would have been to 
him, but for his own baleful passions. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 39 



CHAPTER II. 



" It is an employment worthy of a reasonable creatine, to 
examine into the dispositions of men's affections towards 
each other ; and, as far as one can, to improve all ten- 
dencies to good nature and charity." 

We shall now return to poor Rosebud. 
Though infinitely more inclined to follow 
the carriage which bore away poor Dona- 
ghue from him, with cries of despair, than 
to make any other exertion, yet the ne- 
cessity of some prompt ones for his friend 
was too obvious not to induce him to make 
a speedy effort for collecting his bewilder- 
ed thoughts. 

The first person he naturally thought of 
flying to was don Callan ; but where was 
don Callan to be found ? He had never 
exactly mentioned the precise situation of 
his castle, and unacquainted as every body 
appeared to be with such a person, the dis- 



40 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

tracted doctor soon found he might just as 
well set out in quest of a castle in the air 
as in quest of it. Deprived therefore of 
any immediate aid or consolation from 
him, the idea of don Alonzo de Guzman 
next occurred, and to him he accordingly 
bent, without delay, his agitated steps; 
but no sooner had he begun to introduce 
the purport of his visit, than the manner 
of don Alonzo, which had at first been 
frank and courteous, began to change ; his 
countenance altered — he grew shy — sud- 
denly pleaded business as an excuse for 
not pressing the doctor to prolong his stay, 
and finally acted in such a way as to cut 
off all hope of receiving any service from 
him. 

Reduced almost to despair by this, he 
now tried to recollect the names of those 
he had met at the Tertulia, and to as 
many as he could remember, he repaired 
the next day, but all acted uniformly like 
don Alonzo; a smile greeted him on his 
entrance, but no sooner was his business 
opened, than they seemed to shrink within 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 41 

themselves ; and poor Rosebud soon found 
that, in having a friend in the Inquisition, 
he had the plague-spot upon him, and 
might Qxpect to be shunned accordingly 
by all. 

What to do he knew not ; all he could 
decide on was, never to leave Seville with- 
out Donaghue — to make it his grave also 
if he died there. All his happy flow of 
spirits and confidence in himself forsook 
him ; he stole in and out of the inn, as if 
he had no right to be tolerated there; and 
indeed he every moment expected to be 
insolently turned out of it. At length, 
utterly overcome on the second night, he 
threw his exhausted frame on the bed, to 
try if he could obtain a short respite from 
pain, for since Donaghue had been drag- 
ged from him, he had not tasted sleep. 

Hardly had he closed his eyes, ere a per- 
son entered the room, that would have 
made him open them with a cry of joy, 
had he been aware of the circumstance. 
In a word, the information Donaghue had 
received of the death of the corporal was 



42 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

false; but whether he was intentionally 
deceived or not remains to this day a secret. 

On the very night of his enlargement, 
Cormick, without having sustained any 
injury in the place, was also liberated, but 
somewhat sooner. His immediate inquiry 
was after his master; but he could hear 
nothing concerning him, or rather what 
he did hear, tended to induce a belief of 
his being no more; and from what has 
been already stated of his attachment to 
him, the agony excited by this belief may 
easier be conceived than described. 

In a state of mind that rendered it im- 
possible for him to rejoice at his own de- 
liverance, he returned to the inn, where, 
being a great favourite, nothing could ex- 
ceed the pleasure at seeing him again. 
Whilst receiving the congratulations of 
the people of the house, at his safe escape 
from all the horrors with which he had 
been threatened, he learned all that poor 
Rosebud had gone through ; and, in con- 
sequence, when, on entering his chamber, 
he found him asleep, could not bring him- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 43 

self to disturb him, though he felt that it 
would have been a relief to his bursting 
heart to have immediately claimed his sym- 
pathy. »Pity, however, prevailing over 
selfish considerations, he disconsolately re- 
tired to his own chamber, without makincr 
the slightest effort to wake him, and, me- 
chanically undressing, went to bed; but 
the restlessness ever attendant on real 
grief would not permit of his long re- 
maining in a quiescent state ; and accord- 
ingly, shortly rising, he again repaired to 
the doctor's apartment, to try whether he 
was yet awake. 

Now, though terror prevented any one 
from openly expressing commiseration for 
poor Rosebud, yet there were some that 
really felt compassion for him; amongst 
the number was don Alonzo, and in con- 
sequence he decided, since he could not 
administer consolation to him himself, to 
try and procure it for him through another 
person. Accordingly he sent for his con- 
fessor, and imparting to him his wishes, 
requested he might lose no time in calling 



44 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

on the unfortunate stranger, and trying 
what he could do for the alleviation of his 
distress. It so happened that his confessor 
was father Lawrence, and a more agree- 
able command he could not possibly have 
received, since, in the first place, he knew 
he should be well rewarded for obeying it; 
and, in the next, it promised to afford him 
an opportunity of ascertaining whether the 
doctor had any suspicion of his being in 
any way concerned in the fate of those 
whom he deplored, and who, by this time, 
the priest felt fully assured, whatever 
trouble their friends might experience on 
their account, would experience no more 
themselves. 

It was late when he got don Alonzo's 
message, and accordingly the night was 
somewhat advanced ere he arrived at the 
inn to obey his charitable directions. 

Without stopping to be told more than 
where the doctor's chamber was, he pro- 
ceeded forthwith to it, with a lamp, which, 
having deposited on a table, he was ad- 
vancing to the bed, when the apparition 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 45 

of Cormick, as he believed, stood before 
him; and certainly a more terrific one 
could scarcely have been imagined. 

The corporal, whose eyes were steadfast- 
ly fixed on the confessor, in astonishment 
at what had brought him there, instead of 
dressing himself on quitting his bed, had 
merely wrapped a sheet round him, that, 
clinging to his form, and partly trailing 
on the ground, made him appear much 
taller than he really was, a thing by no 
means necessary, while round his head 
was bound an old silk sash of his master's, 
which he had accidentally found on a chair, 
and substituted in place of the nightcap 
he was too heartless to look for, and 
through several of the loops of which, from 
the tightness with which he had drawn it, 
his flesh protruded ; while several of the 
cords at the end hung over his face, pale 
and haggard with grief and recent agita- 
tion, appearing like so many streaks of 
blood, and giving it the look of being 
frightfully gashed and mangled. 

It has well been observed, that ** con- 



46 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

science makes cowards of us all;" and no 
sooner had the priest beheld him, than, 
firmly persuaded it was his ghost come 
from the other world to reproach and tor- 
ment him for the part he had taken in 
sending him to it, he began to retrograde 
from him, till he reached the bed, when, 
making one plunge within the curtains for 
refuge, he fell plump upon the breast of 
Rosebud. 

It so happened, that at that very in- 
stant the doctor's disturbed fancy had re- 
presented to him his being in full chase of 
one of the inquisitors, and on opening his 
eyes, without being thoroughly awake, 
through the violence with which the con- 
fessor fell upon him, he instantly con- 
cluded, under the strong delusion of the 
dream, on seeing a figure in black, that it 
was the same he had been pursuing ; and, 
under this belief, starting from the pillow, 
he seized the confessor with one hand, and 
>vith the other began belabouring him in 
the most unmerciful manner, between 
every blow, or rather thump, exclaiming 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 47 

— " Where are they, you villain ? Where 
are they — my friend O'Brien and his ser- 
vant? Restore them! — say what you 
have done with them ! — or, spite of your 
racks and wheels, I'll pull your Holy Of- 
fice about your ears, you hypocrite !" 

" I — I — I am not an inquisitor!" at 
length bellowed out the almost strangled 
confessor, by a violent effort extricating 
his throat from the gripe of the doctor. 

" Who the devil are you then ?" 

" The — the confessor to the monastery 
of St. Francis." 

" And what the devil brought you here, 
you porpoise ?" 

" I— I came out of Christian charity, to 
give you some ghostly advice and conso- 
lation." 

" Oh, you did; and to prepare me for 
it, you meant I should be pressed to death. 
By the Lord, you were never so near meet- 
ing the punishment due to your sins as 
you are now," and as he spoke, unable 
any longer to endure the dead weight of 
the confessor, he made an effort to heave 



48 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

him off the bed, in a manner that would 
have tumbled him from it, had he not 
caught at the bedpost. 

Having given himself a shake, to reco- 
ver a little from this violence, he was 
emerging from behind the curtains, when 
again the horrible apparition of Cormick 
met his view, and again he retreated with- 
in them, exclaiming as he did — " A vaunt ! 
I say, avaunt, thou wicked one! Come 
not to torment me before my time !" 

" What ! avaunt, out of my own bed — 
my own chamber!" cried the infuriate 
doctor ; and springing out of bed, he again 
fell on the unfortunate confessor. 

" Oh, have mercy !" roared the other, as 
he continued to pommel him ; " it was not 
you, it was the — the spirit I meant." 

The doctor followed the direction of his 
glance, and, notwithstanding his disguise, 
or rather the imperfect light in which he 
stood, instantly recognised Cormick; in 
the extravagance of his joy, he gave a 
whirl to the confessor, that brought him 
to the ground, with a force that, for a few 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 49 

minutes, completely stunned him, and 
rushing to Cormick, absolutely hugged 
him with delight. — "But where is he?" 
he suddenly demanded ; " where is the 
darling lad ? where is your master ?" 

A burst of anguish was the reply. The 
doctor wrung his hands, and then cover- 
ing his eyes, was about throwing himself 
on a chair, in an agony of sorrow, when a 
sudden exclamation from Cormick made 
him look up, and, with sensations that may 
be imagined, but cannot be described, he 
beheld Donaghue entering the apartment. 

Over the scene that ensued we shall 
pass ; suffice it, Donaghue was the most 
collected of the three, being prepared be- 
low stairs for the appearance of Cormick, 
while both Cormick and the doctor looked 
upon him as one risen from the dead. 

By the time their mutual transports had 
a little subsided, the confessor was begin- 
ning to recover from the stunning effect 
of his dash to the floor, which the corporal 
perceiving, gave a hint to the doctor, that 

VOL. IL D 



50 TRADITION OF THE CASTILE. 

occasioned him to draw back directly. If 
the sight of one ghost is terrific, what must 
have been that of two? In the very ex- 
tremity of his terror, the confessor roared 
aloud, as, on slowly rising from the floor, 
he beheld, near Cormick, the supposed spi- 
rit also of his master. The doctor, how- 
ever, whose feelings were rapid in their 
transitions, stepping out, prevented any 
one from coming to his assistance. On 
finding this, that his roarings were ineffec- 
tual, he made an effort to quit the room, 
but which was prevented by Cormick's 
darting, or, as it seemed to his disordered 
fancy, gliding, with his long trailing sheet, 
between him and the door; while — " No, 
no, father," he exclaimed, " this won't do ! 
you and I must have a little chat before 
you get off; that is, if you don't wish to 
have my troubled spirit still at your heels, 
for never will I return to the hole, let the 
cock crow es er so much, till you have 
confessed who it was that set you on to 
plan the destruction of my poor master 
and myself" 



TRADITION OF THE €ASTLE. 51 

" Oh ! oh ! I'll tell all I know," cried 
the confessor, dropping on his knees ; " it 
— ^it was a man calling himself don Pro- 
teus, but who, I think, must have been 
the devil himself, to set me on to do what 
I did." 

" Troth, likely enough !" cried the cor- 
poral ; " you black drones, in your hives, 
have so much idle time on your hands, 
that I shouldn't wonder if he busied him- 
self, now and then, in finding a little work 
for you ; and, faith, between ourselves, 
Lawrence, I don't think he could have 
found a person readier to do a snug job 
for him than yourself But was he to 
give you nothing for serving him ? did he 
act as generously by you as I did? You 
see, Lawrence, I have not lost my me- 
mory by the journey you sent me on." 

" Oh, yes, he gave me a large bribe." 

" That is, he lost a good many pistoles, 

and you picked them up. Well, go on 

with your confession, and then we'll see 

what absolution you'll be entitled to ; but 

D 21 



kv.-> 



52 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

I much fear, Lawrence, you must be put 
to a woful purgation !" 

" Oh, have mercy, and you shall hear 
all the truth ! He had got himself into 
some scrape with the government, and so 
he took sanctuary in our convent; but 
where he had not been above a day or 
two, when there was an application to 
give him up; on learning which, he offer- 
ed me I know not what, if I would favour 
his escape; but that no harm, innocent 
man as I was, might befall me, for aiding 
him, he proposed that a plan should be 
laid for making it appear that it was by 
means of another person it was accom- 
plished ; and so, after a little considera- 
tion, your master was fixed on, because, 
he said, he had an enmity to him ; so that, 
if any one was injured on his account, he 
preferred its being a person he had a dis- 
like to." 

" He did ! by the Lord, I wish I had 
been at his elbow at the time ! And so, I 
suppose, when you came to me, you were 
quite prepared?'* 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 53 

"Yes." 

" Oh, Lawrence, how I wish I had 
known that at the time, and what a dif- 
ferent reception you would have met from 
me ! it is not pistoles you'd have dropping 
then, but good heavy thumps on your 
shoulders! and what hinders me now?" 
cried the enraged ghost, darting towards 
him. 

The confessor instinctively retreated ; 
but when he saw the supposed spirit also 
of Donaghue approaching, as he imagined, 
to seize him, he lost the power of making 
any further effort ; his senses forsook him, 
and he was carried out of the room in 
strong convulsions. 

The doctor, who had not a little enjoy- 
ed the scene, attended his recovery, not, 
however, out of any charitable motive, but 
entirely to prevent his being immediately 
undeceived, that for one night, at least, he 
might be allowed to writhe under the ter- 
rors of a guilty conscience. A thousand 
boyish schemes were suggested for tor- 
menting him still further ; but which were 



54 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

effectually put an end to by Donaghue's 
pointing out the absolute expediency there 
was for quitting the place immediately, 
since, with a priest for an enemy, he could 
not, notwithstanding the abolition of the 
Inquisition, think it was safe for them to 
remain any longer there ; such is the blind 
respect in which the priests are held by 
the people, and, of course, so great their 
influence — an influence derived from the 
Goths, in whose eyes, monks, priests, and 
bishops, were considered infallible, and 
through whose blind veneration for them, 
they, at length, became the only judges 
in civil, as well as in ecclesiastical matters. 
It was not natural to suppose, that ^ 
man of father Lawrence's disposition 
would not strive to revenge the rough 
treatment he had met with, exclusive of 
the wish he must have to rid himself of 
the dread he must be under of them, from 
knowing he was in their power ; and, in 
addition to which, it was not unlikely, 
that the villain who had made him his 
agent in the treacherous plot that had 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 55 

been carried into effect, might still be 
lurking in the city. 

I>onaghue explained all he thought to 
the doctor, and, in addition, revealed what 
he had hitherto been in ignorance of, the 
whole affair of the prisoner ; and, ere he 
had well concluded, Rosebud became even 
more impatient than he was for their de- 
parture. In a word, immediate prepara- 
tions were made for it, and ere another 
sun rose on the ancient spires of Seville', 
they were at some distance from it, all 
furnished by what had befallen them there, 
with sufficient for meditation and conver- 
sation. That don Callan was the villain 
who had planned his destruction, not a 
doubt remained on the mind of Dona- 
ghue ; but what the cause of his bitter en- 
mity to him was, was an incomprehensible 
mystery to him, such as he never expected 
to be able to fathom. 

After a pleasant journey and voyage, 
they at length beheld the white cliffs of 
Albion again. As they drew near them 
—"Well," said the doctor, "for a real 



56 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

feeling of security, old England, after all, 
is the place! I love travelling; no one 
more delights in it than I do, or in adven- 
tures, that is, when they are all over, to 
have to talk of; but for a constant resi- 
dence, give me the place where we neither 
fear racks on one side, or stilettos on the 
other' — where the accusation of man against 
man is bold and open as his own nature. 
* England,' as some poet observes — I be- 
lieve Cowper, ' with all thy faults,' and 
what is there human without faults? * I 
love thee still !' I would love thee, were it 
for nothing else, but that the moment the 
slave sets his foot upon thy shore, the 
chains drop from his manacled hands. 
The region of liberty must ever be the re- • 
gion of virtuous and generous sentiments, 
and a peculiar Providence must surely 
watch over and bless the land that has 
been instrumental to restoring man to his 
natural charter." 

They landed at Falmouth, and thence 
set out for London, having some regi- 
mental accounts to settle there, before 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 57 

their return to Ireland. Rosebud was in 
no hurry to have them settled, so delight- 
ed was he whenever he found himself 
here, from the variety of amusements 
always to be met with. Long after 
the business was over that brought them 
there, he would have liked to delay, but 
that Donaghue, from the painful recollec- 
tions that were here revived, was unable, 
at least with any pleasure to himself, to 
participate in his amusements, and that 
there was an imperative necessity besides 
for his speedy return to Ireland, in conse- 
quence of the confused state of a property 
that had lately devolved to him by the 
death of a relation. He had promised to 
accompany Donaghue to Altoir-na-Grenie, 
and the latter, shrinking from the thought 
of returning thither without a companion, 
readily consented to proceed with him to 
Teghadovv, the name of his place, and re- 
main there with him till he was at liberty 
to do so. 



d3 



58 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 



CHAPTER III. 



r-f^.f^.f^.f^d 



" Seeing too much sadness hath cong€alefl your blood, and 
melancholy is the nurse of frenzy; therefore they thought 
it good you hear a play, and form your mind to mirth 
and merriment, which bars a thousand charms, and 
lengthens life." 

The friends embarked at the Head. No 
sooner had they got on board, than Rose- 
bud, as was usual with him, set about 
seekhig out amusement for himself, and 
soon succeeded to his wish. The persons 
on whom he depended for furnishing it to 
him, were an English man and woman. 
Having introduced himself to them, he 
allured them to the deck, where Dona- 
ghue remained, being too good-natured to 
desire to have all the diversion to himself. 
" VorCt you please to take a chee7\ sir ?" 
said the lady, offering a vacant one, that 
stood by herself, to Donaghue, on hearing 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 59 

he was the doctor's friend. " Tell, Mr. 
Wilkinson," addressing her own compa- 
nion, " I suppose ve shall soon be seeing 
Dublin ; I t;onder how far that there lake 
we are going to wisit is from it ?" 

" Upon my life, Mrs. Bentley, I have 
no ideer^ but I should suppose not far, 
as they say on board this, that every one 
that comes to see it comes this way." 

" You must know, sir," turning to Rose- 
bud, " I am the wife of a rich man, hving 
at Mile End, in Lunnon, and not being 
over well lately, the doctors adwised me 
to try what a little bit of a voyeege would 
do for me ; and having been to Margate 
and Ramsgate already, and all these there 
places, my husband says to me, says he — 
* By way of variety, my dear, I don't 
think but it would be pleasant for you to 
take a trip to ^ireland, and see the fine 
lake there, that some one was talking about 
the other night ;' and so consenting, as he 
could not come himself, on account of his 
business, for he is a great soap-boiler, you 
must know, sir, he settled that Jonathan 



60 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Wilkinson, his foreman, this good man 
here, should come in his place, to take 
care of me ; and good care, I am sure, he 
will — Fbn't you, Jonathan ?" 

" Vy, I'll do my best, Mrs. Bentley ; 1 
hopes as how I have always as yet been 
found trustworthy ?" 

" ^y* yes, I must say you have, Jona- 
than. — But, as I was saying, sir," again 
addressing herself to Rosebud, " this here 
lake we intend on te^isiting — we, somehow, 
don't remember its name, or the patick- 
lars about it ; but perhaps, sir, you could 
tell us?" 

" Me, ma'am T' replied Rosebud, grave- 
ly ; " I am but a stranger, like yourself, 
to iJireland." 

" Dear heart ! veW, I suppose that's the 
reason we got so well acquainted in a mo- 
ment, for *tis natiral for people of the 
same country to get together." 

The doctor nodded assent, and in this 
way continued to divert himself the prin- 
cipal part of the way. 

As the packet floated over an unruffled 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 6l 

sea, towards evening, into the beautiful 
Bay of Dublin, what feelings and reflec- 
tions were awakened in the breast of Do- 
naghue, by the various objects that were 
presented to his view ! on his right was 
the Hill of Howth, which, running far 
into the Irish Sea, forms the bay on the 
north side ; to his left, the island of Dal- 
key, with a range of the most romantic 
scenery, rendered highly interesting by 
the historical recollections connected with 
many parts of it. He could not look at 
the peninsula of Howth, that, swelling 
into a lofty promontory, forms a grand 
feature in the scene, without reflecting, 
that on Benhedar, or the Bird's Promon- 
tory, its name in former times, stood the 
rath, or royal palace of Criomthan, me- 
morable in his day for several successful 
descents on the opposite coast, in the time 
of Agricola — that it was a seat of the 
Druids, and, in after times, distinguished 
by the exploits of the brave sir Armoricus 
Tristrem, the castle of whose noble de- 
scendant still stands upon the spot, con- 



62 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

taining the sword with which the valiant 
chieftain gained the victory on the day 
that gives its name to the family. Nei- 
ther could Donaghue turn to the other 
side, without recalling the period when 
the fastnesses of the romantic mountains 
he viewed were the retreats of rival septs 
and of sequestered piety — when their 
echoes were now awakened by the war- 
cry of contending chiefs, now by the 
mournful chant of the pilgrim train. Be- 
neath the shade of the oaks, that once 
spread over the now sterile surface of the 
Bird's Promontory, the mysterious rites 
of the Druids were once performed, some 
of their altars still remaining in the se- 
questered glens of the peninsula; while, 
at the^ other side, the bed of St. Kevin, 
with the seven churches, were, in after 
times, the resort of the Christian devotee. 
Some way further on, Donaghue saw 
the spot in which his royal ancestor, the 
noble and the renowned Brien Boru, fell, 
after gaining the memorable victory of 
Clontarf; but no wonder he conquered. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 63 

for neither the physical strength, nor the 
spirit of Irishmen, in those days, was im- 
paired or crushed. A chief was then a fa- 
ther to his followers, nor fled to another 
land, forgetful of their claim upon his 
kindness, and took care not to squander 
what he wrung from their toil, or acquired 
through their valour. — " But now !" Do- 
naghue sighed at the melancholy contrast, 
and at the same instant a blush, the hec- 
tic of a moment, flushed his cheek, at the 
recollection of what he had been so near 
becoming himself 

From these, and such like reflections, 
he was at length drawn by the grand city 
opening to his view at the bottom of the 
bay, seated on a plain, with the Dublin 
mountains forming a noble background 
to the south of the river, and, uniting with 
the still loftier and more varied range of 
the Wicklow ones, forming the south side 
of the bay, the whole of them indented 
with small bays and creeks, and adorned 
with elegant villas and cottages, inter- 
mingled with little villages and towns. 



64 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

While yet Donaghue was gazing on 
the interesting scenery, the sun sunk in a 
flood of glory, beneath the waves that 
seemed to be gently bearing him forward. 
As he sunk, a soft mist began to float, like 
a silver veil, over the landscape, giving a 
shadowy beauty to many parts of it, not 
to be described; while the hues that 
painted the hills, the purple lights that 
gradually faded into distance, with the 
crimson glow that long lingered on the 
summits of the mountains, formed, alto- 
gether, a picture not to be contemplated, 
even by the coldest bosom, without admi- 
ration. But like all else that is beautiful 
on earth, it at last began to change and 
die away; the shades of evening began to 
deepen and condense, and darkness would 
soon have obscured the scene, but for a 
rising moon, that " o'er the dark her sil- 
ver mantle threw, and in her pale domi- 
nion checked the night." 

How beautiful the reflection of her 
beams upon the rippling waves, and how 
finely did the pale and mournful lights 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 65 

Donaghue conceived, harmonize with the 
wild, and now-apparently soHtary scenes 
that seemed receding from his view ! But 
at length the vessel floated into the Pigeon- 
house Dock, and the bustle and confu- 
sion attendant on the moment of disem- 
barking, put an end, for the present, to 
any further reflections on the part of Do- 
naghue. 

The name of the Pigeon-house, Mrs. 
Bentley concluded, was derived from its 
being a place for pigeons ; and, in conse- 
quence, observing, just after her landing, 
a heap of cannon balls, twenty-four pound- 
ers — " Fell," she cried, " 'tis a true say- 
ing, ' travellers see strange things.' Who 
would ever have thought that pigeons' 
eggs, in fl'ireland, were the size of my hus- 
band's head !" 

Having gone through the usual forms 
at the Custom-house, they were immedi- 
ately surrounded by a set of ragged men 
and boys, smacking their whips, and each 
pressing upon them his respective vehicle; 
one protesting he had the easiest jaunting 



66 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

car in Dublin, and another the most Hi- 
gint jingle ; one saying, if the party wasn't 
above six, he'd take them for tin tinpin- 
nies to town, and another for six, if they 
hadn't many trunks. Their wild looks, 
eager manner, and ragged appearance, at 
length began to alarm Mrs. Bentley ; and 
her terror was not lessened by one or two 
of them at length making an effort to get 
her on their car. 

After some consultation, or rather con- 
sideration, Jonathan thinking a jingle the 
safest conveyance of the two, Mrs. Bent- 
ley was handed into one, and the rest of 
the party followed; Rosebud having made 
it a point with Donaghue, that he would 
let him have his frolic out, by not object- 
ing to accompany these people, that he 
might see how they meant to proceed. 

They had scarcely got without the gate 
of the Pigeon-house Dock, when Wilkin- 
son, addressing himself to the ragged dri- 
ver — " Do you know this here place and 
country well ?" he cried. 

" Oh, botheration ! is it me you are ask- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 6? 

ing that? Ah, then it's myself that does 
right well ; for wasn't I bred and born in 
Stoney-batter?" 

" Did you," resumed Jonathan, " ever 
hear of any lake or lakes near Dublin?" 

" Lake ! lake !" repeated the fellow, as 
he scratched his head. " Ah, then, please 
your honour, whereabouts may it be ?" 

" I knows not, I am sure, nor can I 
tell; I never was in this here country be- 
fore, nor ever travelled further in my own, 
than, of a Sunday, to Highgate or Hamp- 
stead, in the regular stage-coach; but a 
captain of a ship told me as how there was 
a fine lake somewhere about here." 

The driver seemed to consider a few se- 
conds, then — " Ah, please your honour !" 
— but suddenly, " be yez all strangers in 
ould Ireland?" 

" Yes, all," replied the doctor, deter- 
mined to ascertain what his drift was in 
asking the question. 

Being satisfied upon that point — " If I 
wouldn't be laying a wager it's Crab Lake 
your honours mean," said the fellow. 



68 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" Upon my life, I am sure I don't know, 
nor can I tell ; but I was informed a lord 
had a house and fine grounds not far from 
it." 

" See if I wasn't right; faith and troth 
that's the very place. The wel of Charle- 
mont has a fine house, sure enough, near 
it, and iligint pleasure grounds." 

" I believe you count it a good ways 
from this here city ?" 

" I do, your honour, and always did, 
though many would say otherwise; but 
if it's a bargain your honour wants, I am 
the carman to get it from ; I'll take yez 
all for " 

" First say," interrupted Wilkinson, 
" how many days, with this one horse, 
and a sorry animal I must say it is, you'd 
be taking us to this here lake ?" 

" Days ! — days !" repeated the fellow, as 
if in utter astonishment. " Days, does 
yoUr honour say, to take yez all to Crab 
Lake? Days! How many days !" 

" I thinks I speaks plain enough," said 
Wilkinson. " As it is a long journey, by 



' TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 69 

your account, and we wouldn't like to 
over-drive your horse, seeing as how I 
don't think he could bear it, I say, how 
many days would you be taking us to the 
lake we have come over to see?" 

" Faith and troth your honour is a kind- 
hearted gentleman, to feel so much for 
ould Darby. But days, did you say, I'd 
be driving you to Crab Lake ! that is all 
oUjezr 

*' Yes," said Rosebud, who had already 
made Wilkinson, to his and Mrs. Bent- 
ley's great joy, believe that he and his 
friend meant to accompany them in their 
excursion, " we are all of the same party." 

" Why," cried the fellow, " yez all 
seem to be so good-natured, that maybe 
I'd better leave it to yourselfs." 

" No, no, neighbour," said Wilkinson, 
" my way is always to make a sure bar- 
gain beforehand, then there's no gifum- 
bling and finding fault afterwards. I say 
again, therefore, what will you have to 
take us all, with this one horse, to the 



70 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

lake, every expence included, save our 
own entertainment at the different stages 
on the road ?" 

" Upon my conscience, and that's as 
good as my oath any day, 'tis a long bit 
of ground to Crab Lake; and then to 
drive yez all in this iligint manner !" 

Hardly were the words out of his lips, 
than down stumbled poor old Darby on 
his knees, to the no small terror of Mrs. 
Bentley — " Oh, we shall be killed ! we 
shall be killed !" she exclaimed, or rather 
soi'eamed out. 

" Ah, the sorrow fear of you, my lady," 
cried Mr. Pat Murphy, pulling up the 
poor beast again ; " this was only a trick 
of poor Darby's, becase he heard us mak- 
ing a bargain ; or else what do you think 
he was about?" addressing himself to Wil- 
kinson. 

" I knows not," replied Wilkinson, ex- 
tremely tvexed; " about breaking our 
necks, I suppose!" 

" Is it he, the creatshure ! Ah, then. 



' TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 71 

sure such a thing never entered his head; 
did it, my ould boy ? But I'll be bound 
it didn't, for a better-hearted creatshure 
than ould Darby is nowhere to be met 
with. What I was going to say to your 
honour was, that if it wasn't a trick he 
was playing, it was going to pray, perhaps 
he was, that we might have a good jour- 
ney ; but perhaps your honour never saw 
a capal say his prayers before?" 

" A what !" cried Wilkinson. " I don't 
understand, hinist friend ; but if you mean 
a horse, no; nor I hope I never shall 
again." 

"By St. Patrick! but that's strange; 
and so your honours would be hiring me 
by the lump, as one may say. Well, that 
shall make no odds; and as I find yez be 
all strangers in ould Ireland, I'll be as 
cheap as I can, or as a poor man like me 
with thirteen children, and as many more, 
for aught that I know, to come, ought to 
be expicted to be ; ask what I will, I'm 
sure your honours will give me a trifle at 



72 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the end of the journey over and above, 
with a comfortable bit now and then to 
on Id Darby. Well, here goes ; for the use 
of the iligint jingle, nine tinpinnieSy for 
ould Darby to draw it, tin tinpinnies, and 
for myself to drive it, tin more" 

" How much," gravely demanded Wil- 
kinson, " do all these tinpinnies make f" 

Murphy took from his pocket a bit of 
chalk, and marked on the shaft of the 
jingle, in streaks, as he thus proceeded: 
" For myself, as 1 look upon yez as all friends, 
being strangers in ould Ireland, there is 
till tinpinnies, for ould Darby the same, 
and for the iligint jingle, that has taken 
many a lady and gentleman to Donnybrook 
Fair, and the little Dargle of a Sunday, 
nine more, making, let me see, one pound 
eleven shillings, and twopence, or four- 
pence, I won't be certain which." 

" How many pence is in a tin pinny, as 
you call it?" asked Wilkinson. 

" Two fives, an please your honour." 

" Well then, friend, I can only say, by 



T?11ADITI0N OF THE CASTLE. 7S 

my calculation, I can only make two tens 
and a nine, one pound four shillings and 
twopence!" 

" Ah, then, your honour, how close we 
are to each other !" 

" How do you make that out ?" 

" Arrah! is there any more nor a tin- 
pinny or two between us ?" 

" I manage to make a difference of six 
shillings !" 

" Pooh ! that's because you reckon in 
the way of your own country, for every 
country has its own way, your honour; 
and, any how, what signifies the difference 
of six shillings? I, that am a poor man, 
think nothing about it !" 

" No, I dare say not, when it's in your 
own favour ; but " 

" Come, come," interrupted Mrs. Bent- 
ley, " nor vill we, friend, provided we find 
you civil and careful ; but I am growing 
cold, the night has changed so, and wish, 
therefore, you'd take us, as fast as you can, 
to some good inn or hotel, if you know of 
such a one, for the night." 

VOL. II. E 



74 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" Do I ? ah ! then let me alone for that. 
Did you ever hear, my lady, of my coun- 
tryman, the duke of Wellington ?" 

" To be sure I did ! every one has heard 
of him ; vasn't the grand illuminations we 
had in Lunnun all on account of his great 
wictory ?" 

" Well, my lady, please the pigs, as my 
grandmother used to say, the Lord rest 
her soul ! you shall sleep in his hotel this 
night, where I'll stay myself, to help to 
wait on you, and be ready to start with 
yez early in the morning, on our long 
journey to the lake, and where yez will be 
sure of getting a good bit and sup ;*' and 
so saying, he now, in right earnest, beganr 
to drive forward, having all this time, till 
now, been doing nothing but driving 
them up one road and down another, into 
the Circular one, that goes, as its name im- 
plies, round Dublin, to the no small amuse- 
ment of the doctor, who was not a little 
diverted by his roguery ; for it is now to 
be understood, that Crab Lake is an insig- 
nificant little place, about a mile or two 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 75 

from Dublin, on the north side, never 
thought of, and, perhaps, hardly known, 
to many of the natives. No wonder, then, 
that Mr. Pat should feel astonished at 
being asked how many days it would take 
to go there. But, much as the doctor 
was amused by his impudence, in taking 
advantage of their acknowledged igno- 
rance, to pass it for a considerable distance 
on them, he did not, of course, intend to 
let him carry on the joke beyond this 
night. 

Mr. Murphy, now finding it high time 
to come to the end of a stage, stopped, at 
length, at a poor miserable house, close to 
the banks of the Canal, holding out a scar- 
let daub, underneath which was written — 
"The Duke of Wellington." Murphy, 
bidding the party wait a bit, went in first, 
and, after stopping a few minutes, return- 
ed, accompanied by another man, who, 
stepping up to the side of the jingle, 
evinced himself the owner of the house, 
by welcoming the travellers into it, and 
beginning to assist them to alight, 
E 2 



76 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

The night, as Mrs. Bentley observed, 
had suddenly changed; it had got ex- 
tremely cold and wet, so that a comfort- 
able room was a thing very much to be 
desired; what their feelings, therefore, 
were, at the appearance of that into which 
they were ushered by their host, with no 
little ceremony and parade, such as, indeed, 
a good deal raised their expectations, may 
well be imagined. Every thing looked 
dirty and wretched, and there being hardly 
three whole panes in the two windows, the 
wind, that, in consequence, rushed in with 
violence^ almost instantly extinguished the 
candle, with which the landlord had pre- 
ceded the party. — " What the devil is the 
meaning of this?" cried Rosebud, now 
beginning to get himself into a passion, 
from feeling uncomfortable. 

" Have a little patience, your honours," 
said O'Shaughnessy, " and I won't be a 
giffy in doing something to keep that 
li^llish wind out !" So saying he retired, 
but presently returned with a light, and 
his arms full of straw ; depositing one in a 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 77 

corner, that was screened, he proceeded to 
fill up the, vacuums occasioned by the 
broken glass, by thrusting handfuls of 
straw into the windows. 

In the mean time, Mrs. Bentley and 
Mr. Wilkinson had seated themselves, 
with mournful looks at each other, oppo- 
site to one another, at the fire-place. They 
had not long done so, when Jonathan, 
unconsciously stirring something at the 
bottom of the grate with his cane, a spark 
of fire issued from it, which he no sooner 
perceived, than, shivering with cold, he let 
drop his cane, and snatching up a snout- 
less bellows, that lay beside him on the 
floor, he set about blowing, what he con- 
ceived the cinders, with such vigour, as, 
in a moment, completely enveloped him, 
and every one else in the room, in a cloud 
of white ashes. Provoked, if not fright- 
ened, Mrs. Bentley was running out of it, 
when Wilkinson stopping her, called for 
the coachman, as he denominated the rag- 
ged carman ; and on his obeying his sum- 
mons, demanded, in no very complacent 



78 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

tone, what kind of a place that was he had 
brought them to ? 

" Is it this snug hotel of the duke of 
Wellington's your honour would be pleas- 
ed to be axing after ? faith, and its itself 
that is a comfortable place to be in, such a 
could wet night as this, barring the want of 
fire, and a bit of glass or two in the win- 
dows; but, stop, sure hasn't Ned been 
after just glazing them ? Och ! blessings 
on him, if he isn't a nate lad, I wonder 
who is !" 

" Do you call a room comfortable that 
has not a bit of fire in it, such a night as 
this ?" demanded Wilkinson, in a passion. 

" Botheration ! botheration ! if that be 
all your honour wants, you'll have it be- 
fore you ask for it ;" and off he flew. He 
soon returned, with a wooden coal-box, 
full of live fire, having thrown which into 
the grate, the box itself remained in his 
hands in flames. 

" You may as well," said Wilkinson, 
noticing this, " throw what you have in 
your hand after the fire." 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 79 

" Do, for God's sake, or you'll set fire 
to the house !" added Mrs. Bentley, 

** Ah, then, madam, does you all think 
I am mad, to go for to burn the man's 
household goods in such a way ?" 

" Why, what use is such a thing, after 
being so burnt?" 

" What use ! many a day he has got a 
worse singeing than this ; wait, your ho- 
nours, till I dip him in the pond without, 
and you'll see how well he'll look." 

On Murphy's re-entrance, after ducking 
the coal-box — " Well, what can we have 
for supper ?" demanded Jonathan. 

5« Why, please your honour, ould Ire- 
land is famous for bacon and greens, which, 
with a nice fat fowl, might, any how, may 
be, do for this night. — I hope you'll like a 
chicken, my lady?" 

Mrs. Bentley answered in the affirma- 
tive, expressing herself very well pleased 
and satisfied with the proposed supper; 
and Murphy withdrew, to give the neces- 
sary instructions to the landlord. 

The kitchen was opposite the parlour, 



80 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

and Rosebud happening to be, at the mo- 
ment, in the passage that divided them, 
but without being noticed by Murphy, 
from the hurry he was in, heard, in conse- 
quence, what followed between him and 
the landlord. — " In the name of St. Pa- 
trick," demanded the latter, " what could 
put it into your head to promise them 
people such a supper, when you know, 
for love nor money, we couldn't get a fowl 
out here?" 

" Botheration !" cried Murphy, " do 
you only make up a bit of fire, get the pot 
on, and leave the rest to me." 

The fellow soon returned, bearing in his 
hand an immense dunghill cock, the head 
of which he had wrung off, and instantly 
set about stripping it of its plumage. At 
Murphy's first entrance, O'Shaughnessy 
had not observed what he was about; but 
no sooner had he time to notice him, than 
he seemed to lose the power of motion, 
and stood staring at him with astonish- 
ment. At length, stooping down, and 
taking up some of the feathers to examine 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 81 

them — " Ah, then," in a voice indicative 
of regret and anger, he exclaimed, " is it 
after killing poor Judy Melany's cock 
you are !" 

" Hush !" cried the other, in a low tone, 
and attempting to close the kitchen door ; 
** burn the feathers, and who will be the 
wiser ?" 

" By my soul now, I am grieved and 
sorry for poor Billy ; man and boy, I have 
known him these ten years, at least ; and 
what's more, I never knew any harm of 
the poor crater. But what will Judy say, 
when she finds the lad gone, that was as 
good as a clock to her ? By St. Patrick, 
but it must be jaws of iron that will be 
able to get into the flesh of the poor ould 
crater !" 

" Come, come," cried Murphy, " what 
signifies grieving! do you finish picking 
him, and hand me a bottle of the lastj^o- 
teen, and if I don't, by a good dose, such 
as, I'll be sworn, they never tasted before, 
give such a stiffening to the jaws of these 
eS 



S2 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

foreigners, as shall make them think Billy 
a chicken, no matter !" 

" Having got what he required, he pro- 
ceeded with it, with glasses, sugar, and 
warm water, to the parlour, and having 
made a strong tumbler of punch, handed 
it to Mrs. Bentley, with a recommendation 
to her to take it off directly, as the best 
preservative in the world against the 
rheumatic^ to which every one, not born or 
bred in Ireland, was subject on first com- 
ing to it, if they did not do similar to what 
he now advised. 

" Only think of that, Jonathan !" said 
Mrs. Bentley, as she accepted the glass. — 
" Thank you, friend, for your attention ; 
indeed I believe it was very necessary, as 
I feel a shivering all over me; but," ap- 
plying her lips to the glass, and taking a 
flip, " it appears to me very strong, though 
very good." 

** Ah, my lady, that's because you're not 
used to it ; when you take more of it, you'll 
think it weak enough." 

" Well, friend, since you recommend it 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 83 

SO strongly, suppose you try your hand on 
a tumbler of it for me," said Wilkinson. 

Murphy required no urging, and Jo- 
nathan having tasted it, expressed himself, 
like his friend Mrs. Bentley, much pleas- 
ed with it — " Now that's down," he cried, 
" it has given such a glow to my whole 
body, as is mighty agreeable — I was so 
cold before ; a sure sign the rheumatism 
was coming on." 

" Ah, the devil a surer one !" said Mur- 
phy, mixing him another dose, which, 
from its strength, had nearly occasioned 
suffocation. 

At length supper was brought in. Jo- 
nathan's eyes sparkled with pleasure and 
delight, as he viewed the fine large fowl 
Mr. Murphy had provided for him. — " If s 
a mighty fine bird !" observed Mrs. Bent- 
ley, as he helped her to a wing. 

Rosebud and Donaghue declined any 
part of it, preferring bread and cheese, a 
circumstance that seemed to afford Wil- 
kinson great pleasure. — " I am inclined to 
think," he said to Murphy, who officiated 



84 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

as waiter, as he went on carving, " that 
you have brought us a capon, instead of a 
common fowl." 

" An', please your honour, which do you 
like best?" asked Murphy. 

" Oh, there's no kind of comparison be- 
tween them 1" 

" Yes, but which does your honour like 
best," again asked the other, who never 
in his life had heard of a capon before, yet 
did not like to discover his ignorance, 
" the capon or the fowl ?" 

" Oh, a capon, to be sure ! give me a ca- 
pon, any time, in preference; and, I must 
say, this is as fine a one, judging from its 
size, as I ever before saw." 

" See the luck I was in," said Murphy, 
with a voice of infinite satisfaction, " to 
order the very thing that was so agree- 
able !" 

Mrs. Bentley cut and tore, and tore and 
cut, to try and get the flesh off poor Billy's 
bones ; they appeared as loth to part as two 
lovers; but when, at length, she did sue- 
c^ed in getting a bit to put into her mouth* 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 85 

her jaws were fairly tired in the mastica- 
tion. Jonathan made a furious attack 
upon one of the old boy's legs, but he 
might as well have hoped to get his teeth 
into a horse's hide, after being well tanned 
and beaten ; and, at last, completely worn 
out with fatigue, they dropped their knives 
and forks, and literally rested on their arms. 
— " Doesn't it please you, my lady ?" ask- 
ed Murphy, advancing to the table. 

" Please her !" repeated Jonathan ; " why 
what the plague bird is it ?" 

" A capon, your honour ; what your 
honour is so fond of." 

" Then if it is, it is a devil of an old 
one ! I never met with such a one before !" 

" Arrah! and, upon my conscience, its 
laugh your honour makes me !" 

" I see nothing to laugh at," said Wil- 
kinson, extremely disconcerted. 

" Why then, perhaps, your honours 
likes the capons in your own country the 
best ?" 

" Yes, I believe we do indeed !" replied 



86 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Wilkinson, with much indignation and 
contempt. 

" Because, in our country, they are so 
tender," observed Mrs. Bentley. 

" Ah ! that's what makes the difference 
between them," cried Murphy ; " in ould 
Ireland we never like our capons till their 
flesh gets a little firm, or hard ; indeed, as 
a body may say, by their getting a little 
ould." 

" Good gracious ! " exclaimed Mrs. 
Bentley, " what a difference in the two 
countries! why, in England, we always 
like the fowl of the same year." 

" Ah ! then that same country of yours 
must be an outlandish place, my lady; 
it's not tough mutton, I suppose, you'd be 
liking there, as we do here ?" 

" Come, come, friend," cried Wilkinson, 
who had resumed his knife and fork, ** you 
know how to play tricks upon travellers ; 
for, now that I begin to look at this bird, 
I am much inclined to think him an old 
dunghill cock." 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 87 

" A capon, your honour." 

" A cock, I say ! and, by the Lord, 
here's his spurs half a yard long ! Why, 
he has crowed for the parish these ten 
years, I dare say." 

" Well, to be sure," said Murphy, " to 
see that some people will only see things 
as they like it themselves !" 

" Come, away with him !" cried Wil- 
kinson; "and, since we must make our 
supper of bread and cheese, let us have 
some good porter, I say, to wash it down, 
if this here country produces such a thing." 

The porter was got, and the rage of 
hunger being at last appeased, Wilkinson 
began to recover from the ill-humour 
which its being baulked in the first in- 
stance had occasioned. A glass or two 
more of the poteen making Mrs. Bentley 
sleepy, she, at last, demanded to be shewn 
to her chamber. Murphy, opening the 
door with the air of one of the first waiters 
in the kingdom, called, in a voice of au- 
thority, for the chambermaid. 

The call was obeyed by a girl without 



88 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

shoes or stockings, and with a rushlight 
in her hand. — " Chambermaid truly !" ex- 
claimed Mrs. Bentley, with a toss of her 
head, on seeing her ; " why, in my coun- 
try, the lowest pot-girl has shoes and 
stockings on." 

" Ah, my lady, the sorrow a bit the 
better they are for that ; that's what makes 
the girls in your country so saucy ; they 
are better fed than taught. I have a cou- 
sin who goes over every year to assist in 
getting in the harvest, and he says they 
don't care what they do there. Now this 
poor thing only thinks of her business, and 
if she doesn't like to be laying out much 
with the shoemaker, why who has a right 
to be angry ?" 

Mrs. Bentley retired; but her compa- 
nion, as yet, shewed no inclination to fol- 
low her example. He at last, indeed, be- 
tween a good fire and the poteen, seemed 
to feel himself very comfortable ; but his 
head was not long able to bear the strength 
of the latter, and, in a short time, in a 
manner that could hardly have been ex- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 89 

pected from his appearance, as he had a 
good deal the look of a swadler, he began 
to bellow out for the waiter, boots, and 
chambermaid. 

Murphy, running into the room, de- 
manded of his honour if all was not right? 

" No, you rascal !" stammered out Wil- 
kinson ; " for I neither see boots, nor 
waiter, nor chambermaid !" 

" Arrah ! be asy, your honour ; don't 
be going on in this comical way ; how can 
you want boots, when they are on your 
legs ? The waiter, myself, is beside you, 
and the chambermaid you can have no 
business with here." 

"Why not?" 

" Because your honour is in your bed- 
room already." 

" How do you — make that — out?" a- 
gain stammered Jonathan ; " I — 1 see no 
bed here." 

" But you won't be long so ;" and so 
saying he disappeared; but almost in- 
stantly returned, with some trusses of 
straw, which, shaking out on the floor, he 



90 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

threw some blankets over, and then, turn- 
ing to Wilkinson — " Ah, then it's snug 
all of yez will be together here; what 
wouldn't hundreds give to be as well off 
as yez all will be this could night, in this 
warm birth. Come, your honour, shall I 
help you off with your boots?" 

" You — you arrant knave," stuttered 
Wilkinson, " do — do you think we — we 
are beasts, to — to — to have a litter made 
— made up for us !" 

" Ah, then sure it can't be helped," said 
Murphy, in a coaxing tone ; " your ho- 
nour looks like a good-natured gentleman, 
and wouldn't be going, I am sure, to take 
the only bed in the house from the poor 
lady." 

Wilkinson paused, and began to consi- 
der — " Is — is it large enough for — for — 
two?" 

" Ay is it, for four." 

" Then— then I'll take a— a nap on it." 

" By my sowl, but you won't. Is it, 
let the Duke of Wellington lose its cha- 
racter by you! So come, botheration! 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 91 

there's a good bed for you. If yez be go* 
ing on in this way, how'U yez be up by 
cock-crow, to be setting out on this long 
journey we are going ?" and as he spoke, 
perceiving the state Wilkinson was in, he 
whipped him up in his arms, and, without 
further ceremony, laid him down on the 
straw, and covered him up with a blanket. 
Donaghue wanted not this finale to 
their adventures at the Duke of Welling- 
ton, to render him completely vexed and 
provoked with himself for having given 
way to Rosebud's whim. Exclusive of 
any consideration about himself, he felt 
sore that he should have given the slight-, 
est sanction to strangers being so deceived 
and imposed on. There was something 
unkind, inhospitable in it, that wounded 
his generous mind. Besides, it was doing 
an act of positive injustice to his country, 
to allow it to appear in such a light as a 
place where there was hardly civilization; 
and altogether he felt he should never be 
reconciled to himself, till he had done 
something to make amends for his indirect 



92 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

connivance against them. In a word, it 
was settled between him and Rosebud, 
that, as far as possible, the amende ho^ 
norahle should be made them: and ac- 
cordingly, the ensuing morning, on Mrs. 
Bentley's insisting, the moment she ap- 
peared, on Jonathan's taking her imme- 
diately back to England, from so wild 
and savage a place, Donaghue interfered ; 
and by his mild and conciliating man- 
ner, prevailing on her to postpone her 
return till she had seen a little more of 
the country, a coach was sent for, in 
which the party was conveyed to the 
Hibernian hotel, with the size and situa- 
tion of which Mrs. Bentley was not 
only delighted but astonished, having no 
conception, from the previous impression 
made on her mind, of there being such a 
place in the capital. 

They did not, however, depart without 
Mr. Pat receiving a severe lecture for his 
roguery. Taking him aside, Rosebud 
protested he had the greatest mind in the 
world to take him before a police magis- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 93 

trate, an assertion however which was not 
strictly true, as his conscience would not 
have allowed him to punish him for what 
he had so much enjoyed, assuring him he 
would keep a watchful eye on him ; and 
if ever he found he attempted a like trick, 
or did not recompense poor Judy out of 
what the party might perhaps be induced 
to give him, for the depredation he had 
committed on her, he would make him 
do so. 

Pat cried and prayed, and finally plead- 
ed poverty, and his thirteen children, pro- 
testing, that as all the English were made 
of money, and got so much out of ould 
Ireland, through the means of those who 
deserted it, he had not thought there was 
any great harm in trying to get a little of 
it from them. 

Donaghue ordered a very handsome en- 
tertainment, of which the strangers par- 
took as his guests. Mrs. Bentley was 
quite charmed with his polite attention, 
and the excellent fare provided for her, 
with such attendance as she had not been 



94 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

much accustomed to ; expressing it, as her 
opinion, that was there such a public- 
house, as she chose to style the hotel, at 
Mile End, it would have wast business 
indeed, particularly of an evening, when 
all the men from the docks were at leisure; 
and declaring that she had never ate a bet- 
ter dinner at the Ship, at Greenwich — the 
Green Man, at Barnet — the Plough, at 
Hampstead — the Fox and Goose, at Nor- 
wood — or the Bald-faced Stag, at Epping 
Forest; and, finally, it was very evident 
her sentiments had begun to experience a 
very favourable revolution with regard to 
the country. 

Though she and her companion were 
by no means people Donaghue could in 
any way assimilate with, yet for two days, 
in consideration of the past, he devoted 
himself entirely to them; on the third, 
they set out in the stage-coach for the real 
lake, with letters of introduction, from 
Rosebud, to some friends he had there; 
and as still further amends for his freak, 
an invitation, on their way back, to his 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 95 

residence. He and his friend soon after 
followed, accompanied by his attorney, 
Mr. Macdonnel, a very pleasant man, who 
proved a very great acquisition on the 
journey, from his perfect knowledge of 
every place through which they travelled ; 
there was not an old church, castle, or 
tower, with the history of which he was 
not acquainted ; and in addition to which 
amusement, he was able to give Donaghue 
a great deal of useful information concern- 
ing his native land. But the pleasure they 
derived from conversing was soon inter- 
rupted by a change in the doctor's hu- 
mour; he grew jealous — fancied himself 
neglected, and, in consequence, gave way 
to a petulance that had soon the effect of 
silencing Mr. Macdonnel. 

He could not have taken a more effec- 
tual way of punishing the other for this 
petulance; silence was, of all things, what 
the doctor could least endure, and accord- 
ingly, suddenly slapping Macdonnel on 
the back, he demanded what he was so 
deeply engaged in thinking on — " Though 



96 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

I think I can guess," he cried, " that it is 
by what items you can best swell out a 
bill of costs against some unfortunate 
client." 

" What's that you say about costs?" 
cried the other, with quickness, as if really 
roused from some deep study. 

" Ha ! how soon the mention of costs 
restored you to yourself, Mac?" 

" Why, doctor, without the hope and 
expectation of emolument, I don't see how 
any man could be expected to undertake 
business." 

" True ; but the hopes and expectations 
of you gentlemen of the law about emolu- 
ment, are, between ourselves, out of all 
rule and compass. Come, confess now, 
Mac — if you w^ere only paid the twelfth 
part of what you demand, would you not 
be paid well ?" 

** It is a rule in the courts," replied 
Macdonnel, with a good-humoured smile, 
" that a man is not obliged to answer any 
question that makes against himself But 
to be candid, ours is an unfortunate pro- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 97 

fession, insomuch, that were I beginning 
my life again, and, of course, had still the 
choice of one, I should prefer any other to 
it. The rapacious, unprincipled conduct 
of a set of rascals, vultures in human form, 
or vampires, or whatever else you please 
to call them, laying themselves out to 
suck the very life-blood of those who fall 
into their hands, has occasioned a stigma to 
be cast upon it, that makes all in it to be 
indiscriminately suspected alike; but the 
legislature has at last, in a degree, taken 
up the matter; and I hope the time is not 
far distant, when, by rendering it not an 
easy matter for any but men of some pro- 
perty to enter it, it will be freed from such 
wretches, not only a disgrace to whatever 
they are attached to, but also to the very 
name of men." 



VOL. XL 



98 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 



CHAPTER IV. 



*' Time, thou mayest roll thy years along, 

Thy lessons silently unfuld ; 
The grave, the ga)?, the old, the young, 

Heed not the tale thou long hast told." 

" Ah, then, Cathala, my darling, do I see 
you again ! a little the worse for the wear, 
to be sure; but no wonder, for many a 
long year has passed since I turned my 
back on you ; but if Time has not spared 
you, yet still, hasn't he been kind in throw- 
ing a fine green mantle of ivy over you ; 
while your own, those whom you sheltered 
from many a storm, have let you tumble 
and decay, without doing a thing for you ; 
but no matter, we shall see if we cannot 
make amends for their neglect, and keep 
your old head up a little longer." 

Such was the apostrophe of Rosebud, at 
the sight of his paternal home; his com- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 99 

panions smiled ; but still each with a look 
that seemed to say they understood what 
his feelings must be at the moment. 
Teghadow was an ancient castle, connect- 
ed with, and, no doubt, in former times, 
forming part of the extensive monastery 
of St. Cathala, the ruins of which evinced 
what it must have been in its days of ori- 
ginal splendour. Besides numerous cells 
and vaults, a great portion of the cloisters 
still remained, together with the chapel, 
that is, its east window and high altar, 
both adorned with beautiful sculpture, in 
high preservation, and sufficient of the 
walls to shew what it was; but the roof 
had given way, not however till the clus- 
tering ivy, that had gradually overspread 
it, had become so strong and luxuriant, 
as almost completely to supply its place, 
forming a perspective of green arches, in- 
expressibly beautiful ; beneath the solemn 
shade of which Donaghue was often wont 
to indulge his melancholy reflections, after 
taking up his abode at Teghadow, as if 
F 2 



100 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

he loved to listen to the " moping owl, 
complaining to the moon, of such as, wan- 
dering near her secret bower, disturbed 
her ancient solitary reign." Before the 
high altar w^as the tomb of the foundress, 
with a curious representation of herself, in 
a recumbent posture ; and altogether there 
was much here to awaken solemn reflec- 
tion, and interest the antiquarian, in the 
ancient grave-stones, with curious inscrip- 
tions, that were scattered about, imbedded 
in rank grass and weeds. 

It stood on an elevation, overlooking a 
narrow, wdnding glen, through w^hlch a 
river took its course; the glen was bound- 
ed, in the most romantic manner, by hills, 
rocks, and hanging w^oods; the rocks rose 
in various shapes, some from banks of 
wood, and altogether the scene w^as strik- 
ingly picturesque. There was, however, 
it must be confessed, more of beauty and 
romantic grandeur about Teghadow than 
of real comfort, having, as the doctor ob- 
served, been wofully neglected. The size 
of some of the apartments in the castle 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 101 

however, as well as furniture they retained, 
proved its having once been a place of 
magnificence ; and much as the doctor af- 
fected to despise any thing of the kind, it 
was evident he took pride in pointing out 
the numerous portraits of his ancestors, 
that hung in the chief sitting-room. 

A few days after the arrival of the party, 
as Rosebud and his friends were convers- 
ing, one evening after dinner, on various 
matters — " There was a time, I believe, 
doctor," observed Mr. Macdonnel, rather 
suddenly, " when you would have sold 
your chance of the lands of St. Cathala a 
bargain?" 

" Why, yes, Mac, I believe so; for, 
with all your scheming, I believe you 
would hardly have had the modesty, had 
a chapman been referred to you for my 
title, to have induced him to believe there 
was any great chance of his succeeding to 
them during his natural life. At one time, 
Donaghue, there were no less than nine 
between me and the castle and lands of 
Teghadow. There were— but no matter 



102 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

who there were, they have all vanished 
before me, without my exactly knowing 
how, and here I am, the last representa- 
tive of a family that was not altogether 
undistinguished in its day. What I went 
through, owing to the unkindness of those 

But it's no matter now, they are gone, 

peace be with them ! I bear no enmity to 
their memories; and instead of trying to 
excite your indignation, Donaghue, for 
Mac knows the family history already, by 
reverting to past grievances, will endea- 
vour to amuse you, by giving you some 
account of this here place, as our friend 
poor Jonathan says. 

" You must know then, that St. Ca- 
thala was a Druidess, who, soon after the 
arrival of St. Patrick in this country, was 
convertecT to Christianity, and founded 
this nunnery, of which she became abbess, 
and where she died. The place continued 
to flourish till the dissolution of religious 
houses, in the time of Henry the Eighth, 
when it shared the general fate. What 
the particular services of my ancestors 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 103 

were, I cannot take upon myself to say ; 
but that they were of some consequence, 
may be fairly presumed, I conceive, from 
the anecdote that is to follow. On the 
suppression of monasteries, numerous were 
the suitors to Henry for grants of the lands 
belonging to them. On one of the days 
set apart by the king for taking into con- 
sideration the various petitions for these, 
sir Hannibal Rose, my ancestor, happened 
to be in waiting, and who, however he 
might have lent himself to advance the 
claims of others, had never yet been allow- 
ed, by his modesty, to advance one of his 
own ; I say, he was in waiting, when sud- 
denly the eyes of Henry became steadfast- 
ly fixed upon him, a circumstance that the 
capricious temper of his royal master did 
not render very agreeable to him, who, as 
we all know, was more feared for his bad 
actions than loved for his good ones. After 
undergoing this evident scrutiny for some 
minutes, with no very easy mind, he was 
motioned to approach the table at which 
the king was seated. On his obeying — 



104 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

* Sir Hannibal,' said the sovereign,/ how 
is it that you, who have fought, and bled, 
and pleaded for us, have allowed us to 
nearly forget your services, when the 
power of so annply rewarding them has 
occurred? I grant, however, that a king 
should never need to be reminded of what 
he owes a faithful servant ; from this mo- 
ment, therefore, consider yourself trans- 
planted into the rich lands of Teghadow, 
attached to the dissolved monastery of St. 
Cathala, in Ireland, on this one condition, 
that you henceforth allow the family name 
to be Rosebud, instead of plain Rose, 
though a name to be liked, if it was for 
nothing else but being that of a flower 
that always brings sweetness to your idea, 
and was the badge of two royal houses ; 
but I choose the addition of bud to the 
flower, having ever considered it an em- 
blem of the human heart, that however 
internally lovely, still needs kindness and 
favour to make it expand to full perfec- 
tion.' 

" Such, O'Brien, is the tradition pre- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 105 

served in our family. The royal grant 
was a noble one ; but I am sorry to say, I 
believe very little benefit will now accrue 
from it to your humble servant — a sad 
race has gone before me; but, hang care, 
let the worst come to the worst, I still 
have fifteen shillings a-day, and a bachelor, 
with some old walls to shelter him, may 
contrive to live upon that." 

" I wish we could say you were sure of 
half that out of Teghadow," observed Mr. 
Macdonnel, producing a rental ; " but 
what by mortgages here, and mortgages 
there, the property may almost be con- 
sidered a nominal one. However, there 
are some bond obligations, the judgments 
on many of which have not, as we call it, 
been kept alive ; so that, if you choose to 
take advantage of this circumstance " 

" For what?" interrupted Rosebud; 
" perhaps to be the cause of making some 
innocent people go without a dinner, that 
I may have a little more money to spend, 
perhaps on idle vagaries, or put up in my 
F 3 



106 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

strong box. No, Mac ; as my agent, you 
are doing your duty to mention every 
thing to me ; but still, as a man not ut- 
terly contaminated by your honest profes- 
sion," and he laughed, " were I to profit 
by your hints, I am convinced you would 
deem me a scoundrel. We'll take an ear- 
ly opportunity of examining into every 
thing appertaining to Teghadow ; what is 
fair, that is, what my conscience makes 
me consider so, shall be allowed ; but, of 
course, nothing else, for I delight in 
the punishment and disappointment of 
knaves." 

" Very fair — very fair indeed." 
" And now," resumed the doctor, " put 
up your papers, my good fellow, and a 
truce for the present to business; I will 
give you a sentiment, old as the hills, but 
that appears apposite at the moment — 
' May the honest heart never know dis- 
tress!" 

Donaghue, now considering himself fix- 
ed for life in Ireland, naturally wished to 
attain a greater knowledge of the country 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 107 

and the people than he had yet acquired : 
he almost blushed when he thought of its 
being yet to seek ; but he was not altoge- 
ther to blame; the strong and early preju- 
dice that had been excited in his mind 
against both, had prevented — but he check- 
ed himself whenever the reflection occur- 
red, from the consideration of the person 
who was to be blamed for the circum- 
stance. The present he conceived a fa- 
vourable opportunity for acquiring what 
he wished, and justice, both to himself 
and others, rendered him anxious for ; for 
how, without knowing the actual value 
of land, could he decide about his own 
property; or how, without a perfect in- 
sight into the characters of the natives, de- 
termine what confidence was to be reposed 
ill them ? He soon found that the infor- 
mation he was solicitous for was not quite 
so easy of attainment as he might at first 
have supposed — that, in short, the common 
Irish were not formed for evasion without 
reason, particularly when a stranger came 
among them, whom at once regarding 



108 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

with suspicion, they, in consequence, an- 
swered in such a manner, so indirect and 
roundabout, as, according to his temper 
or motives for the questions addressed to 
them, were sure of either provoking or 
amusing him. 

Donaghue, however, persisted in what 
he had undertaken, feeling that if no other 
benefit resulted from it, it at least, at times, 
diverted his thoughts ; and there was often 
a weight of wo upon his heart, that ren- 
dered something of the kind necessary. 
In one of his long rambles one day by 
himself, for his companions were now very 
much engaged in business, a heavy shower 
drove him into a cabin for shelter. The 
family were all thrown into a bustle on 
his entrance, by their eagerness to provide 
his honour with a seat; a little white- 
headed boy was the person who succeeded 
in getting him one, which as Donaghue 
accepted, he threw him some halfpence, to 
lay out with a wretched old woman, that 
was passing at the instant with a basket 
of gingerbread. After a few observations 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 109 

to the woman, on the family by which she 
was surrounded, he proceeded, as usual, 
on entering such places, to address some 
inquiries to the man. — " Whose land is 
this you live on, my friend?" he began. 

The man, as if perplexed by the ques- 
tion, scratched his head for some time 
without replying ; and then — " His ho- 
nour's, honey ; who's else should it be ?" 

"What's his name?" 

"Ah, then, please your honour, is it 
squire Power you'd be asking about? 
Faith and troth, it's himself we haven't 
seen this many a long day." 

" Is it from Mr. Edward Power you 
hold your farm ?" 

" Arrah, Nelly, who is that ould man 
who comes here, and a black sight, I am 
sure, he is to us, looking after the rint ? 
sure it's not Michael Kelly, Patrick 
O'Shaughnessey, nor yet Tim Flaherty ! — 
Faith, your honour, there's so many of 
them coming for it, that we don't know 
what they are called." 



110 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" How much land do you hold in your 
own hands ?" 

" That's, please your honour, how many 
barrels of potatoes I'll get out of it ?" 

" No, what number of acres do you 
rent, and, in general, men of your condi- 
tion ; and what do you pay an acre ?" 

" Oh, then, any how, it's we that are 
well taxed for the praties; what with the 
landlord's rint, and the money to that ould 
rogue of a proctor, and father INIurphy's 
dues, the devil a praty we eats that's not 
a lump of gould !" 

" Do you consider the ground about 
here good?" He was interested in the 
question, as it very much resembled that 
about Altoir-na-Grenie. 

" Is it, please your honour, the bog, or 
the mountain, or the midway ?" 

" No, I mean in general, what, one with 
another, may be considered worth an acre?" 

" Oh, as to that, please your honour, se- 
ven times more nor any body, that could 
help it, would give. There's a good bit 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. Ill 

here, to be sure, and a good bit there ; but 
the devil a good bit they'll give any of us 
if they can help it, though they'll have the 
rint snug enough from us." 

Donaghue gave up asking any farther 
questions on the subject he was anxious 
about, convinced that the inquisitor-ge- 
neral himself would not have succeeded in 
obtaining a direct answer where he was. 

His attention was now attracted to the 
door, where the little boy to whom he had 
given the halfpence was striving, with a 
broomstick which he had got, and with 
which he was hitting them most unmer- 
cifully on the head, to keep out three pigs 
and a whole swarm of poultry, that, at- 
tracted by the steam of the hot potatoes 
the good woman was just pouring from the 
pot, into a large wooden bowl, for dinner, 
were endeavouring, with all their might, 
to make an entree. — " What's all this a- 
bout, my little fellow?" said Donaghue, 
rising, and going to him ; " how would 
you like to be struck on the head, in the 



112 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

way you are striking these unfortunate 
animals ?" 

" Sorrow take them !" said the boy, " if 
I didn't bate them this way, they'd be in, 
in spite of me, now that they smell the 
praties." 

" But why not put them up, in time, 
in their own place ?" 

" Eh !" said the boy, as if not well com- 
prehending him ; " sure there's no other 
place for them than " 

"Than this?" 

" Och, yes !" said the mother, " they 
come in at night, as nat'rel as the childer 
themselves." 

" Good Heavens !" exclaimed Donaghue, 
" and are you not afraid to let them be 
where your children are?" 

" Ah, sorrow bit ! it's not any harm 
they'd ever be thinking of doing them. 
There's old Grunty, that's as fond of them, 
as a body may say, as he is of his own." 

While this short dialogue was going on, 
the cock, despairing of getting in quietly, 
suddenly sprung up, and flew over the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 113 

boy's head, and the hens followed. The 
clamour and confusion that ensued, be- 
tween their triumphant notes of exaltation 
and attack on the potatoes, made Dona- 
ghue, after throwing some silver on the 
table, precipitately retreat from this scene 
of riot and wretchedness. 

But though Donaghue could not alto- 
gether obtain the information or acquire 
the knowledge he wished for, yet, as far 
as he could form a judgment, from what 
he saw and observed, he conceived the 
Irish, that is, the common Irish, by no means 
deserving of the character of thought- 
lessness and improvidence; that it is to 
the higher orders, men in the rank of his 
late father, such terms can, with propriety, 
alone be applied ; they, too often indeed, 
appearing to wilfully shut their eyes to 
the terrible consequences that must ever 
result from inattention to one's affairs; 
while those of an inferior description are 
patient of labour, frugal, thrifty, and in- 
dustrious; and though naturally choleric, 
yet cool, collected, and wary, in matters of 



114 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

moment, particularly when their own in- 
terest was at stake. 

In tbeir superstition he was no ways 
concerned ; but he perceived, with regard 
to this, they were by no means behind 
hand with their neighbours, the Welsh 
and the Scotch, particularly the latter, as 
firmly believing in banshees, fetches, and 
the good people, as they style the fairies, 
as the others do in wraiths, brownies, and 
second sight. With regard to their bi- 
gotry, he conceived it a delicate matter to 
interfere in ; with all due deference to the 
opinions of others, he could hardly avoid 
thinking it a dangerous thing, without 
there was a positive hope and prospect 
of their complete conversion, to at- 
tempt to weaken a faith that kept them 
under the control of men of piety and 
learning, who, having an interest in the 
country, it was natural to suppose would 
exert their influence to render them good 
and peaceable subjects. He had heard of 
many instances of restitution and atone- 
ment made, through the power of the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 115 

priest over them, and this was a circum- 
stance that had great weight in making 
him view the matter in the light just 
mentioned. 

Rosebud, after some days close attention 
to business, got so completely sick of it, 
as suddenly to decide on postponing, to a 
future day, the further investigation of his 
affairs ; and, by way of making himself 
amends for what he had gone through, 
proposed a trip to Killarney, after which 
he promised to accompany Donaghue to 
Altoir-na-Grenie, and fix his quarters with 
him for the winter. Neither of his com- 
panions made any objection ; it was vaca- 
tion time with Mr. Macdonnel, and Do- 
naghue fancied he found relief in change 
of scene, and, besides, had long wished to 
see the romantic beauties of this place. 

The doctor, being a good-natured man, 
felt greatly for the wretchedness he saw 
about him, and which, from his long ab- 
sence from the country, struck him more 
forcibly than it had ever done before, and, 
in consequence, gave notice to the poor 



116 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

tenantry, that if any of them required any 
thing of him, or had any complaint to 
make, they were to take advantage of the 
short stay he proposed making at Tegha- 
dow, to let him know. 

Three weeks passed away, and no one, 
either as suppliant or complainant, appear- 
ed ; and on the very morning they were 
setting off on their excursion, JMr. Mac- 
donnel was congratulating the doctor on 
the contented, satisfied tenantry he had, 
so unlike other landlords, when a whole 
troop of ragged, miserable-looking fellows, 
appeared advancing to the house. — " Good 
God, John !" demanded the doctor, with 
his usual quickness, of the servant who 
was in attendance at breakfast, and in a 
tone that evidently implied, had the hour 
been any other than it was, he certainly 
would have been alarmed by their appear- 
ance, " who are these men, or what can 
their business at Teghadow be ?" 

" They are your honour's tenants, who, 
hearing of your being about going, are 
come to pay their respects to you," 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 117 

*' Then do you go out, John," cried the 
doctor, not displeased at the compliment, 
" and give some whiskey among them, 
with my grateful thanks for this proof of 
their attachment, and an assurance, that, 
as soon as ever I return, I will see them, 
but Vv^hich time will not permit now, as 
the hour is late, and we have a long stage 
to go before night." 

That there was something more in their 
visit than Mr. John had chosen to inti- 
mate, Mr. Macdonnel was perfectly con- 
vinced, permission to ask being seldom 
neglected by an Irishman of their descrip- 
tion ; though it is a well known fact, they 
never, if possible, solicit a favour till such 
time as they conceive there may be some- 
thing likely to prevent its being duly 
weiglied ; at the scene that followed, there- 
fore, however he was amused, he was by 
no means surprised. 

On the doctor and his friends appearing 
at the hall-door, they w^ere received with 
loud cheers, much to the surprise of Rose- 
bud, who imagined these visitors had ei- 



118 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ther by this time retired, or were regaling 
themselves in the kitchen. Finding, how- 
ever, they had arranged themselves at 
each side of the hall-door, contrary to his 
expectations, he addressed a few words to 
them, expressive of the happiness he felt 
at finding himself the landlord of tenants 
so respectable, as to have no want or 
grievance to complain of, doubtless owing 
to their peaceable and loyal conduct; and, 
kissing his hand to them, was stepping 
after his companions into the chaise, when 
a pull by the skirt of the coat, that nearly 
brought him on his back, prevented this, 
and made him turn round, in extreme 
rage, to demand who the fellow was that 
had taken such a liberty with him ? 

" Ah, then, please your honour," cried 
the offender, a great, tall, gaunt-looking 
fellow, " it's the first time I was ever look- 
ed upon as a spalpeen, from my edication 
and manners. Faith, and it's myself that 
was always reckoned to do the thing, 
whatever it was, iligintly and ^mteelly. 
But look round, your honour, on the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 119 

handsome set of fellows that are waiting 
your honour's pleasure ; and when your 
honour's informed I am diligated by them 
to address your honour, I think you will 
acknowledge I cannot be the spalpeen you 
took me for, any how." 

'• Well, what am I to understand by 
this ?" demanded the doctor, but little ap- 
peased, being the last man in the world 
who could endure any undue liberty being 
taken with him, or being put out of his 
way ; " what is your pleasure, sir ?" 

" Och! oh hone! your honour, I hope 
the day may nivercome, when your faith- 
ful humble servant, or the likes of him, 
can brag that things are at their pleasure. 
As for myself, 'tis little that I want, or 
rather will ask, from your honour — al- 
though, blessed St. Patrick knows, how 
great my ?iiczssities are — for my business is 
chiefly about the craters here." 

" Why didn't you and they attend me 
within the specified time, sir? I gave due 
notice when I meant to depart; it was 
your business, then, if indeed you have 



120 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

any with me, to have come before, not 
when 1 am just setting off with my friends, 
and my steward has departed for Dublin, 
who alone could tell me whether I was 
right in paying any attention to you, be- 
ing totally ignorant myself about you all." 
" Plase your honour, there's a cure for 
all things, be they ever so bad, under the 
sun, save death, as, I dare say, your ho- 
nour well knows; so that the ignorance 
your honour bemoans I shall soon disperse, 
by the light I shall throw upon the seve- 
ral cases of these your honour's poor te- 
nants. But it's first niciss^ry to shew, 
and which I think I can do to your ho- 
nour's entire satisfaction, that it was not 
out of any perverseness on their parts, or 
a wish not to attend to the notice issued 
by the deputy, they did not come sooner, 
but entirely out of complaisance — * For,' 
says I to them, ' boys,' on hearing your ho- 
nour's kind message, ' it would be the 
height of ill breeding in us to break in, 
full gallop, upon his honour, with our 
complaints, when he is quietly intertain- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 121 

ing and enjoying himself with his friends, 
just as if we thought of ourselves before 
him ; so, instead of being guilty of such 
rudeness^ let us patiently wait till his ho- 
nour is on the wing, and then he won't 
mind a little interruption." 

" You are very much mistaken," said 
the doctor, by no means satisfied with this 
explanation ; " I must have been the best 
judge myself of the time I thought best 
to see or receive any of you ; I therefore 
hold your present conduct, in intruding 
upon me at such a moment, highly repre- 
hensible." 

" Ah ! then I hope not, your honour ; 
or, at least, that you won't continue to be 
angry at it, for we did all for the best, 
and the great king, Brien Boru, were he 
living, could do no more nor act to the 
bist of his judgment, more especially as, if 
there be any blame, it must all light on 
my showlders, since it was I that advised 
ivivy thing. On hearing that the chaise 
was come to take your honour away, the 

VOL. II. G 



122 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

boys came crowding round me with the 
news ; so, says I — ' Boys, this is the mo- 
ment to take his honour flying ;' and off 
I brought them, undertaking to spake for 
them myself." 

" You were vastly obliging truly," said 
Rosebud ; " and pray, may I ask what 
you have to say for them ?" 

" Oh, your honour, that's soon explain- 
ed ! — Boys, give his honour three cheers, 
and then I'll begin." 

The boys obeyed, and their spokesman 
then taking a paper out of his hat, after 
looking at it for a moment — " Come hi- 
ther, Pat Kennedy," he cried, " and put 
your best leg foremost to his honour." 

Pat made a scrape, as he took off his 
hat with a sheepish air, and the other thus 
proceeded — '' Paddy, an please your ho- 
nour, has twelve childer " 

" I have thirteen," whispered Pat, giv- 
ing him a twitch by the sleeve. 

" Arrah, be asy, Pat ! how can you 
make that out ?" 

" Don't you know the way Biddy is in?" 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 123 

" Och, botheration ! is it after reckon- 
ing your chickens you are before they are 
hatched? — Poor Kennedy, please your 
honour, has twelve childer, and another 
on the stocks, which he is in daily ixpec- 
tation of having launched. — Faith, Paddy, 
there are so many of you, I can't rimim- 
ber every thing — what is it you want from 
his honour?" 

Paddy hung his head, and said nothing. 

" Arrah, Pat, is it bashful you're get- 
ting? Come, spake out bouldly; don't 
you see his honour is only waiting to see 
what you want, to grant it, long life to 
him !" 

" Only lave, plase your honour, to take 
a little turf out of your honour's rick." 

" A modest request enough," said the 
doctor. 

" So off with you, Pat," cried the other, 
" and be sure you pray for his honour the 
longest day you have to live, for letting 
you have what you want so readily ;" and 
off scampered Mr. Kennedy. 
G 2 



124 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" Ned Rooney's the next. — Arrdh ! 
where are you, Ned ? is his honour to be 
kept waiting all day for such spalpeens P 
— Och ! here is poor Ned, snug enough all 
the time alongside of me. — What's that 
you tould me you wanted, Ned, child ?" 

" Only a little grass for a cow, to give 
the childer a little milk with their praties." 

" Modest enough, as his honour says. 
Step aside, Rooney, and let Terence 
O'Loughlan shew himself to his honour. — 
Terry, boy, what's that you'd be after ax- 
ing for ?" 

Terence seemed abashed. 

" Ah ! then, Terry, any how, you are 
the last man of all the ^mants that I had 
any notion would be sheepish — a man like 
you, that has had the honour of spaking 
to his countryman, ^meral lViU\ngioi\\ 
didn't you present the gun, Terry, when 
the gineral tipp'd the cock of his hat to 
you ? Tell his honour how you and the 
other Kerry boys knocked the brains out 
of the Frenchmen's heads when they got 
tired of sticking them !" 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 125 

" I don't want to hear any of his ex- 
ploits," said the doctor, angrily ; " but I 
must observe, my friend, that you seem 
to be carrying on the war just as you 
please, and that, if not intending to knock 
out my brains, you are, at best, going on 
in a fair way to confuse and bewilder 
them, so that I mayn't know what I am 
doing." 

" Arrah! is it me, your honour " 

But an immoderate fit of laughter pre- 
vented him, for some minutes, from pro- 
ceeding in his vindication of his honesty. 
" Why then, upon my sowl, your honour 
made me laugh, you looked at that mo- 
ment so funny, just like your cousin Phe- 
lim, into whose shoes you have stepped ; 
he had just such a trick of curling up his 
nose when he was vexed." 

" Let me have no more of your tricks," 
cried Rosebud, still more angrily ; "I'm 
not to be losing the day in this manner. — 
What is it you want, Mr. O ?" turn- 
ing gruffly to the fellow for whom the 
spokesman had been just pleading. 



126 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" O'Loughlan, plase your honour. — Ah, 
then, Terry, is it yourself that has been 
keeping his honour waiting all this time, 
to know what you want, and be hanged 
to you !" 

" I want only, plase his honour, a few 
barrels o^ praties ^ 

"Very well, Terry, very well!" pushing 
him behind, and dragging forward another 
man, a most miserable-looking ragged crea- 
ture — " Plase your honour, this is Andrew 
Denny, the best ball- player, hurler, wres- 
tler, jig-dancer, bird-catcher, and what not, 
in the barony — ain't you, Andy ? Oh, but, 
by the powers, Andy, how could you have 
the impudence to come before your law- 
ful landlord, his honour, in such rags and 
tatters, any how ?" 

" Why, then, upon my conscience and 
sowl, and that's as good as if I had bibled 
it, the devil another rag has Andy but 
what he has now on his own back." 

" Very fair, very fair. — Plase your ho- 
nour, that's honest enough of Andy ; you 
see he has put all the rags he could find 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 127 

on his own back, to pay his rispicts to 
your honour, leaving his wife and childer 
quite naked. — But it's some covering, I 
suppose, Andy, boy, you'll be wanting 
from his honour, for the good woman and 
the gassoons T 

" Why no," replied Andy, " we don't 
much mind the back, so the belly is full." 

" What food do you want from me, 
Mr. Denny ?" 

" Turnips, plase your honour." 

" Turnips !" repeated Rosebud, in much 
surprise ; " what, is it to feed your wife 
and children on turnips?" 

" Oh ! plase your honour, let Andy alone, 
he knows well what he is about ; there's 
not a man on the estate lives better than 
Denny and his family, let what will suffer 
by it, the hares and the rabbits — don't 
you, Denny ?" 

Denny looked sly, and was quickly 

pushed back to make room for 

?* Hold ! hold !" interrupted the doctor, 
no longer able to command himself; " this 
is carrying the joke too far ; I'll allow no 



128 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

more of these fellows to be intruded on 
me. Yet, before I depart, I desire to 
know who it is that has taken the liberty 
of forcing so many of them on my notice?" 
" All fair, very fair, your honour ! Why 
then, your honour must know, that poor, 
and low, and dijicted, as I appear, yet still 
I am the legal discindant, in a right line, 
of Aod Dubh, called, by his familiar 
friends. Black Hugh, king of Leinster, 
whose mortal part rests from all the trou- 
bles and perplexities of this bad world in 
the chapel here of St. Cathala, his soul, I 
trust, in glory. It has often been hit in my 
teeth by the boys, what a spalpeen I was 
for not taking up arms to recover my king- 
dom. For preventing this I had many rea- 
sons. In the first place, my great ancestor, 
Aod Dubh, king of Leinster, preferring a 
heavenly crown to an earthly one, actually 
abdicated his throne, taking upon himself 
the poor habit of a friar, in a cell belonging 
to this monastery of St. Cathala; and in 
the next, I think it would be going against 
his intentions, if any of his discindants 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 129 

thought proper to resume what he, for the 
sake of his sowl, deemed it better to resign. 
I was born to labour, and sure the morsel 
I earn with the sweat of my brow, is 
sweeter to me than a fine feast would be, 
if I thought it got at the price of the pre- 
cious blood of any one. Striving for 
greatness in this world, would, I know, be 
wicked, and hoping for it folly ; but for 
glory in the next I may labour, with every 
hope and assurance of obtaining it, if I 
but do my part in this." 

" Give me your hand, Hugh," said the 
doctor ; " I believe you are an honest fel- 
low, though an impudent one ; but your 
high descent excuses that. But is there 
nothing you require for yourself ?" 

*^ The saints best know what my nicis- 
sities are," replied Hugh ; " but it does 
not become me to specify. This much 
respict is due, I think, to my blood, not to 
put me on a level with these spalpeens, 
but leave it to my own discriMon to sup- 
ply them." 

" Royal sir !" said Rosebud, with a 
g3 



130 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

sneer he could not suppress, though not 
displeased with the fellow, " I shall con- 
sider my poor place honoured, if it can 
supply your wants, convinced that, with 
the usual generosity of exalted personages, 
in attending to them, you will not forget 
the rights of others. So good-by, Black 
Hugh; and, as the dons would say, to 
whom 'tis evident from your complexion 
you are allied, may you live a thousand 
years !" 

" I respectfully beg to set your honour 
right on one point — my name. Many ge- 
nerations ago, one of the c?2.yrmdants of 
Aod Dubh, finding his father l ad brought 
down the vengeance of Hen . en on the 
house, for taking up arms tr- recover the 
throne of Leinster, left his curse to any of 
his posterity who should give the name of 
Black Hugh to any of their children. My 
own father was a proud, overbearing man, 
and, in spite of all his relations, would 
give me the forbidden name ; but in a 
way, being also cunning, that, he has been 
heard to say, the devil himself couldn't 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 131 

take hould of it; I was therefore christen- 
ed Aod Hugh — Duhh Black-— FeYix Ma- 
carty !" 



CHAPTER V, 



■Who can paint 



Like nature ? Can imagination boast, 
Amidst her gay creation, hues like these?" 

On the arrival of the party at Killarney, 
the weather not being considered favour- 
able for a water excursion, they repaired 
to lord Kenmare's park, whence they had 
an enchanting view of the scenery. But 
we shall not attempt to particularly touch 
on what has already been so often and so 
well described : suffice it, the expectations 
of the travellers, highly as they were rais- 
ed, were more than answered by the union 
of the sublime and beautiful, the awful 
and the picturesque, they beheld here; 
and that they justly conceived it worthy 



132 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

of the closest attention of the philosopher, 
the naturalist, the bard — in short, of every 
description of men of taste. 

" Ornamented as the lakes are with is- 
lands, and encompassed by mountains, re- 
sounding with waterfalls, and reflecting 
on all sides the umbrageous trees and ever- 
greens that adorn its banks ; while the fer- 
tility of the rocks is truly astonishing, 
where the trees, too ponderous for their 
feeble roots, are often bent towards the 
earth, and flourish, thus distorted ; and 
equally curious the different species of 
shrubs, springing from the same decayed 
stock, which, no longer able to put forth 
leaves itself, serves as a nidus to others ; 
while the power of echoes is here, in par- 
ticular, shewn in an extraordinary degree, 
as they not alone multiply and reiterate 
the most common sounds, but swell them 
to an astonishing degree, particularly un- 
der what is called the Eagle's Nest, and 
from the foot of Glena'a, resembling a con- 
tinual cannonading, then dying away ; and, 
after a short period, the explosion is heard 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 133 

again, reverberating, from the opposite 
shores ; but when the music strikes, it re- 
freshes the ear with the softest melody, 
which is distinctly reechoed in harmoni- 
ous sounds from the opposite hills. In 
short, altogether, the lonely situation, the 
romantic forms of the rocks, the various 
fruits of the hanging woods, the stupen- 
dous mountains that surmount and limit 
the view, raise a combination of such de- 
lightful sensations as are not to be de- 
scribed." 

Long before this, it was concluded that 
Jonathan and Mrs. Bentley were on their 
way back from this here to that there 
country of their own, as they styled it. 
Our party therefore, in rambling about 
the park, were much surprised at encoun- 
tering them, with two other persons ; but 
it seems, at a little distance from the capi- 
tal, the stage in which they had taken 
their departure for the Lake met with an 
accident, which obliging them to return, 
just as they were entering Dublin, they 
met with a Mr. Wakefield, a linen-draper. 



134 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

in Ratcliff Highway, who had come over 
on business, and his wife, very particular 
friends of theirs, and who, by promising 
to accompany them on their excursion, if 
they would defer it a little, had induced 
them to do so. 

Rosebud, from the amusement he ex- 
pected to derive from the circumstance, 
was not sorry at the rencounter ; and hav- 
ing repeated the invitation previously 
given them to Teghadow, and extended it 
to their friends, they immediately became 
one party. 

After passing a few days very agreeably 
to all, the doctor having his joke, Dona- 
ghue his lonely ramble, and the others ex- 
cellent fare, they all prepared to set out 
for Teghadow. 

In the small village where they stopped 
for the night was a curious old church, po- 
sitively asserted to be built in the time of 
St. Patrick, and as positively that a kind 
of hollow in a stone, known by the name 
of St. Patrick's bed, in the upper part of 
one of the old towers, was occasioned by 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 135 

the pressure of the saint's body, and who, 
from having made it his couch while so- 
journing in this part of the country, had 
communicated a virtue to it, that rendered 
it efficacious in the cure of almost all com- 
plaints. 

This marvellous story was no sooner 
communicated to Mrs. Bentley and Mrs. 
Wakefield, than one recollected being sub- 
ject to a pain in her shoulder, and the 
other to a toothach ; and, in a word, it 
was finally agreed that they should try 
the virtue of this miraculous couch ; but 
without letting their intentions be known 
to any one, save their own immediate com- 
panions. They were not, however, able 
to manage matters so secretly, that what 
they intended did not reach the ears of 
Rosebud, through the medium of the cor- 
poral, who, with his own servant, had at- 
tended the party to the Lakes, and it im- 
mediately suggested playing a trick, with 
the assistance of his informant. 

Night was fixed on for the experiment ; 
and as the hour approached for their re- 



136 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

pairing to the church, Rosebud, wrapping 
himself in a sheet, over which a quantity 
of beads was hung, with a mitre, made by 
the corporal, of stiff brown paper, on his 
head, and an ozier in his hand, in place 
of a crozier, preceded them to it, accom- 
panied by Cormick, and hid himself in the 
reading-desk. 

On the arrival of the ladies, attended by 
the husband of one and the friend of the 
other, as without them they feared ven- 
turing, a kind of altercation took place, as 
to which should first ascend to the blessed 
couch, it not being allowed that more than 
one should repair to it at a time; to end 
this, lots were drawn, and the lot falling 
on Mrs. Wakefield, she stepped forward, 
with apparent good resolution, to the little 
tower, accompanied by her husband, with 
a lantern, to keep watch at the foot of the 
stairs till her return. 

Hardly was she gone, ere — " What's 
all this about, Mrs. Bentley ?" demanded 
Wilkinson, internally grumbling at being 
kept from his rest, and not perfectly com- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 137 

prehending the affair ; " for I declares it's 
monstrous cold here." 

" Why, as well as I can make out, from 
these here people," replied the lady, " there 
was a conjurer once lived here, who made 
a bed, something likes the celestial bed, I 
suppose, that I once heard talk of in Lun- 
noUy that cures all manner of disorders by 
going into it." 

" What was his name?" asked Jona- 
than. 

" Why, they calb him St. Patrick." 

" Oh. he was a saint then instead of a 
conjurer!" 

" Oh, that's all one to these here wild 
Hirish, they don't know no difference be- 
tween them, being, as you see, not of the 
religion oiwe in England." 

" Is he dead or living?" demanded Jo- 
nathan. 

" Why, I protests I don't know that, 
as I never asked." 

"I wonder you didn't, Mrs. Bentley, 
for if he is living, God knows what he 
mayn't make you pay for coming here, 



138 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

without knowing the usual price of ad- 
mission." 

" Fell, to be sure, so he may ; but I'll 
tell you how t;e'll manage ; t;e'll slip away 
just as quietly as we came." 

Hardly had she said so, when a rustling 
was heard behind them ; both stared, be- 
gan to tremble, and, without further ce- 
remony, retreated to the door, and effected 
their escape, leaving their friends to finish 
the adventure by themselves. 

Rosebud, stealing softly from his place 
of concealment, advanced towards Wake- 
field, as he stood shivering and shaking, 
with a lantern in his hand, at the foot of 
the tower, wondering what vagary this 
was of his wife, to come to a church at 
such an hour, for the lady had not thought 
proper to explain her reason to him. At 
the sight of such an apparition as Rosebud, 
he began instinctively to draw back, till 
he could get no further, being pent up in 
a corner, when, finding he was stopped — 
*' Who are you, for Heaven's sake?" he 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 139 

exclaimed, in a tone of terror ; " and what 
is your business with me ?" 

" Nothing in the shop way ; for my own 
country furnishes what you deal in, in 
Ratcliff Highway; but my name is St. 
Patrick, and I am come out of kindness 
to your wife, who is now above in the old 
tower, so give me the lantern, and do you 
go back to the inn, and regale yourself 
with a glass o^ poteen, while I have a little 
chat with her." 

Wakefield, who was a little thick-head- 
ed, and from never having troubled him- 
self much about the saints of his own 
country, could not be supposed to know 
a great deal about those of another, imme- 
diately concluded that the figure before 
him was an old sexton, whose name was 
St. Patrick, and who, from having heard 
of the frolic of the ladies, had come, as 
perhaps he conceived in duty bound, to 
keep watch in the church, while they re- 
mained, or in hopes of getting a little mo- 
ney from them, and, under this persuasion, 



140 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

gladly resigned the lantern, and retired, 
being extremely tired of waiting. 

"Philis! Phillis! I say, Phillisr cried 
the apparition, as he approached her, " what 
are you doing, stretched at your full length 
in my soft bed ?" 

Phillis, who, like the rest of the party, 
knew not who or what St. Patrick was, 
whether alive or dead, a saint or a sinner, 
sat up, in some little alarm, at this inter- 
rogation ; and having, in a mild, modest 
tone, explained what had brought her there, 
concluded by hoping it was no ofrence. 

" No; but my bed, Phillis, will be of 
no service to you, except you confess your- 
self to me, and promise to repent of all 
the faults I shall point out. You are a 
woman, Phillis ; six-and-twenty years have 
rolled over your head, and you are a fe- 
male still, and will continue one, I very 
much fear, to the hour of your death. 
You cried when you entered this world of 
wickedness, without knowing why, and 
it is a custom you have persevered in, to 
the great annoyance of your husband. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 141 

When a child, you knocked your dolls 
about, and wished yourself a girl — when 
a girl, to be a woman — when a woman, to 
be married — and But, no, I hope no- 
thing more, Phillis. But come, if you 
hope to derive any efficacy from the virtue 
of my bed, you must answer these ques- 
tions. Are you envious ? Do you ever 
speak ill of your neighbour? Or are you 
ever cross, whimsical, and fretful to your 
husband, without rhyme or reason? and 
take my word for it, except you can say 
no in reply to them, as sure as my name 
is Paddy, you are not in the least better 
than others." 

Phillis coloured and hesitated, and seem- 
ed greatly perplexed, but still without 
making an effort to open her lips. 

" Oh, well, I see how it is," said the 
saint. " Silence gives consent. Oh, fie, 
Phillis ! I didn't think you, who looked so 
demure, were given to backbiting your 
neighbour and scolding your husband ; but 
you blush so, I perceive, there is some hope 



142 TRADITION OF THE CASTLF. 

of you, SO tell me what religion you pro- 
fess?" 

" I am, sir, one of the new lights." 
" New lights ! bless me, what do you 
mean? You cannot mean you are a gas 
light ! But come, I thought the light I 
introduced into this island many years ago 
sufficiently clear and bright to shew people 
the way they should go, without needing 
any other to guide them. Hearken to me, 
Phillis, and take the advice of a friend, by 
returning to the path it illumes, or, in 
other words, give up the tabernacle for 
your parish church. My light will never 
want grace, because it's the real light; but 
God knows whether so much can be said 
for the others, that are starting up every 
day in every corner, stolen and pilfered 
from me. But, hark! I scent," here he 
gave a loud cough, as a signal to the cor- 
poral, who replied to it properly, " the 
morning air, and hear the cock crow ! So, 
adieu, Phillis !" appearing to vanish from 
her view as he spoke, but very gallantly 
leaving the lantern behind him, that she 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 143 

might find her way down the stairs, and 
out of the church, without risk to her neck. 

Rosebud was so much amused with the 
Enghsh party, that he made it a point with 
Donaghue, they should, for a few miles at 
least, occupy part of the coach with them, 
in which they travelled. Donaghue might 
have objected, but that just as they were 
setting off, they encountered a counsellor 
O'Reilly, an acquaintance of the doctor, 
living in the direction they were proceed- 
ing, and whose horse having got lame, oc- 
casioned a seat to be offered to him in the 
chaise. 

It soon became evident to the two gen- 
tlemen, from the titterings of the ladies, 
that they had some very amusing secret 
between them, which they only wanted a 
pretext to disclose. The doctor seeing 
this, and guessing what it was, soon fur- 
nished them with what they required, by 
inquiring whether he might ask what made 
them so merry that morning? 

" Oh dear, I'm sure I can't tell," gig- 



144 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

gled Mrs. Wakefield; " but Mrs. Bentley 
can." 

" Me ! not I indeed ; I shouldn't have 
thought of such a thing. You, who saw 
all, can best tell all." 

" Well then, doctor, did you ever see 
St. Patrick?" 

" No, ma'am ; I never had that plea- 
sure." 

" Dear, then I am sure you would have 
liked him wastly if you had, he's such a 
pleasant, respectable kind of old gentle- 
man." 

" And something like the doctor him- 
self, didn't you say?" said Mrs. Bentley. 

" Yes, only for his great long beard, like 
the tail of a cow, and the cap, with horns, 
on his head, and a dress like a white sheet, 
or a tablecloth, about him, but vich, I 
suppose, is the way the sextons in this here 
country dress, for the purpose of striking 
people with greater respect and w^eneration; 
and I must say it has that effect." 

" And pray where had you an opportu- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 145 

nity of seeing this strange figure?" de- 
manded the doctor gravely. 

" Now don't for to be going to tell Mrs. 
Bentley, I desire you again," giggled Mrs. 
Wakefield, " for," affecting to blush, " I 
shall be so ashamed if you do." 

" Pooh !" cried her husband, " I dare 
say by this time every body knows where 
you were ; and if 'tis the custom to go into 
that bed, what the deuce signifies your 
having done so?" 

" Why, not to you, I dare say," retort- 
ed the lady, somewhat nettled by the tone 
in which he spoke ; " it seems as if 'tv»^as 
no odds to you indeed where I went, or 
with whom I staid, by your leaving me 
alone, in such a lonely place, with a strange 
man. I'm sure, if he wasn't a saint by na- 
ture, as by name, there's no knowing what 
might have happened." 

" Oh ! as to that, my dear, I saw he was 
too old to be afraid of him ; and, besides, 
I was shaking so with the cold, that I 
couldn't by no means have stopped no 
longer." 

VOL. II. H 



146 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" What are you two talking about ?" 
cried Wilkinson, with distended eyes; 
" sure you don't pretend you saw St. Pa- 
trick, whom I heard all about while I was 
warming myself at the kitchen fire, after 
coming back from the church !" 

" Pretend !" repeated the lady, with 
much indignation ; " well, I am sure, I 
can't but be obliged to you for that word, 
Mr. AVilkinson, meaning as much as that 
my husband and I don't tell the truth. I 
say I saw St. Patrick, and heard him too; 
and good advice he gives, telling me to go 
back to my own parish church, and not 
mind the Tabernacle no more; and telling 
me how they have been stealing grease 
and fat, and what not, from him, poor gen- 
tleman, for these new lights they are put- 
ting up every where." 

" Oh, you must have been dreaming, in 
that there hod kind of bed you lay down 
on !" replied Jonathan. 

" Well, so she may," said her husband ; 
" but, as to St. Patrick, I saw him myself." 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 147 

" Well, if you did, it was a ghost you 
saw." 

" A ghost!" cried Mrs. Wakefield, 
again repeating his words ; " do you think 
I don't know the difference between a 
ghost and a man? didn't 1 feel him, as 
well as see him and hear him ? for when 
he was civilly putting down the lantern, 
by the side of the bed, that I might find 
my way out of that old ruinous place, my 
hand hit against his, and it felt just like 
any one's hand ; and did ever any one hear 
of a ghost having flesh on its bones ?" 

" Well, and how old might he seem ?*' 
asked Jonathan. 

" Why rather an elderly gentleman ; 
and, I dare say," added her husband, " but 
for his beard, he wouldn't look by ten 
years as old as he does." 

" Well, I believe if you were to take a 
great many tens off his age, besides one 
ten, it wouldn't make no great difference 
in his looks," observed Jonathan. 

" I don't know that, for, I must say, I 
H 2 



148 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 

never saw a man, of his seeming age, brisk- 
er or nimbler." 

" His seeming age !" repeated Jonathan, 
in a tone of astonishment ; " why, Billy, 
do you know what you are saying ? But, 
come, come, don't be thinking of hum- 
ming us any longer in this way, saying 
you never saw a man of thirteen hundred 
years old brisker or nimbler ! it's not be- 
cause your w^ife has said a foolish thing 
you are to uphold her in it." 

" I declare I am going to faint !" ex- 
claimed Mrs. Wakefield, "I am — oh! oh! 
dear, dear, is there no one who will step 
forward to take my part against such a 
brute, to go for to sinuate 'tis all a hum 
what I have been saying of St. Patrick ! 
Surely, as a lady of honour, a respectable 
married woman, whose word would be 
taken at any shop in RatchfF Highway, I 
shouldn't be used thus." 

" ]My dear, don't wex yourself," said her 
husband. 

*' Yes, but I will ; and I'll never forgive 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 149 

you, if you don't prove and uphold your 
having seen St. Patrick yourself." 

" Well, my love, so I will." 

" No, I am not your love — I'll never be 
your love again, if you don't punish that 
savage, that bear there, who has had the 
audacity to give me the lie before such 
genteel company." 

" I protest I meant no offence," said Jo- 
nathan, somewhat alarmed by seeing 
Wakefield clench his fist, and cast a wick- 
ed look at him ; " I only meant to say it 
was morally impossible you could have 
seen a man of St. Patrick's age, being at 
least, as I have already said " 

" Oh dear ! oh dear ! how cruelly, how 
shamefully I am used !" again exclaimed 
the lady ; " to be contradicted again, 
without that poltroon, whom I once called 
husband, but never will again, not taking 
my part ! but I'll take my own, since no 
one else will ; I'll not suffer myself to fall 
to the ground without an effort to save 
myself;" and as she spoke she was mak- 
ing a dart at poor Jonathan, when one of 



150 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the springs of the coach gave way, in con- 
sequence of a violent jolt over a rocky- 
part of the road, and the party were fairly 
tumbled upon one another within it. 
The chaise, of course, immediately stop- 
ped, and they were speedily extricated, 
without any personal injury, from their 
unpleasant situation. 

A good inn was close by, and here they 
ordered dinner, in order to give time for 
the repairing of the carriage. To fill up 
the interval, counsellor O'Reilly proposed 
taking them to view the pleasure-grounds 
of a gentleman in the neighbourhood, who 
had actually converted a once barren plain 
into a wilderness of sweets ; after which 
he must bid them adieu, he said, to cut 
across the country to his own residence, 
distant about ten miles, and whither he 
gave them a pressing invitation to accom- 
pany him, but which was declined. — " This 
place fully proves what wonders can be 
effected by money, aided by industry and 
perseverance," he said, as he conducted them 
through it, and still continued to expatiate 



TRx\DlTION OF THE CASTLE. 151 

on the various objects that came under 
their consideration, till they approached 
the margin of a beautiful lake, with an 
island in the centre of it, embellished with 
w^ood, a neat cottage, sheep, cows, and en- 
livened by inhabitants, all busily engaged 
at work, when, suddenly stopping, in a 
tone of the wildest astonishment — " Why, 
how is this 1" he exclaimed — " that island 
— that island was not there a week ago !" 

" Not a week ago !" repeated Rosebud; 
" why, man, are you serious ? If as you say, 
your friend, then, must have the lamp of 
Aladdin at his command, for nothing eke 
could have enabled him to place it there 
in such a time, and state of perfection." 

" By G — d I see how it is !" cried Mr. 
O'Reilly, with something of distraction 
in his manner, in drawing nearer to the 
edge of the lake, " that island was mine ! 
cattle, trees, cabins, and inhabitants, all 
mine ! and I am robbed ! actually robbed, 
by G — d ! this is one way of embellishing 
one's grounds, to rob another man of his 
property for the purpose .'—Holloa ! Darby, 



152 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

I say !" to an old man on the island— 

" holloa, Darby, and be d d to you ! 

what brings my ground here? what, in 
the devil's name, has brought you here — 
and the cabins — and the trees — and the 
cows — and the sheep — and the " 

" Faith and troth, your honour," replied 
the old man, drawing as close to the wa- 
ter's edge as he could, " it must be by en- 
chantment, otherwise how could the land 
lave its own rightful owner in the lurch, 
and slip quietly away, with us all on it, to 
become the property of another? When 
we went to bed the other night, we were 
tinants of your honour, and when we got 
vip in the morning, we were tinants of 
squire O'Flaherty !" 

" You lie, you rascal ! you never were, 
nor ever shall be ! Take back my ground, 
you old villain, with all my property, or 
I'll have you hanged !" 

It appeared that a bog, on the estate of 
Mr. O'Reilly, had given way, and part of 
it, stocked and adorned as already describ- 
ed, been floated into Mr. O'Flaherty'a 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 153 

lake, being intercepted by a sand-bank, 
on which it quickly settled, forming a 
most romantic island. Mr. O'Flaherty 
was, at first, very much pleased with th^ 
embellishment his lake had received ; but 
when he found the price at which it had 
been obtained, the bog, in its progress, 
having covered several acres of fine mea- 
dow land, he conceived he had infinitely 
more reason to grieve for its acquisition, 
than his friend, Mr. O'Reilly, had to de- 
plore its loss. 

When the fury of Mr. O'Reilly had aht- 
tie subsided, he could not help joining in the 
laugh, which his insisting on old Darby's 
taking back his land had excited against 
him. — " It's a match," said Rosebud, " for 
the assertion of a man of thirteen hundred 
years having been seen last night, brisk 
and nimble, and looking remarkably well 
for his years ; but the fact is, we are all 
apt, no matter what our country, to blun- 
der, when we speak without reflection, so, 
when we laugh at one another, let it not 
be done by way of ridicule." 
h3 



154 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

The journey ended without any farther 
mishap or incident worth mentioning; 
and, after passing a few days within the 
truly hospitable walls of Teghadow, the 
English travellers departed, highly de- 
lighted with the entertainment experienc- 
ed there, and protesting, of all things, they 
should like to pay another visit to Jf ire- 
land, they had met with so much kindness 
and civility in it. 



CHAPTER VI. 



r**s#»*^.#^ 



" Oh, happiness! our being's end and aim, 
Good, pleasure, ease, content, w hate'er thy name ; 
That something still, which prompts th' eternal sigh, 
For which we bear to live, or dare to die; 
Which still, so near us, yet beyond us lies, 
O'erlook'd, seen double, by the fool and wise ; 
Plant of celestial seed, if dropp'd below. 
Say in what mortal soil thou deign*st to grow ?" 

On the departure of his English visitors. 
Rosebud, having leisure to look about 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 155 

him, soon discovered that the king of 
Leinster had not been idle, neither his 
companions, during his absence, or allow- 
ed the permission granted to them to sup- 
ply their wants to remain a dead letter on 
record. The doctor, wild with rage, at 
what he termed their rapacity and roguery, 
summoned his steward, and demanded 
how he had permitted such proceedings? 

" Plase your honour, the business was 
done before my return from Dublin ; on 
discovering the depredations that had been 
committed, I instantly set about finding 
out the offenders. This proved no hard 
matter — each was ready to confess how far 
he was concerned in what had been done; 
but for which they pleaded — that is, that 
schemer. Black Hugh, as they call him, 
for them — that they had your honour's 
authority for the freedom they took with 
your honour's property." 

The doctor now became sensible of the 
imprudence he had been guilty of, in giv- 
ing such power as he had done, to a fellow 
with whose character he was totally unac- 



156 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

quainted; but the consciousness that he 
was chiefly to blame himself could not 
prevent his finding fault with another; he 
attacked the steward furiously, accusing 
him of not having given him that proper 
information, on his arrival, that would 
have prevented or guarded him against 
what had occurred ; and finally concluded 
by commanding that rascal, that had so 
imposed upon him, to be sent to him im- 
mediately. 

This royal personage soon made his ap- 
pearance, perfectly cool and collected, and, 
with a smiling countenance, welcomed his 
honour back to the castle of his forefathers. 

The rage into which Rosebud was al- 
ready thrown by a knowledge of this 
man's conduct, was now augmented to 
such a degree, by what he conceived his 
brazen impudence, as scarcely to leave him 
the power to articulate. — " You — you — 
b — b — you black rascal, what a game you 
— you — you have been at in my absence !" 

** Och ! the sorrow one, whoever tould 
your honour such a thing of your humble 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 157 

servant grossly belied him ! The devil a 
game was played at Teghadow, nor more 
nor. that, in the ball-court of St. Cathala's, 
since you went away." 

" What, do you intend to add mockery 
to robber}^ you scoundrel I I suppose 
you'll be telling me you were legally au- 
thorized, by your birth, to commit the 
depredations you and your rascally com- 
panions have done on my property ; but 
I believe you'll soon be convinced to the 
contrar}% soon find you'll not have the 
reason you imagined to congratulate your- 
self on having winged me so neatly, as you 
call it, flying; for I shall see, my friend, 
whether I cannot send your majesty, with 
your faithful followers, in order that you 
may be furnished with a genteel court 
elsewhere, on a distant voyage." 

" Well, to be sure, your honour can see 
if you like it ; but if your honour is only 
patient for a bit, I think I'll explain mat- 
ters to your satisfaction. When your ho- 
nour so generously granted the permission 
you did, says I — ' Here's great confidence 



158 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

reposed in me,' for I took all upon my own 
showlders, * and if I don't see that it's not 
abused, to the injury of his honour, I am 
not the man I represented myself to be.' 
The best thing, therefore, thinks I to my- 
self, I can do, is, to let the boys have their 
full fling, by which means they'll be im- 
prist with gratitude for his honour's kind- 
ness, that sorrow bit of them ever after 
but will consider his intirist as their own, 
and scorn to aoa any thing more of him 
they don't honestly earn ; so away I let 
them go to work. — ' Well, boys,' says I, 
* you see what a generous landlord you 
have, how he has let yez all have your 
wants; and, after this, won't yez be un- 
grateful spalpeens if you don't do some- 
thing in return ?' So, with that, they all 
came crowding about me, and — * Arrah, 
Felix,' says they, ' what w^ould you be at ? 
if 'tis spilling our blood for his honour, 
won't we do it ?' — * Och, botheration,' cries 
I in return, * is it him, a loyal man, that 
has been fighting in the wars, that would 
be after wanting you to do that ! But is 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 159 

there nothing else to be done, boys ? isn't 
all the hedges, and ditches, and fences, about 
Teghadow, torn, and tattered, and destroy- 
ed ; and wouldn't it be a ginteel, as well 
as a grateful return, in us, for his good- 
ness, to set heart in hand to repair and re- 
store them while he's away, so that, when 
he comes back, he may find a snug tight 
place of his own about him, and see that 
his kindness hasn't been thrown away 
upon a parcel of spalpeens ?" 

Mr. Felix spoke so plausibly, that, in 
spite of himself, as he proceeded, the ire 
of Rosebud subsided ; and when, on going 
over the ground, he really found that what 
he had stated was correct, or rather, allow- 
ed him to infer, he could not avoid think- 
ing himself amply repaid for what had 
been taken from him, and that Black 
Hugh had manifested no little shrewdness 
in the affair. 

A few days after, in looking over his 
steward's accounts, the detection of a great 
deal of dishonesty occasioned his speedy 
dismissal, to the great joy of the poor te- 



160 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

nan try, over whom he had been a complete 
tyrant. Rosebud had no sooner got rid 
of him than he thought of his friend Hugh, 
and finding, on sending for him, that he 
was fully competent to fill his place, im- 
mediately appointed him his successor. 

The necessity of revisiting his paternal 
home had never once been lost sight of by 
Donaghue ; but so many painful feelings 
were awakened when he thought on the 
subject, that, as long as possible, he wish- 
ed to put off the dreaded moment ; but 
a letter received just at this juncture from 
old Cormick, representing the imperative 
necessity there was for returning, without 
further delay, to Altoir-na-Grenie, if he 
did not wish to let every thing go to de- 
struction, some of the tenants, believing 
he never meant to come back, not caring 
what depredations they committed on the 
land, induced him to make up his mind 
without further hesitation on the matter; 
and accordingly the doctor, as previously 
promised, began to prepare for accompa- 
nying him, when, on the very eve of de- 



s 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. l6l 

parture, some relatione of Rosebud, whom 
he could neither think of offending or dis- 
obliging, arrived, most unexpectedly, at 
Teghadow, to pass some time there with 
him, thus putting it entirely out of his 
power to keep his promise with Donaghue. 
Which was most disappointed, it would 
be impossible to say; however, it could 
not be helped ; and trying to derive con- 
solation from the hope of shortly meeting 
again, the doctor pledging his word that 
the moment he was at liberty, he would 
follow to Altoir-na-Grenie, they parted. 

Donaghue proceeded on his journey on 
horseback, attended by Cormick, the dis- 
tance to Altoir-na-Grenie not being too 
great to permit him to reach it before 
night. His heart sunk within him as he 
set out ; the idea of the cold, the dreary, 
the desolate home, that awaited him, chill- 
ed his very soul ; in vain his reason repre- 
sented to him, that the trials he groaned 
under were such as, in the course of na- 
ture, we must all expect — nothing could 
alleviate the anguish they awakened, for 



162 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

there was no hope of the forlornness they 
occasioned being ever relieved. In study, 
to be sure, he could take refuge from his 
dreary solitude, or the bitter thoughts it 
excited; but without a being to impart 
the sentiments, the ideas it gave rise to — 
good God ! would not this chilling consi- 
deration be sufficient to prevent his ob- 
taining any consolation from it ! 

A feeling of impatience would some- 
times occur at the view of his situation — 
the thought of being doomed to waste the 
bloom, the vigour, the glowing energies 
of youth, in inaction and obscurity ! But 
still, as it arose, it was checked by the re- 
flection of being himself the cause of what 
he had to deplore — that, but for his own 
folly, to call it by no harsher name, he 
might now have been possessed of the 
loveliest of her sex, of esteemed connex- 
ions, of social friends, of fortune, conse- 
quence, all that the heart of man covets or 
desires, or deems essential to felicity. 

But, essential to his interest as was his 
return to Altoir-na-Grenie, yet, had he 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 163 

not been assured that Miss Erin neither 
then was, nor would probably be again in 
the neighbourhood, nothing could have 
induced him to return to it, since, after 
what had occurred, the thoughts of death 
were not so dreadful to his imagination 
as the idea of their ever meeting again. 
'Tis true, there was a fine seat, he under- 
stood, in it, belonging to her late uncle, 
and, of course, now to her father; but, 
judging of sir William Erin by the gene- 
rality of men of rank and fortune belong- 
ing to the country, he did not deem it 
very likely that he would relinquish the 
splendour and gaieties of the English ca- 
pital, where he had learned he now was 
with his family, for a residence in Ireland. 
But her absence from the neighbourhood 
made no alteration in the determination 
he had long formed, of keeping himself in 
utter seclusion whenever he returned to 
it. He knew how anxious his own im- 
mediate people were for his continuing 
amongst them at Altoir-na-Grenie, and he 
meant to make their absolute silence as to 



164 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

his being there the positive stipulation 
for gratifying them. He certainly did not 
apprehend being inundated by civilities; 
what had occurred during his last stay 
there prevented any apprehension of the 
kind; but vulgar and impertinent curio- 
sity might be excited, and he shrunk from 
being an object of it. 

He tried to divert his thoughts, by pay- 
ing attention to the various objects that 
came under his view as he rode along. 
Autumn was already advanced, and had 
begun to shed her rich gleams over the 
varied prospect, and he endeavoured to 
amuse his mind, by trying to count and 
classify the colours which she employs to 
diversify nature, and distinguish her reign 
from that of the other seasons; but he 
made little progress, for his ideas would 
wander. The scenery too was on too 
grand and extensive a scale to come under 
the confined control of human calculation ; 
it was one indeed on which the mind could 
have dwelt with rapture, and there was a 
period when Donaghue's would have done 



THADITION OF THE CASTLE. l65 

so; but he was now in too perturbed, too 
disconsolate a state, to permit him to do 
so; dread and heaviness hung upon his 
soul, and a thousand times he wished he 
could have retarded his journey. With 
all the slowness of reluctance he proceeded; 
still he got on, and tow^ards the decline of 
day found himself near its termination. 

The last rays of the sun had, by this 
time, faded from the mountain-tops, and 
in all around, the coldness and the bleak- 
ness of the approaching season seemed al- 
ready displayed; at least, such were the 
melancholy feelings of Donaghue, that 
every thing seemed to wear a mournful 
hue to him. Slowly as he had previously 
been proceeding, he now tried to proceed 
more slowly, by every moment checking 
his horse, and making some pretext for 
entering into conversation with his atten- 
dant; in consequence, ere they had got 
much farther, sudden darkness fell around 
them ; and Donaghue, well aware of the 
road before them, began to regret what he 
had done, from the danger he feared it 



166 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

might be the means of exposing them to. 
— " What's to be done, corporal ?" he de- 
manded ; " would it not be better for us to 
alight, and seek shelter in a cabin till the 
moon is up?" 

" Och ! no, your honour, for that would 
be making it so late before we got home, 
for the moon won't be up till late to-night; 
besides, I could go every step of the "way 
blindfold ; and, indeed, 'tis all the same, to 
be sure, as if I were now, it's so pitchy 
dark." 

They accordingly went on, when, after 
advancing some way further, Donaghue, 
suddenly checking his horse — " We must 
proceed cautiously, corporal," he said, " for 
I hear a fall of water." 

'' Then we must be pretty near the en- 
trance of the pass, please your honour." 

" I rather think we have already gain- 
ed it, for my horse steps unsteadily, and, 
from his trembling, seems much alarmed." 

" That's because he is English, and not 
accustomed to the soft bogs of ould Ire- 
land. I'd recommend your honour to 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 167 

alight, and exchange with me, when you'll 
be taken safe and sound, without fear or 
trembling, into the court-yard of Altoir- 
na-Grenie ; for this ould boy of mine, from 
being born and bred in Ireland, knows 
there's no use in expecting smooth roads 
every where, so he puts down his legs 
carelessly and bouldly, and is never sur- 
prised, wherever they may go; if it's a 
good bit he meets with, all is well — if a 
bad, to him equally so; and as to its being 
light or dark, 'tis all one to him, being 
quite blind. So, come, your honour, take 
him, and I'll warrant the Englishman 
won't be half so much afraid, when he 
finds he's following his friend; for, though 
they didn't seem to like one another at 
first, I think, somehow, they have got fond 
of one another lately." 

" No, thank you, corporal, I think I 
may venture to intrust my safety to my 
own horse." 

They continued to advance, when, sud- 
denly — " Hark ! hark, your honour !" ex- 



168 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

claimed the corporal, " is not that a shot 
out of the king's great fowling-piece ?" 

" I think so." 

" And another — and another ! then we 
are not far from sweet Altoir-na-Grenie." 

Hardly had he announced this, ere the 
moon began to shew herself, rising above 
the summits of the mountains, and pre- 
sently after gaining the high arch of hea- 
ven, poured a flood of light and glory 
upon this nether scene, that was at once 
solemn and beautiful. Donaghue for a 
few minutes could not withdraw his eyes 
from the beauteous planet ; when he did, 
the ivy-capped towers, and ancient battle- 
ments, of Altoir-na-Grenie, appeared rising 
to his view. — " The lonely refuge for my 
sorrow," sighed Donaghue, as his eyes fell 
upon the dreary pile, and thought, with a 
mingled sensation of awe and melancholy, 
of the ages that had rolled over its ancient 
head, since first it was illumined by the 
chaste light that now partially fell upon 
it, and of the tales of suffering and of trial, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 169 

if endued with the faculty of speech, it 
might be able to unfold. 

But his entrance within its gloomy gate- 
way obliged him to try and collect him- 
self. Nothing could exceed the rapturous 
joy of old Cormick and his wife at seeing 
him. — " And, now that you have come 
back, 'tis always to be staying here, I 
hope ?" cried the latter. 

Donaghue shuddered, and felt his very 
soul chilled at the thought. — " But she 
does not know my feelings — she cannot 
enter into them !*' he sighed ; " to her it 
must be the most delightful place in the 
world, for here she has her husband and 
her son, and she feels not the want that I 
do — the want of the bosom friend !" 

He started, on entering the parlour, 
from mistaking a dark great-coat that lay 
on one of the chairs, for the mourning 
cloak in which he had attended both his 
parents to the grave. — " Here I am," he 
cried, on being left a few minutes to him- 
self, while supper was preparing for him, 

VOL. II. I 



170 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" returned to my home. But what a 
home ! without a being to sympathize in 
my feelings — what a contrast to that of 
past times, when I had the first, the most 
exalted of women, the tenderest of mo- 
thers, to receive me, sooth any care that 
might have obtruded, by her mild coun- 
sel, or check any impatience ! I thought 
at the moment I knew her value — I 
thought, from the persuasion of this, that 
I could not more affectionately love or re- 
gard her, and that, of course, whenever it 
was the will of Heaven to deprive me of 
her, I should be most unhappy; but I 
now find, that 1 knew not, in reahty, the 
value of the jewel I then possessed, because 
I never seriously calculated upon its loss; 
when I returned to her, it was with a cer- 
tain degree of delight — when I parted 
from her, my feelings were not equally af- 
fected with sorrow, because I bore in mind 
it was a loss I could repair, whenever I 
thought proper to come back to home. I 
have come back — but to what a home! 
without kindred to welcome me, without 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 171 

friend to break in upon the dull monotony 
of my solitude, without hope, without 
prospect of revolving years changing my 
destiny — of to-morrow not being as to- 
day — and so on, till the grave yawns to 
ingulf me and my cares for ever !" 

Old Cormick, on whom the manage- 
ment of every thing had devolved at Al- 
toir-na-Grenie from the time of Donaghue's 
departure, lost no time, the day after his 
arrival, in laying a statement of his affairs 
before him. We shall not, at present at 
least, enter into a tiresome detail of these ; 
suffice it to say, that, on a close examina- 
tion into them, Donaghue found, that 
from the terrible manner in which the 
property had been managed, the valuable 
farms that had been let on leases, renew- 
able for ever, for a mere nothing, hardly 
seventy pounds a-year remained for him, 
out of this once splendid inheritance, that, 
through so many generations, had de- 
scended to him. 

How his father could have been induced 



172 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

to act in the manner he did — how so wil- 
fully to shut his eyes to the ternble con- 
sequences likely to accrue, from so entire- 
ly giving up his property to the manage- 
ment of others, filled him with the deepest 
astonishment ; for to this last circumstance 
it was clearly evident to Donaghue, all 
the ruin and distress that had been brought 
upon the family was owing. Had Cal- 
laghan, the steward, been living, he would 
have been tempted to have called him to 
an account for his, he was convinced, ne- 
farious conduct ; but he was gone to his 
dread account elsewhere, and all that re- 
mained for the unfortunate youth to do, 
whom his villainy had thus despoiled, was 
to endeavour to bear with fortitude and 
patience the evils he had brought upon 
him. And to what was he doomed by 
this detection of his villainy, but what he 
had before anticipated, seclusion from the 
world ; for all idea of reentering it was 
now indeed rehnquished, since he saw he 
could not mix in it in a manner suitable 
to his birth. But so subtle is the nature 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 173 

of hope, SO unknown to ourselves does it 
lurk and linger in the innermost folds of 
the heart, that till this moment, it was 
now evident to him, from the withering 
pang he felt, he had indulged a delusive 
belief of not being positively compelled to 
the relinquishment he now saw inevitable. 

"But, your honour," said Cormick, sud- 
denly breaking in upon the deep abstrac- 
tion into which he unconsciously fell, 
" now that you have looked at the bad 
side of things, won't you turn to the good ? 
It will go hard with us, I think, if, with 
what remains of the land of Altoir-na- 
Grenie, and the stock upon it, we don't 
contrive to make matters comfortable." 

" The stock!" repeated Donaghue; 
" what stock ?" well aware that all that 
had been on the estate at the time of his 
father's death had been seized and sold — 
" I fancy, in mentioning my poor charger, 
and Terence's horse, all the cattle I possess 
is enumerated." 

" Pooh ! pooh ! no such thing, your ho- 



174 TRADITION OF THE CASTLK. 

nour; does your honour forget Billy, and 
Judy, and Nelly, and Caty, and " 

" Oh, nephews and nieces !" said Dona- 
ghue, answering in that kind of vague tone 
that manifested his being lost in thought. 

"Oh, no, your honour!" as if a little 
vexed, was the reply ; ** but the horses, 

and cows, and goats, and 1 give them 

these names by w^ay of distinguishing 
them from one another." 

" Well, and what have I to say to 
them ?" demanded Donaghue ; " they are 
not mine." 

" Oh, but they are !" cried the attached 
old creature, in a sudden transport of af- 
fection and grief, throwing himself at the 
feet of Donaghue, and embracing his knees; 
" they were bought out of the money 
earned in your honour's family, under the 
best of masters, the best of mistresses, rest 
their souls in peace and glory ! and they, 
and I, and mine, and all that we have 
amongst us, are your honour's." 

*' Now, now, I begin to comprehend 
you," said Donaghue, with much emotion, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 175 

and forcing him to rise ; " some other 
time, my dear old man, we will talk fur- 
ther on the subject. My first concern must 
now be, to obtain the corporal a good si- 
tuation, for it would be a pity his youth 
should be wasted here. As I rather think 
my friend, Mr. Melville, has, by this time, 
returned from abroad, with his uncle, I 
shall write to him to-morrow about him: 
and now, my good friend, retire; it will 
be better for us both that you should do 
so at present." 

Donaghue turned aside to a window, to 
conceal the emotion that impeded his ut- 
terance; but the old man perfectly com- 
prehended what he meant, and, still more 
affected, instantly withdrew. 

The scene indeed had powerfully re- 
called to the harassed mind of Donaghue 
the affecting one that had taken place be- 
tween him and this faithful servant at the 
house in London, on the examination of 
his affairs there, while yet the corpse of 
his father lay unburied, under a hired roof, 
to protect it from indignity. He shud- 



176 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

dered at the review, and was almost won- 
dering how he had been able to support 
himself under the horrors that there en- 
compassed him, when the door was thrown 
open, and the corporal almost rushed into 
the room. — " What's the matter?" ex- 
claimed Donaghue, a little surprised by 
his appearance, but at the same time has- 
tily turning to a table, as he spoke, where 
some papers were scattered, in order to 
have a pretext for avoiding his eyes, for 
not even by him did he like the traces of 
sorrow he was aware were still visible on 
his countenance to be seen — " What's the 
matter? Nothing unpleasant, I hope, has 
happened ?" 

" Yes, your honour, something very 
unpleasant has happened." 

" Indeed !" cried Donaghue, somewhat 
startled by this declaration, and involun- 
tarily raising his eyes to him. 

" Yes, your honour. It can't but be 
unpleasant to a servant, who has lived 
from the day he was born with one mas- 
ter, served faithfully, by day and by night, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 177 

by land and by water, in peace and in war, 
to hear, all of a sudden, that he is to be 
turned off, made over to another, tran- 
sported as it were." 

" Good Heavens ! Terence, what do you 
mean by this wild declamation ?" 

" Mean ! haven't I just heard, from my 
father, that you are going to write to Mr. 
Melville to get rid of me !" 

" Now, Terence, how unjust is that re- 
proach ! Are not you sensible, if I had 
the power of retaining you with me, that 
is, of rewarding you according to your de- 
serts, I never would part with you ? Since 
I cannot promote your advancement in 
life, I should consider myself guilty of 
very reprehensible selfishness, in taking 
advantage of your attachment, to keep 
you with me. My friend, Mr. Melville, 
will have a double motive for interesting 
himself for you ; the knowledge he has of 
you himself, and of my anxiety about you. 
Take my advice, therefore, my dear Te- 
rence," pursued Donaghue, in a concilia- 
i3 



178 TRADITION OF THE CA^LE. 

ting tone, and laying his hand on the 
shoulder of the corporal, " and do not de- 
cline his services. In accepting the com- 
fortable situation I make no doubt he will 
procure you, you know you are neither 
banishing nor transporting yourself from 
this; occasionally you can return to isee 
how we are all getting on here, and how 
happy shall I be, and how happy will your 
poor parents be, to hear, from your own 
lips, that you are getting on well !" 

The corporal attempted to speak, but 
emotion choked his utterance; the muscles 
of his features swelled, and at last tears 
gushed from him. He dashed them in- 
dignantly away — " And it is- — it is you, 
Mr. Donaghue," as he was in the habit 
of calling him in early days, he said, or 
almost sobbed, " that have forced them 
from me ; and I could almost say it was a 
shame for you, for you know how you ai'e 
breaking my heart by speaking in this 
manner. I can't, to be sure, stay in your 
house against your will; but if I must 
quit, no one shall know where I go. But 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 179 

you won't," he cried, suddenly seeming 
to recover himself, " I know you won't," 
turning with quickness on his master; 
" and I am a man again. I want nothing 
but to be let to stay with you ; for isn't 
my pension, God bless the king who gives 
it me, fine wages for me ! — more nor I 
should want to spend! So say the word 
— say the word, my dear master, that I 
am not to be driven away, and Terence is 
himself again." 

Donaghue could contend the point nb 
further. Unutterably affected by this 
strong attachment, he extended his hand 
— " And here," he said, " is my pledge, 
that, except you wish it yourself, you shall 
never leave me." 

Terence fell on his knees, in a transport 
of gratitude, and kissed his hand; then 
starting up, he ran from the room to con* 
ceal the tears he could not suppress ; and 
thus the scene closed between them ; and 
Donaghue found himself formally installed 
the master of Altoir-na-Grenie, with his 



180 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

affairs investigated, and his establishment 
settled. 

The winter set in early, and with more 
than usual rigour; but hardy, vigorous, 
and strong, its frost nor its snows would 
have prevented the adventurous foot of 
Donaghue from scaling the mountain or 
traversing the vale ; but there was a heart- 
lessness about liim, that hindered exertion. 
Independently of the common feelings of 
humanity, he took no interest in any thing; 
his lands had passed away into the pos- 
session of strangers, and he knew not who 
might claim or succeed him in the ancient 
towers that screened him from the world. 
In short, all appeared a blank to him ; and 
the chilling sensation communicated by 
the circumstance deadened the natural 
energies of youth, and extinguished, in a 
degree, the fire and animation of a vigo- 
rous mind. He did not, however, suffer 
himself to give way to this kind of list- 
lessness, or feehng of inanity, without 
sometimes struggling against it. He tried 
to reconcile himself to the idea of solitude^ 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 181 

by reflecting on the -advantages that often 
accrue from it, the temptations it removes 
one from, the cares it exempts one from, 
and the leisure and opportunity it affords 
man to dive into his heart, examine the 
thread of his destiny, and see how it is 
that his own errors have served to tangle 
and perplex it ; but this was not all — in 
such a range of country, how agreeably 
might he diversify it ! if, in no other way, 
would not the leisure it would give him, 
to watch the changing seasons, to watch 
them gradually stealing upon one another, 
and deepening and blending into each 
other, serve to amuse it? How delightful 
to see the first timid flowers of the early 
year peeping forth, to enamel again their 
native soil — to feel the winds of spring- 
abroad — to hear the voice of the turtle 
again in the land ; to see the blossom suc- 
ceeded by the fruit — the bright foliage of 
summer varied by the russet tints and 
golden gleams of autumn — the mists of 
autumn giving place to the bright blue 
bracing skies of winter! Besides, who. 



182 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

that has not a perfect knowledge of rural 
scenery, can ever do perfect justice to the 
works of the poet or the painter, appre- 
ciate their descriptions, or enter into the 
feelings that awaken their enthusiasm? 
But it was on books he chiefly depended 
for relief from inanity and care; he still 
fled to them as a refuge from both ; and 
from the effect they produced upon his 
mind, he felt that the man who is endued 
with a taste for intellectual enjoyments, 
can never be considered truly miserable. 

A long continuance of frost was suc- 
ceeded by wet weather ; the westerly wind 
began to blow, and dashing the clouds it 
wafted on the summits of the mountains, 
with the vapours brought from the vast 
Atlantic, their contents inundated the 
country. All now indeed was a scene of 
gloom and dreariness ; the amusements of 
pasturage and the labours of agriculture 
were suspended, while the mournful dash- 
ing of the waves along the coast, the por- 
tentous noises which every change of the 
wind, and every increase and diminution 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 183 

of the waters, raised in this now-lonely re- 
gion, full of echoes, and rocks, and caverns, 
completely hurt the spirits and affected the 
imagination. 

Donaghue now almost entirely shut 
himself in his castle, except when some 
tale of distress allured him abroad to see 
proper assistance administered ; but with 
such precautions, persisting in his deter- 
mination of not letting his residence at 
Altoir-na-Grenie be known, that none dis- 
covered or suspected from whom the se- 
cret bounty flowed, that brought unasked 
relief 



184 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 



CHAPTER VII. 



" Not unfamiliar to mine ear, 
Blasts of the night ! ye howl, as now 

My shudd'ring casements loud 

With fitful force ye beat. 
Mine ear has dwelt in silent awe, 
The howling sweep, the sudden rush ; 

And when the pausing gale 

Pour'd deep the hollow dirge, 
Once more I listen, sadly communing 
Within me — once more mark, storm-clad. 

The moon, as the dark cloud 

Glides rapidly away, 
I deem that the voice of spirits dwells 
In their mysterious moans; in solemn thought, 

Muse on the choral dance. 

The dead men's jubilee; 
Hark ! how the spirit knocks, how loud, 
Ev'n at my window knocks — again !" 

DoNAGHUE loved to speiid an hour or 
two in the library before he retired for the 
night. It served more to compose him to 
seek that rest that tired nature needs, for 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 185 

the common road of life is dark and 
dreary. Tlie familiar objects of human pur- 
suit too generally raise the sordid and 
troublesome passions; but in the pursuit 
of study all is noble, liberal, generous ; it 
drives from the thoughts all those low and 
mean considerations which were, during 
the day perhaps, excited in the mind by 
the worldly occupations necessity forced 
upon it, and which low and vulgar minds 
set a consideration on. To the man of 
philosophical observation the world ap- 
pears as a theatre, in which the busy ac- 
tors toil and weary themselves for his a- 
musement ; he sees the airiness of many 
objects that are pursued with avidity — he 
is acquainted with the false shew that sur- 
rounds him — he knows how short and un- 
substantial are the good and evil that ex- 
cite all the ardour of pursuit and dislike, 
and can therefore derive a degree of plea- 
sure from reflection, of which they who 
are deeply, and even successfully, inte- 
rested in them can never participate. 
As Donaghue entered this apartment, 



186 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

his heart ever grew lighter ; he was imme- 
diately lost in an ideal world, or wrapt 
in the perusal of works that point out the 
road to endless bliss hereafter. On open- 
ing the door one dreary night, liis ears 
were assailed by a kind of uproar in the 
room, and his light nearly extinguished. 
As he cautiously advanced, he perceived 
the noise that had surprised him was oc- 
casioned by the swinging to and fro of the 
numerous shades of his ancestors that hung 
upon the walls; judges, bishops, generals, 
admirals, senators, ladies, shepherdesses 
and their sheep, all appeared in dire com« 
motion ; the great wigs seemed to be in 
danger of being lost, truncheons shook, 
admirals trembled, ladies wavered, all, in 
short, all seemed to be reanimated, and de- 
termined on quitting the stations they had 
so long held ; but Donaghue, at no loss to 
surmise the cause of this general agitation, 
soon put an end to it, by closing the win- 
dow that had, by mistake, been left open. 
Donaghue could not help dwelling a 
little on the incident ; and — " How often, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 187 

perhaps, in real life," thought he, as he 
seated himself at a table by the fire, " did 
the originals of these shades need a friend- 
ly hand to compose and lead them back to 
tranquillity ! and how much did the fu- 
rious agitation of the recent moment re- 
mind me of those furious agitations that 
are so frequently excited in actual life, by 
clashing interests and petty animosities !" 
His eyes wandered over the pictures-— 
" What a numerous race," he sighed, "have 
gone before me! The brave, the busy, 
the beautiful, now only glowing on can- 
vas, and threatening, as if in mockery; 
and are those painted shadows all that re- 
main of beings that but a few short years 
ago were full of life, of motion, and of 
spirit ! * Oh that my eyes could behold 
them, as they sit dim in the clouds ! Of 
what are the skirts of thy robes formed ? 
Are they gone on their blasts, like sha- 
dows of mist? Whence is the stream 
of years! Whither do they roll along! 
Where have they hid their many-coloured 
sides ! I look into the times of old, but 



188 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

they seem dim to my eyes, like reflected 
moonbeams on a distant lake." 

Donaghue took up a book, but the hur- 
ricane without distracted his attention; 
the whirlwind was up in the wood, win- 
dows flapped, torrents roared, and the sea 
heaved its weltering billows with terrible 
fury against the rocks. The birds that 
nestled in the ivy amongst the old battle- 
ments and towers, disturbed by the storm, 
came, attracted by the light within, flap- 
ping their wings against the windows of 
the library, to try and force an entrance. 
An owl at length succeeded in making 
one; and flying straight towards Dona- 
ghue, perched on the table by him, where 
he sat quietly, apparently staring at him. 

Donaghue could not help smiling, as he 
viewed its solemn visage. — " And did one 
believe in transmigration," he cried, " might 
not one be tempted to imagine, from its 
looks, that its little body enclosed the soul 
of some grave judge or bishop? Well, sup- 
posing one did, which of my ancestors 
should I be led to suppose had his spirit 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 189 

lodged within it? Why, certainly, from 
the resemblance I think I trace between 
their countenances, that grave judge's yon- 
der; and so, my lord," he said, " in con- 
sideration of our being, perhaps, indirectly 
related, allow me to shew you a little at- 
tention," attempting, as he spoke, to 
smooth its feathers, which the storm had 
a good deal ruffled; but hardly had he 
laid his hand on it, ere, seizing one of his 
fingers, it gave it a most inhuman squeeze. 
" Upon my word, my lord," said Dona- 
ghue, when he had a little recovered from 
the agony this occasioned, " this is a very 
bad return for my intended kindness to 
your lordship, and a wide deviation from 
the golden rule of, I presume, your for- 
mer days, that of doing to others as you 
would have them do to you. However, 
you may perhaps dislike any freedom ; I 
shall not, therefore, in any way, run 
the risk of offending again, but leave your 
lordship quietly to the enjoyment of your 
own reflections, as long as you think pro- 



190 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

per to honour my poor castle with your 
sage presence." 

The bird blinked at him for a moment, 
as if paying all due attention to what he 
was saying, and then, hopping from the 
table, proceeded to seek for itself a snug 
corner in another part of the room. 

Donaghue resumed his book, but still 
his attention wandered; he laid it aside, 
and opened his desk, for the purpose of 
re-perusing some of Melville's letters, who 
all this time, as we believe has been al- 
ready stated, had been travelling about 
the Continent with his uncle. In looking 
for them, his eyes fell upon a roll of dusty 
papers, which, in searching in an old chest 
for some vouchers belonging to the castle, 
he had found a few days before, and on 
discovering they were not what he wanted, 
was on the point of throwing them back, 
when some words in them caught his at- 
tention, and excited just a sufficient de- 
gree of curiosity to decide him on looking 
over them at some future time. Besides, 
what an indignity to the fair lady, whose 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 191 

production they were, to treat them with 
that contempt ! for the writing was evi- 
dently that of a female. 

Donaghue was at this instant in that 
kind of desultory humour, if the expres- 
sion may be allowed, that incHned him to 
think there could not be a better time 
than the present for wliat he yet intended. 
Accordingly, untying the faded ribbon 
that kept them together, he began to un- 
roll them. This he soon found was requi- 
site to do with caution, for between damp, 
and time, and moths, they were indeed in 
a very fragile state, insomuch as in many 
places to be completely mutilated, and in 
others hardly legible ; and Donaghue could 
not help smiling at the idea of the roll be- 
ing just such a one as was fit to find in an 
old castle. To commence the regular pe- 
rusal of it seemed, at first, too serious a 
business, for the papers were numerous 
and closely written, and for some time he 
kept turning them backwards and for- 
wards in a vague manner. At length — 
" This is silly," he cried ; " without a clue 



192 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

it is impossible to comprehend them ;" and 
so, seeking for the commencement, after 
passing over several faded lines, he regu- 
larly began as follows : — 



" You tell me you are wild for this 
wonderful ghost story, connected with an 
old castle, and that, in such a solitary place, 
I can have nothing better to do, than to 
sit down and gratify your curiosity by re- 
lating it. A pretty observation truly! 
Some twenty or thirty years hence, in- 
deed, if you made it, I might probably 
allow the justice of it; but now, with 
somebody that shall be nameless here, and 
a whole host of handsome young men that 
are come down to spend their Christmas 

in the neighbourhood But as I like to 

be good-natured, I will forgive your sau- 
ciness, and endeavour to oblige you, if I 
can. If I can, I say, for, in the first place, 
I don't know whether I shall have patience 
to go on ; and, in the next, as I have ne- 
ver before tried my hand at putting a story 



TRADITION OP THE CASTLE. 193 

together, whether I shall please myself, as 
I proceed, in which, or either case, 1 shall 
stop short, but not to raise your expecta- 
tions with any intention of ever resuming 
it a^ain ; so that, if not gratified, you 
at least will not be teased by a story like 
the king of Bohemia's and his seven cas- 
tles, never ending, still beginning. By- 
the-bye, have you read the work to which 
it belongs? I ask you, because it is so 
recently come out; somebody brought it 
over from London to me, and I was so 
charmed — uncle Toby and corporal Trim 
have really got my heart between them ; 

and as to the story of Le Fevre But 

to begin my own : — 

" Well then, to commence it, as my old 
nurse used to do her wonderful ones in the 
nursery to me, of kings and queens, good 
fairies and bad, distressed princesses, wan- 
dering knights, and enchanted and enchant- 
ing bears — Once upon a time, there stood, 
not a hundred miles from Altoir-na-Gre- 
nie, an old castle, that, in its pristine days, 

VOL. II. K 



194i TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

was said to have equalled it in strength 
and grandeur, belonging to the once roy- 
ally-entitled family of O'Connor. How 
this family fell, like their ancient castle, 
into decay, boots not here to mention ; 
suffice it to say, that in solitary poverty 
liere lived in the year — — — 

J5 

Here there was an hiatus of some lines. 
Passing over it, Donaghue thus resumed: — 

"The old man's feelings at his altered for- 
tune were aggravated by its having forced 
him to submit to a separation from his son. 
Unable to give him an independence in his 
own country, he was compelled to let him 
seek one abroad, by taking up arms under 
a foreign standard, his religion interdicting 
any thing of the kind in his own country. 
Young O'Connor entered into the service 
of Spain ; he married in that country, and 
became the father of a lovely daughter, 
who remained to console him for the early 
death of her amiable mother. 

*' Years advanced. Old O'Connor found 
himself on the verge of the grave ; his pil- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 195 

grimage had become a grievous one, and he 
was not sorry at finding it drawing towards 
a close; but his heart sunk within him, 
at the thought of its ending without be- 
holding his son again ; for neither age nor 
sorrow had deadened its natural feelings, 
and we love to indulge the idea of our 
eyes being closed by the gentle hand 
cf affection. He wrote to his son, to im- 
part — — — — — 

^__^ 5J 

Another chasm here occurred, and, after 
glancing over several defaced lines, Dona- 
ghue took up the story again as follows : — 

" The circumstances that compelled 
O'Connor, on obeying his father's sum- 
mons, to give up his commission in Spain, 
were not so much regretted by him as 
might have been imagined ; the warmest 
affections of his heart centered in his na- 
tive country. Besides, he was not with- 
out a hope, that, through some important 
services he had had the good fortune to 
render the English government while 
K 2 



196 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

abroad, his disability to enter its service 
might be overlooked ; or, at least, that if 
it were not, some slight provision might 
be made for him or his child. A memo- 
rial to this effect was drawn up; but, alas! 
unbacked by interest, of what avail were 
the claims it modestly set forth for atten- 
tion ! and O'Connor's long estrangement 
from Ireland, together with the loftiness 
of his proud spirit, on his return to it, had 

prevented his seeking — — — 

)> 

Here was another blank. Donaghue 
hastily passing it over, sought for the next 
connecting line ; for, though at the first 
mention of a ghost story, he had been very 
near throwing aside the papers, yet, as he 
proceeded, he had found a little degree of 
interest awakened, even by the name of 
the family. 

" The disappointment to which he was 
finally doomed was aggravated by the tor- 
menting uncertainty in which he had been 
long kept. * Hope deferred maketh the 
lieart sick, and suspense racks the spirit.' 



tilADITlON OP THE CASTLE. 197 

Oh ! why will man be so cruel to his fel- 
low-man ! is it not enough to refuse, to 
dash the cup of expectation from the qui- 
vering lip of anxiety ! Why must the bit- 
terness of refusal be heightened by the in- 
sult of neglect — the barbarity of trifling ! 
We often treat one another in such a man- 
ner, that it is enough to make one imagine 
we did not remember we were of the same 
species, travelling to the same goal, and 
all liable to the same changes and chances. 

" But, to proceed without further ser- 
monizing — but, as I was in for it, I thought 
I might as well try my hand at this also. 
Irritated and despairing, rankling with a 
sense of unmerited neglect and contempt, 
he returned to his dilapidated home, to 
brood over his disappointment, and try if 
he could devise any plan for the future. 

^' But his was not the only discontented 
spirit in the neighbourhood ; there were 
others also that had wrongs to complain of. 
In short, arising was in contemplation, and 
to obtain the aid of men of his description, 
inured to camps, and acquainted with mi* 



198 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

litary discipline, was considered a matter 
of essential importance by the party. 
They had had their eyes for some time on 
O'Connor; the moment of irritation was 
regarded as a favourable one for putting 
his sentiments to the test, and accordingly, 
whilst yet his soul was all in a tumult at 
the treatment he had received, an overture 
was made him to become their leader. 
His resentment, not allowed to cool, was 
too keen to permit him to reject it, and 
ere he well knew what he was about, he 
found himself engaged in a desperate bu- 
siness. 

** One of the chiefs with whom he was 
associated was a youth of the name of 
Brennan. To this youth nature had been 
infinitely kinder than fortune, and perhaps 
this very circumstance, the kindness of 
one but aggravated his impatience under 
the cruelty of the other. To a quick and 
intelligent mind, a countenance of strong 
expression, and figure of commanding 
grandeur, he united, from the manner in 
which he had been brought up, all those 



I'llADlTION OF THE CASTI.E. 199 

qualifications that were deemed essential 
for the adventurers in former days, and 
without which indeed it was decreed that 
no soldier should be received amongst the 
national defenders of his country — a poe- 
tical genius, and a foot so swift and light, 
:as to allow of his treading on a rotten stick 
without breaking it. But the enjoyment 
of all these gifts seemed marred by a 
brooding and repining spirit, a rankling 
:and indignant sense of individual wrong 
and national oppression. His grandfather, 
the descendant, or rather representative, 
of one of those old Milesian families, whose 
-estates were wrested from them, to be be- 
stowed on Protestant retainers of the go- 
vernment, could never speak on the sub- 
ject with calmness ; and having had the 
entire bringing up of the boy himself, 
through the early death of his parents, 
took care to imbue him with all his own 
inveterate prejudices and violent animosi- 
ties. No wonder, then, that he should 
disclaim, as he grew up, all allegiance to 
Q, government he deemed at once unjust 



200 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

and usurping, or wish to extirpate what 
he was made to detest, from a belief of 
being oppressive. Gradually he became 
moody and melancholy, a seceder from so- 
cial enjoyments, and a frequenter of wild 
solitudes ; but not for the purpose of in- 
dulging delightful musings, or having the 
spirit of poetry kindled within him, by 
the contemplation of the dread magnifi- 
cence of nature, but of brooding over ima- 
gined injuries, and meditating wild and 
terrific plans of revenge. What he medi- 
tated he at last began to systemize; and 
by the time O'Connor had returned from 
his unsuccessful suit, regular associations 
w^re formed, and nightly meetings held. 

"' The object he had in view rendered 
Brennan incapable of regretting the dis- 
appointment sustained by O'Connor, and 
the anticipations he indulged from it were 
shortly verified. Hardly, however, had 
O'Connor consented to unite himself with 
the party, than, like the seduced spirit, 
Abaddona, he repented; not so much, 
however, perhaps, from any alteration in 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 201 

the feelings that had incited him to the 
measure, as a gloomy presentiment of the 
horrors likely to accrue from what was in 
agitation. Rendered desperate by fortune, 
these, perhaps, on his own account, he 
might have disregarded ; but in his fate 
he knew his daughter's involved, and for 
her sake he wished he had taken a little 
more time for consideration. But the die 
was cast, the Rubicon crossed, having 
bound himself by oath to the party, and 
in consequence become the repository of 
their secrets, he conceived himself bound, 
by every tie of honour and generosity, to 
remain attached to them. In every re- 
spect, indeed, he had committed himself 
too far to recede ; his daughter, at the in- 
stigation of old Brennan, had been remov- 
ed to his abode, and he felt aware that it 
concerned her safety to let no appearance 
of wavering or repentance be seen in his 
manner. Dark and distrustful, it was to 
a doubt of his fidelity indeed was owing 
the wish of old Brennan to have her com-^ 
k3 



202 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

mitted to his care, though he made his 
granddaughter's anxiety for her company 
the pretext. 

" His abode, the remains of an old rug- 
ged castle, on a rocky hill, bare of almost 
every convenience, and exposed to all the 
fury of the ocean, was sufficient to chill 
almost any imagination. The heart of 
Morna sunk within her as she entered 
within its gloomy walls; but hurried im- 
mediately on her arrival to one of the 
wildest parts of the kingdom, how rough, 
and uncouth, and melancholy,* did every 
thing that she had as yet met with appear 
to her ! what a contrast to the scenes of her 
Ihfancy, to the balmy air, to the orange 
groves, to the monuments of ancient gran- 
deur, she had been accustomed ! The 
Arabian gardens of Granada had been the 
haunts of these days, ^atid she sighed to 

have left the land of her mother r— — 
»» 

Here was another chasm. Donaghue 
rapidly passed over it, and thus again 
caught up the story ; — 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 203 

" Such was Morna, now in the first 
bloom of youth; indisposition, and the 
pensive gentleness of her soul, were visible 
in her countenance; her form was flexile 
as a reed ; her complexion announced her 
foreign descent, but it was still clear and 
variable ; her hair was black as the wing of 
the raven, and in the softness of her large 
dark eyes there was a charm that enchant- 
ed ; her accents were mild as her manners, 
the ear listened to them with pleasure; 
but when she sung to her guitar some 
Moorish ditty of her native land, atten- 
tion was enchained, and the soul, through 
every thrilling fibre, owned the power of 
her strains. 

" Brought up in the greatest simplicity, 
though so formed for admiration, she knew 
not her power to excite it ; but there were 
those who soon became sensible of it. Of 
the number was Roderick O'Brien, heir to 
the then proud owner of Altoir-na-Grenie. 
What he heard of the Spanish maid, as 
she was denominated in the neighbour- 
hood, inflamed his curiosity to behold her» 



204 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

and having once beheld her, he felt it was 
essential to his happiness to do so again. 
But to gaze in silence, to follow like a sha- 
dow her devious footsteps, or listen be- 
neath her window for the strains that 
made him think her more than mortal, was 
not sufficient for a lover of the ardent and 
impassioned nature of Roderick. But how 
he managed matters to get introduced to 
her, and contrive that her rambles should 
no longer be solitary, it matters not to 
say ; suffice it, he did so, and that feelings 
began to be awakened in the gentle bosom 
of the lovely Morna, that tended not a lit- 
tle to console and reconcile her to what 
she had previously regretted. 

" But all this was without the know- 
ledge of her father. Though connected, 
there was a coolness between him and Mr. 
0*Brien. The latter, a proud, haughty 
man, had thought proper to slight the ac- 
quaintance of the poor soldier, on his re- 
turn to his native land; and in conse- 
quence of the resentment excited by this 
conduct, Roderick was well aware any 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 205 

open attentions to Morna would have been 
interdicted. 

" Day and night were not more differ- 
ent, with regard to disposition, than this 
father and son ; but indeed, from all I 
have heard, the former bore no resemblance 
to any of the family that either preceded, 

or have since come after him, being all 

But no matter — where's the thread of 
my story ? If I suffer it to drop for any 
time, I fear I may find it as difficult to 
take up, as aunt Joyce a long neglected 
stitch off of one of her knitting-needles. 

" Well, as I was saying, this enchanting 
kinsman of mine, for a spirited lover is to 
me a most enchanting creature, found 
means, in spite both of this Montague and 
Capulet, to play the part of Romeo most 
delightfully to this gentle Juliet, insomuch 
that he was in great expectation of soon 
being able to prevail on her to let him try 
whether a friendly father Lawrence was 
not to be found, when she was suddenly 
borne away to old Brennan's. 

*' His distraction at the circumstance 



206 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

was heightened by alarm about young 
Brennan ; he knew — — — 

Here time or damp had done another 
injury. Donaghue, still more impatient, 
eagerly looked for the next legible part, 
and thus went on. But ere we proceed, 
we shall premise, that it is not our inten- 
tion^ to particularly notice these chasms 
again, but leave it to the blanks they oc- 
casion, to point out to the reader when- 
ever they occur. 

" His fears," Donaghue again began to 
read, " were not ill-founded; Brennan 
loved the maid, with an ardour not inferior 
to his own ; and to secure her for his bride 
was not the least cause of the old man's 
anxiety to get her into his power, for his 
gi-andson was the object of his idolatry, 
and to promote his happiness and gratifi- 
cation the first object of his life. 

" Morna liked the sister of young Bren- 
nan, and did as much justice to him as she 
could ; she admired his bravery, his strong 
and masculine mind ; but she shrunk from 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 2:07 

the thought of encouraging his love, and 
would have done so though her heart had 
not been irrevocably devoted to another; 
for there was a fierceness in his nature, 
that would have made her shudder at be- 
ing in his power. She tried to misunder- 
stand the looks with which he regarded 
her; but she was not long allowed to re- 
main dubious as to their meaning. She 
answered him with candour — promised to 
regard him as a friend, but refused to give 
the slightest hope of ever considering him 
in any other light. 

" Brennan smiled ; he wished to win 
her — to owe her hand to love; but the 
slave of ungoverned passions — - — 

" The teri'ified Moma would have ap- 
plied to her father for protection from this 
persecuting lover, but that she feared a 
complaint to him might be the means of 
involving his safety, for, in some way or 
other, it was evident to her he had com- 
mitted himself with these people. Yet to 
run the risk of being forced to become 



208 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" By indefatigable exertions, Roderick 
at length obtained an interview; but 
scarcely had they met, ere old Brennan 
appeared in sight; and terrified at the 
thought of his surprising them together, 
from the disclosure she dreaded being 
made to her father. Morn a fled precipi- 
tately from her lover. But she had not 
escaped the eagle eye of Brennan ; his sus- 
picions were excited by what he saw, and 
he followed her flying steps with all the 
agitation of alarm. Till now she had 
not known what it was she had to fear ; 
but his wild, or rather infuriate questions, 
now fully revealed to her the terrible truth, 
and she shuddered to think of the dangers 
that beset her father. In vain for some 
time she pleaded she could not have be- 
trayed what till then she was ignorant of; 
the old man would listen to no denial of 
what he accused her ; and the sudden en- 
trance of his grandson perhaps alone pre- 
vented her personally suffering through 
his brutal violence. At Length she indu- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTL£. 209 

ced a belief of not yet having disclosed any 
thing inimical to the safety of the party ; 
but further reliance on her, after the meet- 
ing that had been witnessed between her 
and Roderick, was out of the question, 
except her interests were henceforth ren- 
dered inseparable from those with whom 
she was now associated; there was but 
one way of accomplishing this, and it was 
decided, that, without further delay, she 
should become the bride of Brennan. 

" Morna shuddered, and drew back; 
she cast an imploring look on her lover,^ 
but passion had stifled generosity in his 
bosom; and the joy that kindled in his 
eyes, convinced her that any appeal to it 
would be vain. Trying, however, to curb 
his raptures, he took her in his arms, and 
strove, as he strained her to his breast, 
throbbing with the most tumultuous feeU 
ings, to calm her perturbation ; but no ar- 
guments, no persuasions, could do this; 
she protested against the measure thus re- 
solvedj but in vain; an obedient priest 



210 TRADITION OF THE CASTL^. 

was at hand, and, spite of her resistance, 
commenced the ceremony. 

" Wild with despair, she shrieked aloud, 
and called upon her father; but her father 
was away, and there were none to aid her. 
The horror of her situation deprived her 
of her senses; the ceremony was suspend- 
ed, and after some fruitless efforts to reco- 
ver her, she was borne to her chamber in 
a state that almost precluded ail hope about 
her. 

" From a kind of stupor, she was roused, 
at midnight, by a terrible tumult. The 
plot had, by some means, been discovered, 
or betrayed, and the building was, in con- 
sequence, beset by a party of soldiers. 
Convinced, by this circumstance, of her 
having been guilty of the treachery of 
which he had accused her, the fury of old 
Brennan knew no bounds. Yielding to 
its savage dictates, he hastened to her 
chamber, determined, at least, on the gra^ 
tification of revenge — — — 

" But the efforts of his granddaughter 



I^UADITION OF THE CASTLE. ^ll 

Would have proved of little avail, such 
was the strength given by temporary mad- 
ness, had not her piercing cries reached 
the ear of her brother, where his unerring 
aim had already done terrific execution, 
in repelling the assailants. With one whirl 
of his sinewy arm he rescued the almost- 
expiring Morna from the savage gripe of 
her merciless enemy, and was bearing her 
away to a place of safety, when a ball came 
whizzing through the window, and laid 
him dead. 

" At this sight, the old man abandoned 
himself to despair. His yelling cries were 
terrific, as he threw himself upon the body, 
and, tearing his grey locks, he rolled him- 
self on the floor in agony. But though 
both the weeping witnesses of this agony 
participated in his feelings, neither had 
courage to approach him, till the enraged 
soldiers, setting fire to the building, made 
them tremble at the idea of another mo- 
ment's delay in it; but it was some time 
before his granddaughter could make him 
sensible of the danger they were in. When 



Sl^ TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

at length she did, he raised himself on his 
knees, and, pushing her aside, seized 
Morna, with a suddenness that also brought 
her on her knees beside him. His demo- 
niac look and laugh, at the moment, made 
her instantly comprehend what his full in- 
tention was ; she saw he had determined 
on devoting her a victim to — — 

*' But the strength derived from despe- 
ration was insufficient to enable her to 
extricate herself from him. The flames 
fiad by this time reached the room ; the 
rafters crackled, and the fierce eyes that 
glared upon her were rendered more ter- 
rible from their reflection. She gave her- 
self up, and, uttering the name of her fa- 
ther, again sunk into insensibility — 

" On re-opening her eyes, instead of the 
scorching glow of the fire upon her cheek, 
she felt the pure breath of heaven blowing 
chilly on it. Her father had saved her. 
A rumour of the intended attack upon the 
dwelling of Brennan had brought him un- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 213 

expectedly to it ; and in the confusion that 
prevailed, he succeeded in getting into it 
by one of the secret passages, and bearing 
her away from the dreadful death that 
otherwise awaited. 

" But their mutual joy at their restora- 
tion to each other was of short continuance. 
— * The blood-hounds are upon us, my 
child !' he cried, as he raised her trembling 
frame from the grass, on which he had re- 
posed it. 

" His feelings, as far as regarded him- 
self, rendered desperate by fortune, he 
would probably have disdained any pre- 
caution for his safety, merely on his own 
account; but he w^as too well aw^are of 
what his Moma would suffer, should he 
attempt to brave his fate, not — — 

" But not so immediately could O'Con- 
nor think of a place of concealment, as of 
the necessity there was for seeking one. 
At length it occurred to him, that within 
his own desolate dwelhng he might be 
able to obtain a temporary refuge. There 



214 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

were numerous hiding-places in it, not ex- 
actly known, he believed, to every one; 
and through one of these he flattered him- 
self he should be able to evade the keen 
pursuit that. he had no doubt would be 
made after him. 

Morna exerted herself to the utmost to 
drag her trembling frame along; but her 
imagination was too much disturbed not 
to expose her to continual alarms. Every 
moment she fancied she heard the shouts of 
pursuit, and at every plash in the bog they 
had to traverse, that it was made by some 
other foot than theirs. They reached the 
building, however, without molestation, 
and quickly passing through the upper 
chambers, descended to the ones they 
sought. What a shelter for Morna ! The 
damps of death seemed gathering on her 
pallid brow ; and surely, she thought, its 
pangs could not exceed those she then ex- 
perienced. But if, in imaginary security, 
this ancient habitation of her forefathers 
chilled her from its dreariness, how infi- 
nitely more so did it now, with her mind 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 215 

impressed with terror ! All around it were 
frightful wilds and fastnesses, well adapted 
indeed to afford shelter, but a shelter 
which none but the most desperate — the 
outlaw or the rebel, could think of seek- 
ing. An uninterrupted succession of bogs, 
mountains, and morasses, was the only 
prospect, with a lonely lake, environed by 
stupendous cliffs, that, as it flowed along, 
seemed moaning at the neglect of its ro* 
mantic scenery. — — — 

" Through means of this faithful fol- 
lower, with whom O'Connor contrived to 
have a communication, they were supplied 
with what was just necessary for their pre- 
servation. But such a state was not to be 
long endured ; O'Connor urged his daugh- 
ter to repair to the neighbouring convent 
of Ursulines, founded in the eleventh cen- 
tury by one of his house, and where he 
was assured she would meet with the kind- 
ness and attention she required ; yet the 
only reply these entreaties received was 
by clinging still more closely to him. But 



216 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

she could procure him such a friend, if she 
durst but open her heart to him ; but she 
had heard his sentiments respecting the 
treatment he had received from the fa- 
ther, and how could she then speak of the 
son ? But to know she could serve him — 
could have him rescued from the horrible 
situation he was in — could procure him the 
assistance of a person whom nothing could 
coiTupt, and not do so, was impossible; 
and, in short, she watched for an opportu- 
nity of stealing out, and by means of — 

" To describe the rapture of Roderick, 
when, at length, he prevailed on O'Connor 
to accept his proffered friendship, and al- 
low him to conduct him and Morna to 
Altoir-na-Grenie, there to remain till it 
might be considered safe for them to at- 
tempt getting off to Spain, would be im- 
possible. 

" But the alarm that O'Connor and his 
friends were under about his safety was 
without foundation; in the papers that 
were seized, his name, fortunately, hap- 



TRADITION OF TttE CASTLE. 217 

pened not to be mentioned ; and whatever 
might be the enormities of the misguided 
unfortunate men with whom he had con- 
nected himself, that of treachery towards 
each other certainly could not be ranked ; 
so that, though suspicion attached to 
him, it never was brought sufficiently 
home to occasion him any trouble. That, 
however, it pointed at him, was quite 
enough to induce Mr. O'Brien to think 
himself fully justified in still declining any 
intercourse with him — he was an attainted 
man, he said, and therefore to be shunned 
by all who wished to be considered loyal 
and good subjects; and altogether express- 
ed himself in such a way about him, that 
had he been apprized of the shelter he 
gave him within his walls, he would not 
have permitted him to enjoy it long. In 
vain Roderick pleaded for him, and took 
his part; he reminded his father of the 
connexion that subsisted between the fa- 
milies, and that in consequence, from a 
feeling of pride, to say nothing of huma- 

VOL. II. L 



218 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

nity, he should give him his support and 
countenance. Mr. O'Brien, however, a 
stern, proud, avaricious man, as already 
hinted, saw things in a different light ; a 
connexion that could reflect no conse- 
quence, he was not by any means inclined 
to bestow the radiance of his countenance 
on; and, in short, he remained inexorable 
to all that his son could urge in behalf of 
his unfortunate kinsman. 

" How great was the despair of Rode- 
rick at this — cutting off all hope as it did 
of obtaining his consent to marry jSIorna ! 
and, without it, how could he think of 
wooing her to become his, when poverty 
for so many years might be their lot ! for, 
though the family estates were entailed, 
till the decease of his father he could not 
command a shilling. Suspense on such a 
subject was not endurable, and by an effort 
of desperation, he summoned sufficient 
courage to come to the point, and solicit 
the coveted consent. The result was what 
he had fearfully anticipated, a positive in- 
terdiction against ever thinking more of 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 219 

Morna, and haughty, command not to ap- 
pear again in his presence, till he could 
assure him he had made up his mind to 
submission. 

" Resentful and indignant at this cruel 
obduracy to the wishes of an only son, and 
insensibility to the merits of one of the 
loveliest of her sex, Roderick would im- 
mediately have quitted the castle, but that 
he could not bear to absent himself from 
a place where he could sometimes see the 
object of his affections ; but the consola- 
tion derived from this idea was shortly cut 
off; O'Connor did not long remain in ig- 
norance of what had passed at Altoir-na- 
Grenie ; he heard of the quarrel between 
the father and son, and that, though re- 
maining under the same roof, they had as 
little intercourse or communication with 
each other as if separated by hundreds of 
miles, and accordingly decided, that, for 
the present, all further correspondence 
should be suspended between him and his 
daughter. 

LSI 



220 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE", 

** From the moment of receiving thi^ 
intimation, the manner of young O'Brien 
altered ; all his cheerfulness forsook him ; 
it was evident to him from it, that there 
was an end of any further hope about 
Morna, and in conceiving her lost to him, 
he ceased to feel any further interest in 
life. This was the first trial his fortitude 
had ever met with, and he bore it like a 
petted child of fortune, who expected to 
go on without meeting with an adverse 
gale through the voyage of life. His na- 
ture was noble, but his passions were ar- 
dent, and he had never been taught to curb 
them— never reminded of the disappoint- 
ments we are liable to here, or that it is 
our duty to struggle against despondence^ 
and still remember that there is an all- 
wise, all-good, all-gracious Being, watch- 
ing over us, who, provided we do our part, 
will never forsake uSy nor even in this 
world suffer us to be severely afflicted, 
except it may be indeed to render us still 
more susceptible of the happiness awaiting 
lis hereafter. — — — — 



ts,aditiok of the castle. ^21 

** Roderick was sitting disconsolately by 
himself one gloomy evening, when his 
own faithful attendant, Phelim, entered 
the apartment; and — ' Ah, then,' said 
Phelim, w^ho was likewise his foster-bro- 
ther, * isn't this a poor case, that you 
should be sitting here by yourself, like 
some poor sinner doing penance, when 
there is such a power of company in the 
castle enjoying themselves and making 
merry?' for it is here to be understood, 
that Mr. O'Brien, to shew his utter disre- 
gard to the feelings of his son, made it a 
point of giving splendid entertainments 
every day — * Och! and it's myself that 
wishes the ould gentleman in the yellow 
silk morning dress would be paying you 
a visit, for it's then you might be after 
pleasing yourself (Phelim knew how mat- 
ters were) * Avithout thanking kith or kin.' 
— * The old gentleman in the yellow silk 
morning gown !' repeated Roderick, but 
evidently in a manner that proved it was 
unconsciously, * who is he?' — * Ah then, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

sure, Mr. Roderick, is it yourself that's 
axing that?' cried Phelim; 'why, I thought 
every body in or about the castle, or be- 
longing to it, knew who he was — why, 
your own great ancestor, squire Dennis 
O'Brien, who, in the time of the Crom- 
wellian wars, fearing his castle being ri- 
fled, buried all his money and plate in a 
large pot underground somewhere here, 
and dying suddenly, without having time 
to say where, has ever since been troubled 
on that account, and must continue so till 
he makes the discovery ; but it seems he is 
determined on not making this, except to 
some person in want of the treasure ; for 
though he has been seen often and often 
in the castle, yet it has never been but at 
such times as it was known that some one 
belonging to it was in want of money, and 
then he always appears in the dress he used 
to wear of a morning, a fine yellow silk 
gown, with roses on it, with a crimson 
velvet cap on his head, and red morocco 
slippers on his feet, just as he is drawn in 
his picture ; and 'twas that that made me 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. S23 

think you must know who I meant, for I 
thought you could not have looked at it 
so often as you have done, to be sure, 
without knowing who it was intended 
for.' — * His picture! what picture?' asked 
Roderick, again in. an abstracted tone. — 
' Ah then, Mr. Roderick,' again cried 
Phelim, ' is it joking you are ? Why the 
picture that hangs up in the library, just 
by the fireplace, and facing a window.' — 



Donaghue almost started, under the 
vague idea of having seen the picture this 
described somewhere in it; he eagerly 
looked up, and there, actually facing him, 
his eyes encountered it, the full sized por- 
trait of an elderly gentleman, habited ex- 
actly as the manuscript described, sitting 
in an easy chair, with a pointer at one 
knee, and on the other his hand, with a 
book, as if his reading had been suspended 
for the purpose of letting him observe 
something that had interested him, and ac- 
tually it seemed to Donaghue as if his 
eyes were bent down upon him at the 



224 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

moment, with a look of earnestness and 
inquiry. Donaghue could not help smi- 
ling at the momentary effect the idea had 
upon him ; he gave another glance at the 
portrait, and resumed the manuscript. 



" Matters continued to go on in the 
same way ; every day the breach seemed 
to get wider and wider between the fa- 
ther and -son ; some of their mutual friends 
interfered, but to no purpose, for neither 
could be induced to cede the smallest 
matter to the other. 

" Roderick was sitting rather late one 
night by himself, moodily brooding over 
his blighted hopes of happiness, when the 
door behind him opened, and concluding 
it was Phelim, now indeed the only per- 
son with whom he had any communica- 
tion, he did not move; but when, after a 
minute or two, he found no one approach- 
ed, though he heard a low rustling sound 
in the apartment, he turned to see who it 
was that had entered, and beheld an el- 
derly portly-looking gentleman, habited 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 225 

in a yellow silk robe de chambre, with a 
crimson velvet cap on his head, and red 
morocco slippers on his feet. The castle 
was full of guests at the time, and it in- 
stantly occurred to Roderick, that this 
stranger was one of them, who, having in- 
terested himself in the difference between 
his father and him, had come to speak to 
him on the subject, as many other old 
friends of his father, not before known to 
him, had done. But, whatever he might 
have come for, Roderick was naturally too 
courteous not to receive him with compla- 
cence ; he rose, and invited him to take a 
chair by the fire. This the stranger de- 
clined, but with a pleasant smile, intima- 
ting by his gestures, for he spoke not, that 
instead of sitting with him, he wanted him 
to accompany him immediately from the 
apartment. Confirmed by this in his pre- 
vious idea — * Impossible !' said Roderick ; 
* I guess where you would lead me ; but 
there is no use, I am well aware, in going 
to my father, except I have made up my 
h 8 



226 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

mind to act as he wishes. This I can ne- 
ver do. My thanks, however, are not the 
les&tiue to you, for thus kindly interesting 
yourself about me.' 

" Still, however, as if not attending to 
this declaration, the stranger continued, 
by his gestures, to urge him to oblige him, 
but keeping receding all the time towards 
the door, followed by the other. At 
length, on his gaining it — * Stop, sir,' said 
Roderick, perceiving all was darkness 
without, and knowing there were several 
intricate passages in this direction, divided 
by steps, or narrow flights of stairs, * let 
me get a candle to light you.' No reply 
was made, and ere he could repeat the re- 
quest, the stranger had somehow vanished. 

" Roderick felt a momentary sensation 
of surprise at the circumstance ; it seemed 
to him as if he had actually faded from his 
sight, but this must be owing to the un- 
steadiness of the light that issued from 
the room, and without troubling himself 
farther on the subject, he returned to it 
As he reentered it — * Where can this cold 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 227 

earthy vapour come from ?' lie cried ; * and 
see how it affects the candles — they burn 
blue!* He resumed his seat by the fire, 
and took up the poker, with an intention 
of stirring it, but his hand fell powerless 
by his side, and a deadly sickness came 
over him for a few minutes, accompanied 
by cold damps, such as he had never be- 
fore experienced. — ' Well, this is odd 
enough !' he said ; ' such a sudden attack !' 
But he thought no more about it ; and not 
liking to furnish Phelim with a new theme 
for conversation, who, notwithstanding the 
great regard he had for him, sometimes 
talked too much for the state of mind he 
was then in, nothing was mentioned to 
him of the visit he had received. 

" Well, the posture of affairs continued 
unaltered at the castle. Roderick at length 
became ill, and through absolute pining 
and vexation, took to his bed. He would 
allow no medical man to come near him ; 
and indeed the disease being seated in his 
mind, a visit of the kind could have been 
of no service ; nor did his father urge it. 



228 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

conceiving this illness was all a pretext to 
try and soften him. 

" The talkativeness of poor Phelim now 
got more fatiguing than ever to his mas- 
ter, who, besides, grew a little peevish and 
irritable, so that, whenever he could, with- 
out absolutely hurting his feelings, he 
contrived a pretext for getting rid of him. 
He had done so one night, by affecting 
sleepiness sooner than usual, but the mid- 
night hour struck without finding his eyes 
closed. As he lay despondently awake, he 
fancied he heard the door softly open, and 
a low rustling sound in the chamber, and 
imagining it was Phelim who had return- 
ed, in a sudden fit of irritation he was 
drawing aside the curtain to reprimand 
him for this disobedience to his orders, 
when he was not a little surprised at be- 
holding the stranger in the yellow silk 
morning-gown standing by the bedside. — 
* Good God, sir !' cried he, * is it you I be- 
hold?' raising himself, sick asiie was, up- 
on his elbow ; * what kind concern does 
this manifest about me T 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 229 

*VThe other smiled, and drawing back 
a little from the bed, motioned him to rise, 
and, as he had done before, to follow him 
from the chamber. — ' Impossible, sir,' said 
Roderick; ' don't you see the state I am 
in ? Yet, if indeed you come with any 

kind message from my father ' The 

stranger shook his head. — * Oh, then, I 
cannot indeed rise !' said Roderick, falling 
back on his pillow through the pang oc- 
casioned by the disappointment of this 
suddenly awakened hope. 

" Still, however, the stranger persisted 
in his silent importunities, as if bent on 
not taking a refusal, till Roderick became 
so displeased, that nothing but courtesy 
prevented his drawing the curtain between 
them. On a sudden a footstep was heard 
in the gallery. Roderick impatiently rais- 
ed himself on the pillow, for the purpose 
of listening whether it was Phelim's, that 
he might get him to light his visitor to 
his chamber; and while doing so, the 
stranger again seemed to fade away before 
his eyes, and immediately a heavy stupor 



230 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

fell over his senses ; and when he awoke 
in the morning, all that had passed over- 
night seemed to him as a dream. 

" Some few nights after this, he took it 
into his head he should like to read a book 
of love poems that lay in the library ; and 
the whim had no sooner seized him, than, 
having already dismissed Phelim, he de- 
termined on trying to get them himself, 
convinced he should not, at such an hour, 
encounter any one there. Accordingly 
he got out of bed, and, putting on his 
night-gown and slippers, contrived to 
reach the apartment; and, securing the 
book, was about returning, when his eyes 
suddenly encountered the picture of squire 
Dennis O'Brien, in his yellow gown, as 
described by Phelim; and — * Good God!' 
cried Roderick, starting, as his eyes now 
fell upon it, * that picture is the identical 
image of my unknown visitor!' and a 
strange feeling came over his mind ; and 
while yet there was a shudder in his frame, 
he heard a low rustling sound in the room, 
and turning with quickness, beheld the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 231 

strianger standing beside him, as if to give 
him an opportunity of comparing him with 
the portrait — — — — 

" Well, after all this, Roderick could no 
longer doubt having received a visit of no 
common kind, neither of the purpose of 
it; and — ' Since so wonderful an interest 
has been excited about me/ he cried, 
* why should I not avail myself of it? 
Could I get possession of this buried trea- 
sure of my ancestors, I should be able to mar- 
ry Morna, and would have her, and would 
marry her, spite of all opposition, though 
I should be obliged to raise a troop of 
hardy young fellows, like myself, to en- 
able me to carry her off!' And so being 
prepared, and collected, and determined 
how to act, should he ever behold the ap- 
parition again, the next time he did so, 
which was soon, he addressed it, with the 
usual adjuration, inquiring what had trou- 
bled his repose? 

" The spell being now removed from 
his lips, his mysterious visitant explained. 



232 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

by mentioning the hid treasure, which he 
could never rest till he had discovered; 
but the secret of which he was under a re- 
striction not to disclose to any one not be- 
longing to the family, or who was not in 
want, or worthy of it, and who had not 
the courage to follow him at the midnight 
hour, whithersoever he should lead, with 
a pickaxe, a shovel, and a basket, to dig 
for it, and bear it away. 

" A thousand times had Roderick said, 
what would he not undertake for his Mor- 
na ! and he was now called upon to prove 
the sincerity of this declaration. The en- 
suing night was settled, between him and 
the phantom, for this projected exploit; 
but what changes do a few short hours 
often occasion in human feelings — human 
affairs ! ere it came, wealth was no longer de- 
sired by Roderick, since wealth could no 
longer confer happiness on him. The first 
thing that was presented to his eyes the 
next morning, was a letter of solemn farewell 
from Morna, who, the preceding day, had 
taken, in privacy, the veil in the Ursuline 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Convent, thus terminating all further anx- 
iety in the mind of her father about her 
earthly weal, and removing, as she hoped, 
the only cause of dissension that existed 
between her lover and his parent. The 
farewell breathed the very spirit of her 
feelings ; it melted, while it strove to con- 
sole, and was accompanied by a present of 
those long dark tresses which he had so 
loved to see fluttering and waving about 
her, and which she desired him to keep, 
in fond remembrance of one who, it might 
be said, had died for him, for in renoun- 
cing the world, as she had done for his 
sake, was it not to a living tomb she had 
consigned herself? 

" Oh, there was agony in that thought 
to the lover ! better, better, he imagined, 
he could have borne to hear of her actually 
being laid within the earth, than to know 
that she still lived, but no longer for him ! 
He raved with all the extravagance of 
despair, and vowed not to survive her loss. 

" Night came ; but no longer was the 
purpose to which it was intended to have 



234 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

been devoted remembered. The clock, 
however, had hardly struck twelve, when 
the apparition of his kinsman stood beside 
the bed ; but the visit was now a mockery 
to him, Roderick conceived, and he re- 
fused to rise. 

" The other continued to urge him for 
some time, by his gestures, but in vain. 
At length — * The wish to serve you is 
useless,' he cried. ' The means of giving 
happiness to others, if not to yourself, have 
been offered and rejected. Farewell! 
Once more you'll see me ; and as I then 
appear, you yourself will be in less tlian 
another devolving year !' — — 

" At last Mr. O'Brien became convinced 
of the danger of his son ; and when he was, 
what was his horror, his grief, and his re- 
morse ! How fervently did he then wish 
that past time could have been recalled ! 
How readily would he then have sacrificed 
all his prejudices, his ambitious hopes and 
plans, to save him ! but the fiat was gone 
forth, and another than Roderick was des- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 235 

tined to succeed him in the possessions on 
which he so valued himself. 

" Roderick was drawing towards his 
end, when one night his heavy eyes were 
opened by a low rattling sound in the 
chamber. He gently put aside the cur- 
tain, to see what occasioned it, and beheld, 
exactly facing him, a human skeleton, lean- 
ing against a bureau. The words of the 
apparition, on its last visit, instantly re- 
curred to his recollection ; and if till now 
a hope of his recovery had lingered in his 
heart, it was now relinquished; for, spite 
of grief, of despair, of all that in our first 
frantic moments we may utter, there are 
few of us, I believe, when it comes to the 
point, such is the instinct of nature, but 
cling, with something of tenacity, to life. 

" In his last moments he revealed the 
appearance of the apparition to him. What 
credit his story met with then, I cannot 
pretend to say ; but if we may judge from 
the manner in which it has been handed 
down, through successive generations, I 
should suppose very implicit ; and indeed, 



S36 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

even at this day, there are some in the fa- 
mily, my aunt Joyce for instance, and one 
or two more old aunts and cousins, who 
would deem a doubt on the subject a kind 
of scepticism not to be forgiven. It is, in 
short, a general, as well as positive, belief, 
that the spirit of squire Dennis still trou- 
bles the castle, and will continue to do so till 
the discovery of the buried treasure ; and 
that he will yet assuredly be the making of 
some one of the family. Who this lucky per- 
son may be, of course cannot be surmised, 
since hitherto fortune has been sufficiently 
kind to all of the race, not to subject them 
to the fright of a visitation of the kind ; 
for I much fear, that not even a convic- 
tion of the motive that brought him, would 
be able to keep one from experiencing 
some little panic at the sight or sound of 
squire Dennis's yellow morning gown ; 
that I have laughed a hundred times at 
the idea of this, I believe I need scarcely 
say ; yet not to affect to be always wiser 
than other people, I will acknowledge, that 
4once — but remember it was but once — I 



TRAi)ITION OF THE CASTLE, 237 

did feel a little agitation at the recollec- 
tion of it. Papa had been uncommonly 
cross and ill-natured, at least so I thought 
then, in refusing to give me money for a 
new sack; to be sure I had just got two 
divine ones down from Dublin — but that 
was no matter, I saw a new one on Mrs. 
Blake, made of a silk I liked better — the 
sweetest silk, a bright garnet colour, with 
immense bouquets of natural flowers, 
orange lilies, white roses, and variegated 
carnations, thrown on it; and I quite long- 
ed, and made up my mind to get a dress 
of the same ; but no entreaties would do, 
though backed by mamma, who could not 
herself aid me, having had a long run of 
ill luck at cards ; so up I went to my cham- 
ber, completely in the dumps ; and there, 
as I sat bemoaning myself, the story of 
cousin Roderick coming into my head — 
* Well, I am sure,' I said to myself, * if 
there is any truth in it, now is the time 
to prove it ; for here, I am sure, is one of 
the family distressed enough to need a little 
kindness;' and hardly had I said so, when 



238 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Lord ! my heart beats now at the 

fright I got at the moment — I heard a low 
rustling sound in the closet within it. 
Without waiting to hear more, up I jump- 
ed, flew from the room, and making but 
one leap down the stairs, was very near 
coming plump upon the old butler, as he 
was passing at the moment to the parlour, 
with some of the supper-things ; if I had, 
Heavens! what a kick-up I should have 
caused there, by the smash I should have 
occasioned amongst the old china bowls 
and gilt glasses, that have been upwards of 
a thousand years in the family, I believe, 
like heirlooms ! However, this mischance 
I escaped ; but — * The Lord save us, Miss!' 
said Andrew, alarmed by my looks and 
manner, * what has happened ?' — ' Oh, no- 
thing,' I replied ; ' I only want Anty ;' so 
Anty w^as called ; but, like Andrew, catch- 
ing dismay from my looks, soon began to 
shew evident signs of disinclination to ac- 
company me up stairs. 

" On reaching my chamber, she drew 
back, to let me enter first ; but this I de- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 239 

clined, and forcing her before me — * Oh, 
there it is ! there it is !' I cried, starting 
back, on again hearing the noise that had 
just before driven me from it. — * The Holy 
Virgin protect us! what, Miss?' asked 
Anty, crossing herself; then, as if sud- 
denly recollecting herself, she desired me 
not to be frightened, as she was certain 
what I heard was the cat in the closet, 
which she had observed stealing slyly af- 
ter her into it, when she entered it to get 
my night-things ready for me against I 
went to rest; and there indeed was Miss 
Puss, playing hide and go seek amongst 
my fine silk sacks and petticoats. 

" Well, I have now given you the mar- 
vellous ghost story you were so anxious 
to hear, or what may be termed the Tra- 
dition of our Castle ; and having had pa- 
tience to pen it for you, shall take care 
that my labour be not thrown away, by 
availing myself of the first opportunity 
that occurs for sending it to you; and 
should not one offer before my leaving 
this, shall leave it in special charge with 



240 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

mamma, to forward it by the first that 
presents itself after my departure. My 
departure! methinks 1 hear you repeat, 
and where may your ladyship be steering? 
Why, the fact is, not to counterbalance 
good-nature by ill-nature, or, in other 
w^ords, gratify your curiosity in one in- 
vStance, but leave it ungratified in another, 
amongst other presents which a certain 
gentleman has lately been forcing on my 
acceptance, is a little gold ring, that I have 
at last promised to take from him the en- 
suing week ; and as it will operate like a 
spell in binding me to his fortunes, in fol- 
lowing them I shall be led from this, as he 
is, you know, a military man. 

" Seriously, I had some idea of coaxing 
you down to officiate as bridemaid; but, 
after all, at this inclement season of the 
year, to seduce you from the dear delights 
of Dublin, would, I thought, be cruel, 
more especially as I could not have enjoy- 
ed your company for more than a day or 
two, as almost immediately after the ce- 
remony we must leave this. Farewell, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 241 

dear girl ; you shall hear from me as soon 



Here the manuscript abruptly closed, 
leaving Donaghue unacquainted with the 
name of the fair writer, whose request to 
have it sent to her friend, it should seem, 
had never been attended to, by its having 
been found in the castle. The name of a 
person, however, no longer in existence, 
he could feel no great anxiety about know- 
ing; and according to the course of nature, 
it could not be doubted that the person 
whose writing he had been reading, had^ 
long ere this, paid their debt to nature. 

Donaghue heaved an involuntary sigh 
at the brevity of human life, as he me- 
chanically rolled up the papers, and depo- 
sited them again in his desk — " And well 
may the poet say — * Son of the winged 
days, why buildest thou the hall ?' he cried, 
as he did so, " for scarcely have we entered 
upon the enjoyments of spring, ere win- 

VOL. II. M 



242 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ter comes to chill the genial current of the 
soul, and remind us that the next change 
will be one that will preclude another." 

The violence of the wind had by this 
time abated; but the low moaning sounds 
into which it had sunk, more affected the 
imagination of Donaghue ; for exactly as 
it now sighed and sobbed round the case- 
ments, apparently uttering the laments of 
deep sorrow and distress, had it wailed 
and whined on the night of his mother's 
death. 

The feelings awakened by what it re- 
called to memory, were too painful for 
passive endurance; he hastened from the 
library, to try if in sleep he could lose 
them. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 243 



CHAPTER VIII. 

" To trace the winding riv'let through the dale, 
That, on the mill-wheel, tries its wond'rous force ; 

Now smoothly glides, to fertilize the vale, 

Or, glist'ning, through the village takes its course." 

At length the adamantine chains of win- 
ter were broken, and the teeming buds 
and vernal gales of spring began again to 
gladden the senses. Donaghue, spite of 
the dejection of his spirits, could not help 
participating in the genial influence of the 
season, such is the renovating effect of 
renovated nature upon the human frame, 
and was almost insensibly led by it to re- 
new those active pursuits in which he had 
once so delighted ; he had indeed, by this 
time, begun to see the impropriety of any 
longer indulging in the listlessness that he 
had, for some time, given way to. It was 
m2 



244 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

our duty, he knew, as long as we were 
suffered to remain upon this mortal stage, 
to make the best use we possibly could of 
the faculties with which we were endowed ; 
and this, he certainly knew, could not be 
done if we permitted the frost of apathy 
or indifference to steal over them. Yet 
still he might have felt reluctant to emerge 
from the positive seclusion to which he 
had almost once decided on devoting him- 
self, but that, from the manner in which 
the winter had passed away, he had every 
reason to believe, that not the slightest 
suspicion of his being at Altoir-na-Grenie 
was entertained in the neighbourhood, 
and that consequently he need be under 
no apprehension of any one being on the 
watch to encounter him. 

The country about Altoir-na-Grenie was 
bold, picturesque, and highly interesting ; 
and not a little was the pleasure which he 
proposed to himself from ranging about, 
more especially, as with the greater part 
of the immediate neighbourhood he was 
unacquainted, from conceiving it unwor- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. Q45 

thy of his notice during his first visit, and 
through the melancholy circumstances 
that had attended his second. 

He wandered about, as chance directed, 
and felt, that had he sooner known the 
romantic scenery in his vicinity, he would 
hardly have had resolution to refrain so 
long from viewing it. Seated sometimes 
by the side of a meandering stream, en- 
compassed by stupendous mountains, soar- 
ing above each other, until their tops were 
hid in clouds — there, where nature was be- 
held in her wildest attire, but grand and 
sublime in the extreme — there, where all 
was still nature, save a few straggling 
goats, hanging on the sides of the preci- 
pices, what sensations of mingled awe and 
tranquillity filled his mind! Or, when 
watching the gambols of the finny race, 
how soothingly did the hours steal away ! 
how still more so, when, undisturbed by 
harsher sounds than the water murmuring 
o'er its pebbly bed, or the sound of the 
breeze sighing amidst the foliage of the 
surrounding trees, he perused a favourite 



246 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

author, or resigned himself all to thought ! 
At these moments his soul seemed all at- 
tuned to peace and harmony, and scenes 
that might otherwise have created disgust, 
from their loneliness, charmed and de- 
lighted. 

All this was very well during the day ; 
but when night again approached — when, 
after having indulged in the feelings and 
pursuits of an active and enthusiastic ima- 
gination, he was compelled to return to 
the solitary home, how did his heart again 
sink within him, and the feelings, so late- 
ly glowing, become chilled, at finding none 
there to whom he could impart what those 
feelings had been — on listening, but with^ 
out hearing any voice responding to his ! 

His looks still continued languid; exer- 
cise imparted an occasional glow to them, 
but content was wanting to render it per- 
manent ; and this he felt it impossible, at 
least for the present, to be. He could be 
patient, enduring, resigned — but to he 
content was out of the question, at least 
as he understood and defined the expres* 



TRADITION OF THE TASTLE. 247 

sion; for content, in his opinion, implied 
perfect satisfaction with your lot, such as 
precluded al"l wish for change ; and how 
could he be supposed to experience such a 
feeling at his ? Would it not indeed be 
a reproach to him if he did ? — a proof of 
an indolent, supine, inglorious spirit, sa- 
tisfied with obscurity and solitude, so the 
mere vulgar wants of nature were sup- 
plied ? No ; such a thing was not to be 
hoped, or imagined, or desired; and he 
only waited the return of his uncle, gene- 
ral O'Donaghue, from abroad, who w^as 
now daily expected on leave of absence, to 
consult with him as to some plan for the 
future; perhaps he might be induced to 
assist him in getting on active service 
again ; and whenever his spirits drooped, 
as was too often the case, he still tried to 
reanimate and buoy them up with the 
hope. That the idea had not at once 
struck him, he now felt surprised, not re- 
flecting that we cannot always immediately 
collect ourselves, so as to be enabled to see 
what is best to be done. 



248 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

But the pleasure in which he had re- 
cently been indulging was nearly relin- 
quished, through the unexpected an- 
nouncement of the arrival of sir William 
Erin and his family, with a large party of 
friends, at Ashley Vale, the beautiful seat 
in the neighbourhood, distant a few miles 
from Altoir-na-Grenie, to which he had 
succeeded in right of his uncle. 

The unwelcome intimation was no soon- 
er received by Donaghue, than he was al- 
most induced, from the dread he had, after 
what had occurred, of encountering any of 
the family, to give up, as just hinted, the 
rambles from which so much relief and 
enjoyment were derived ; but when he re- 
flected on the utter ignorance in which all 
in the neighbourhood were of his being in 
it, he thought he need not inflict so severe 
a punishment on himself as relinquishing 
them would be; and finally, was deter- 
mined to persevere in them, by, perhaps, a 
hope of their being the means of furnish- 
ing him with an opportunity of now and 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 249 

then catching a stolen glimpse of the love- 
ly Eveleen. 

But though nothing, as we have just 
observed, could be more terrible to his 
imagination than actually encountering 
her, or any of her connexions, yet, with a 
strange inconsistency — one however which 
was, perhaps, natural in a lover — he sud- 
denly began to act in a manner calculated 
to expose him to the risk of what he so 
much dreaded, by now beginning, when- 
ever he went out, to take the exact direc- 
tion to Ashley Vale instead of any other. 
He had often heard before of this magnifi- 
cent seat, which its late owner had spared 
no pains or cost in embellishing, under 
the idea that he was beautifying it for an 
only and a darling son, but without ever 
before having the slightest interest or cu- 
riosity excited about it ; but now, when 
the latter could no longer be gratified 
with safety, or at least without incurring 
the risk of what he so shrunk from, he 
felt a downright insatiable longing to 
view it, such as kept him continually ho. 
M 3 



250 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

vering about and wandering in its vicir 
nity. It is true, in the first instance, he 
had regarded it as one of those deserted 
seats consigned to decay and desolation, 
that it is melancholy to contemplate — now 
it was considered as the actual, the imme- 
diate abode of her, whose idea associated 
with it could impart a charm, an interest, 
to any thing. 

The sun was hardly risen one morning, 
when Donaghue, with his usual attendant 
and companion, a large Newfoundland 
dog, found himself at the Vale, near the 
edge of a romantic stream, hemmed in by 
verdant banks, here starting into hillocks, 
and there swelling into soft downs, over- 
spread with the finest turf The mists of 
early morn, still rolling away, and every 
moment revealing new beauties to his 
view — the shifting volumes of clouds they 
caused in the heavens, thai, as they still 
varied and dispersed, occasioned different 
masses of light and shade f > traverse the 
river in succession, excited -. degree of ad- 
miration in the mind of . > >naghue that 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 251 

fixed him to the spot. While he was ab- 
sorbed in contemplation of the scene, or 
rather, watching the winding vapours flit- 
ting from chff to cliff, as if in search of 
the clouds from which they were sepa- 
rated, a piercing shriek reached his ear, 
and eagerly looking to where it came 
from, he saw a female had fallen into the 
stream, from a rustic bridge at some little 
distance. The current, which was strong, 
and set in that direction, quickly hurried 
her to the other side of the bridge, and 
Donaghue darted forward to leap in there 
to her rescue. In his eagerness he stum- 
bled against the stump of a tree, and hit 
his ancle with such violence, that down- 
right agony for a moment took from him 
the power of moving, and when able to 
get on again, to his inexpressible horror, 
he saw she was within a few yards of a 
mill-race, into the vortex of which, if once 
whirled, nothing could save her. He run 
forward a few paces more, to be as near 
her as possible, and then plunged into the 
water; but his exertions could not have 



252 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

proved availing, she must have perished, 
so near was she to the fatal eddy, but for 
Neptune, who, on perceiving what had 
happened, had darted into the stream, and 
coming up with her just at the critical 
moment, contrived, by seizing her by the 
clothes, to keep her afloat till his master 
reached them. Though the stream was 
deep, it was not broad, and Donaghue 
soon succeeded in getting her to the bank, 
and dragging her up it. 

Her bonnet had fallen off in her plunge 
into the water, and her hair now com- 
pletely overspread her face. Donaghue 
threw it back to give her air ; but, as he 
did so — good God ! who can speak his 
feelings, his emotions, on discovering that 
it was no common stranger he had saved, 
but his Eveleen — the beloved, the adored 
Eveleen ! With a rapture that mocks de- 
scription, he clasped, he strained her to his 
breast, and — " Oh, my God ! my God !" 
he cried, with uplifted eyes, and all the 
fervency of adoring gratitude, " am I then 
still so much the peculiar object of thy 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 253 

heavenly favour, as to have been rendered 
instrumental to the preservation of this 
precious life !" 

But was her life preserved ? He laid 
his hand fearfully on her heart — he 
fancied he felt a slight pulsation, but it 
might only be fancy ; her lips were ashy 
white, her cheek was white, and cold as 
marble, and her eyes closed, as if the rigid 
hand of death itself had pressed the lids 
upon them. He laid her gently on the 
grass, with her face inclined towards it, 
and began chafing her temples, but not 
without exerting his voice to try if there 
was any one within hearing. Neptune 
too appeared anxious to ascertain this, as 
he kept running about, apparently in great 
agony, sometimes licking one fair lifeless 
hand, then the other, with dismal howls, 
that went through the heart of his master. 

Approaching voices were at length 
heard. The moment they met the ear of 
Donaghue, he involuntarily caught up the 
lovely object of his solicitude in his arms, 
as if fearful else of being deprived of her. 



254 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

The confusion he was in prevented his re- 
cognising the voice of any one he knew ; 
what his surprise therefore was, when, is- 
suing from amidst the trees, he beheld 
lady Jane Morley, in company with lord 
Altidore, a young nobleman of consider- 
able property in this part of the country, 
may well be imagined. 

Her ladyship's was, evidently, not infe- 
rior; she uttered an absolute scream of sur- 
prise, and — " My God, O'Brien !" she ex- 
claimed, " is it you I behold ! I did not 
imagine you were in the neighbourhood. 
But how is all this ? what has happened ? 
Is Miss Erin dead ?" 

" Dead!" repeated Donaghue, with 
horror at the suggestion, and indignation 
at the tone in which the inquiry was made, 
" Heaven forbid ! But this is no time for 
questioning ; I beseech you to see if any 
one can be got to assist in conveying her 
to the house." 

" Well, but first tell me, how did all 
this come to pass ?" 

" I should conceive," said Donaghue, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 255 

glancing at the dripping garments of Miss 
Erin, " the inquiry superfluous." 

" Oh ! now I comprehend it — she fell 
into the water, and you rescued her — 
quite an adventure indeed !" 

" My God ! I hope nothing serious will 
result from it," cried lord Altidore, at- 
tempting as he spoke to take the hand of 
Miss Erin, but which Donaghue prevent- 
ed by his suddenly drawing in her arm. 

" I fervently hope not," he said ; " but 
the best way of preventing the likelihood 
of what we fear, is to procure her imme- 
diate assistance." 

" What's to be done ?" cried lady Jane. 
" But wait — how lucky ! there's sir Wil- 
liam Erin approaching through the trees, 
with some of his people. — Give Miss Erin 
into my care, O'Brien, and for Heaven's 
sake run home and change your wet 
clothes ; she needs no further aid now from 
you, and 'tis ridiculous therefore to en- 
danger your health by remaining any 
longer as you are." 

Donaghue hesitated; he was loth to 



256 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

part with his lovely burthen ; but then, as 
he had by this time assured himself that 
she still breathed, to encounter sir Wil- 
liam, after what he had probably heard of 
him — his laugh, his sneer, his contempt — 
no, the thing was impossible, and he suf- 
fered lady Jane, who, all the time he had 
been thus considering, had been trying to 
force Miss Erin from his support, to at 
length succeed in drawing her from it, and 
effected his escape, just as he distinguished 
the voice of sir WilHam. 

The moment he was gone — " Here! 
here!" cried lady Jane to lord Altidore; 
" here — quick — take this insensible beauty 
from me, and, as you hope to profit by my 
wish to serve you, contradict nothing I 
shall say or intimate ; her being found in 
your arms will naturally induce a belief of 
your having been her preserver; and as 
that romantic fellow that is just gone does 
not visit at the Vale, you may have all the 
eclat of the affair, if you do not choose to 
undeceive the parties yourself." 

Lord Altidore had only time to nod ac- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 257 

quiescence to her suggestion ere sir Wil- 
liam appeared. What his sensations were 
at the state in which he beheld his daugh- 
ter, and the danger he learned she had so 
narrowly escaped, may easier be conceived 
than described. As soon as the shock his 
feelings met with had a little subsided, he 
hurried onward, to see that every thing re- 
quisite for her restoration was got ready 
against her reaching the house; but hard- 
ly had he left her, ere Miss Erin, heaving 
a deep sigh, recovered her senses. But 
not immediately did she make any effort 
to have this known ; she had seen, she was 
certain, Donaghue — by him she believed 
it was she was rescued, and conceiving 
that the palpitating bosom on which she 
felt herself reclining was his, she felt her- 
self in no hurry to raise her head from it, 
for the sentiments he had inspired, in spite 
of what had offended in his conduct, had 
suffered no diminution through time or 
absence, and this indulgence of her secret 
tenderness for him was not to be resisted. 
But hardly had a tint of returning life re- 



258 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

visited her lips, than lady Jane, taking her 
hand — " Oh ! well," she cried, " all is safe 
now ; you won't give us the slip this time, 
my dear girl ! so come, exert yourself, that 
no further time may be lost in getting you 
to the house." 

Thus urged. Miss Erin raised her head ; 
as she did so, her eyes were involuntarily 
uplifted to the countenance of the person 
who supported her. She started as they 
encountered his, and — " Good Heavens !" 
she faintly exclaimed, and would instantly 
have disengaged herself from his arms, but 
he prevented her by a gentle pressure. 
Her looks wandered wildly round, as if in 
quest of some one, and again a faint excla- 
mation of astonishment escaped her lips. 

" What's the matter, my dear creature ?" 
demanded lady Jane, though too perfectly 
aware to have needed making the inquiry ; 
" you look alarmed !" 

" No — not — not alarmed," said Miss 
Erin ; " only — only surprised a little, for 
I thought — I imagined " 

*' Oh, well, no matter," artfully inter- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 259 

rupted lady Jane ; " some other time you 
can explain ; but really now I cannot ad- 
mit of another moment's delay. So, come, 
let me help to support you, as well as his 
lordship, and, between us both, we shall 
not be long in getting you to the house." 
Miss Erin almost unconsciously accept- 
ed her offered assistance. She was lost in 
wonder and perplexity : it seemed to her 
certain that she had seen Donaghue, and 
yet she was now led to believe herself 
mistaken in the persuasion. So positive 
was she of the fact of his being her pre- 
server, that not the slightest doubt was on 
her mind till the actual moment of her 
opening her eyes ; she had felt confident 
she had seen him on the opposite side of 
the stream, and to the surprise, the emo- 
tion, occasioned by his unexpected sight, 
for of his being in the neighbourhood she 
had not the least conception, was owing 
her life having been endangered; for, in 
the tumult of her spirits, she had started 
forward on the bridge, without recollect- 
ing the caution she had received about one 



260 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

of the planks that was loose, and which 
turning up the moment she set her foot 
on it, precipitated her into the stream. 
But she found herself in the arms of 
lord Altidore, and how therefore could she 
persist in what she had imagined? If 
Donaghue had been her preserver, would 
he have resigned her to the support of 
another — would he have vanished without 
waiting to see her restored to life ? or, at 
least, if he had been, would there not have 
been some allusion to, or mention of 
him ? Yet it was strange, most extraor- 
dinary, that her vision had so deceived 
her ; but that it had was now evident, and 
with a deep sigh at the conviction, she 
suffered herself to be led onward. 

Ere the party reached the house, they 
were met by some of the servants, with a 
couch to convey her thither ; but she was 
now too well recovered to need this, 
though her nerves still continued in a state 
of agitation, that made the medical men, 
who were in waiting to receive her, 
give orders for having her immediately 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 261 

put to bed, and kept perfectly quiet for 
some hours. 

As soon as lady Erin had a little reco- 
vered from the shock sustained by hearing 
of the narrow escape of lier darling child, 
and the general bustle and confusion oc- 
casioned bv the circumstance had a little 
subsided, sir William repaired to the par- 
lour, where lord Altidore was detained by 
lady Jane, and eagerly approaching him — 
" Pardon me, my lord," he cried, extend- 
ing his hand to him, " for not having 
sooner come to express what I owe you ; 
but, till I heard the report of her medical 
attendants about the dear sufferer, and saw 
her mother a little composed, I had not 
the power to collect myself From this 
moment I must hope and trust there's an 
end of any coolness that may hitherto 
have subsisted between us ; since it would 
grieve me indeed if I were not allowed 
personal opportunities of evincing those 
feelings with which my heart must ever 
glow towards you." 

Lord Altidore bowed and smiled, and 



262 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

protested, very truly, he had done nothing 
that merited such acknowledgments ; thus 
artfully taking care, that if the mistake 
into which sir William had been led, by 
the management of lady Jane, should be 
detected, he should not be accused of hav- 
ing said any thing to confirm it. 

But it is here necessary, ere we proceed 
farther in our story, that we should ex- 
plain a few particulars. In the first place 
then, lady Jane was again at liberty to act 
as she pleased, having quietly inurned the 
poor banker. The wealth acquired by the 
honour ;he had done him in taking his 
name, rendering any further addition of 
fortune unnecessary, she, in consequence, 
determined on now giving the full fling 
to inclination. Donaghue still maintained 
his empire over her heart, or rather, her 
passion for him had by this time become 
wild and extravagant, through the oppo- 
sition it had hitherto met, and accordingly 
decided her on letting no common obsta- 
cles impede her wishes. 

How great would have been her rap- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 263 

ture, could she have persisted in believing, 
as vanity in the first instance had induced 
her doing, that the coldness with which 
Donaghue had met her advances after her 
marriage, had been the effect alone of rigid 
principle ! but her friends, the Miss Ma- 
gennises, good-naturedly undeceived her 
in that respect, inspiring her with the most 
malignant envy andjealousy of Miss Erin. 
But though she could not have avoided 
being hurt at the affections of her lover 
having wandered from her, for she would 
persist in fancying that the affections 
of Donaghue had once been hers, she 
would not have been so alarmed at the 
circumstance as she was, but for her know- 
ledge of the characters of sir William 
and lady Erin ; she knew they were not 
common ones, that, without being either 
romantic or enthusiastic, they were above 
being actuated either by sordid or illiberal 
considerations. In a word, that from their 
dispositions, it was not improbable, that 
if Miss Erin felt any responding senti- 
ment of regard for Donaghue, and it could 



264 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

be ascertained he was not unworthy of 
her, their union would not be hindered by 
disparity of fortune. 

To prevent what she dreaded, vigilance 
was requisite ; but how was this to be ex- 
ercised, without becoming intimate in the 
house ? To become so, however, she con- 
ceived could be no very difficult matter, 
from the intimacy that long subsisted be- 
tween the Erin family and hers, owing to 
their belonging to the same neighbour- 
hood; and, in a word, on the arrival of 
the Erins in London from the Continent, 
she played her part so well, as soon to be 
considered a kind of confidential friend 
amongst them ; and on her expressing a 
wish to see Ireland again, had her father's 
ruinous and dilapidated mansion been in a 
state to accommodate her, to obtain an in- 
vitation to accompany them thither. 

V Well, all this was very well; she should 
now be on the spot to watch over the in- 
terests of her heart ; but still all her vigi- 
lance, her circumventing cunning, might 
be of no avail — Miss Erin's giving encou- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. ^65 

ragement to some other admirer was the 
only thing that could entirely calm her 
apprehensions, and this the young lady 
seemed by no means inclined to do. 

Amongst the numerous conquests she 
made was lord Altidore ; his rank, for- 
tune, and personal accomplishments, fully 
authorized him to enter the lists for her 
favour; but a coolness, founded on some 
long- existing feud between their families, 
subsisted between him and sir William, 
that forbid an attempt of the kind, more 
especially as he was conscious, from his 
then ignorance of the treasure he possess- 
ed in his daughter, of having given utter- 
ance to some very aggravating expressions 
with regard to the baronet. 

He and lady Jane were very intimate, 
and from knowing the terms on which she 
and his charmer were, he involuntarily 
made her the confident of, as he feared, 
his hopeless passion. Lady Jane no soon- 
er learned his sentiments, than she decided 
on trying what could be done to render 

VOL. II. N 



266 TRADITION OF THE CASTLK, 

him instrumental to the accomplishment 
of what she wished. If any one had a 
chance of rivalling Donaghue, she con- 
ceived it was him ; accordingly, she offered 
her services, but on the express condition, 
that he was solely to be regulated by her. 

What condition, what stipulation, was 
there to which he would not have readily 
yielded, for the sake of the promise she 
made him? he bound himself to all she 
required, and, as she directed, quickly fol- 
lowed to Ireland, after the departure of 
the family for it. His seat lay contiguous 
to the Vale, and the secret meetings be- 
tween him and lady Jane were, in conse- 
quence, frequent; but in vain they con- 
sulted on some method for bringing about 
the introduction he was so anxious for. 
Artful and confident as was lady Jane, 
still the baronet was so proud and so wary, 
that she was posed on the subject, and al- 
most despairing, when the unexpected in- 
cident connected with Donaghue furnish- 
ed her, as she conceived, with what she 
required. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. ^67 

How she made use of it, and succeeded 
in the hope it suggested, is already known. 
Introduced as the preserver of his daugh- 
ter, it was not to be imagined that sir Wil- 
liam would repel his lordship; and what 
interest might it not, viewing him in that 
light, give him in the eyes of a youthful 
and romantic being like Evcleen ? Should 
the error into which they were led be de- 
tected, still that detection could not pos- 
sibly, she conceived, be a means of depri- 
ving him of the footing he had gained in 
the family, so pleasant and conciliating 
were his manners when he chose to appear 
amiable. It should be her care, however, 
to guard against any thing of the kind. 
As yet she knew the family at the Vale 
had no suspicion whatever of Donaghue 
being in the neighbourhood. From tlie 
agitation he had evinced on learning the 
approach of sir William, it was evident to 
her it was his wish that they should still 
continue ignorant of it, and she deter- 
mined to take advantage, or rather thought 
N 2 



268 TRADITION OP^ THE CASTLE. 

it would be strange if she was not ena- 
bled, of this double circumstance, to keep 
them asunder. 

In the mean time Donaghue disconso- 
lately returned home, little aware of the 
plots, and plans, and designs, he was the 
occasion of The glow of tumultuous rap- 
ture quickly faded before the bitter thought 
of no more enjoying the society of Eveleen. 
Now he repented having so suddenly re- 
signed her to the care of another — then he 
rejoiced at having escaped the perhaps 
sneer of her father — now he regretted the 
way in which he had acted, from the con- 
sideration, that had he remained, it might 
have been the means of obliging sir Wil- 
liam to have paid him some such attention 
as might have furnished him with a fair 
pretext for novv^ and then making his ap- 
pearance at the Vale — then again, his pride 
made him exult at having done so, since 
any attention that was not voluntary he 
could not endure the idea of receiving. 
His conduct had left sir "William free to 
act as he pleased ; if, therefore, he chose 



TllADITION OF THE CASTLE. 269 

to make any overture for his acquaintance, 
it must, of course, gratify him, from know- 
ing it was his own choice. Yet, after 
what he had probably heard of him, the 

prejudice it probably had excited But 

then, when his daughter's preservation 
came to be considered, how, even by this, 
could he withhold from giving utterance, 
in some degree, to the feelings it must 
have awakened ? 

Donaghue at last thought it impossible 
but that he must do so, and giving way 
to the persuasion, sat watching the re- 
mainder of the day, in momentary expec- 
tation of receiving some intimation, at 
least of acknowledgment, from him. But 
minute after minute, and hour after 
hour, passed away, without bringing any 
thing of the kind, and the f^-verish 
restlessness of impatient expectation at 
length began to give way to the chill of 
disappointment; yet, hardly had it begun 
to pervade his feelings, ere he started at 
the terrible idea of the cause to which 
what he could not help resenting might 



270 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

be owing ; Eveleen might be in danger — 
had not, perhaps, been brought to herself, 
or was likely to be so; and, in frantic 
agony at the thought, the corporal was 
summoned, and instantly dispatched to 
the Vale, to privately learn the truth. 

The tidings he brought back, with al- 
most the speed of lightning, relieved the 
tortured heart of Donaghue from the 
dreadful apprehensions that had so sud- 
denly suggested themselves to him. Miss 
Erin was not only in no danger, but so 
well recovered as to have been able to 
leave her chamber by dinner-time ; so, to 
whatever might be owing the inattention 
he had met with, it certainly was not to 
the cause he had feared. 

Well, there was comfort in that; yet 
how could he avoid a rankling sensation 
at the idea of there being to excuse, or 
justify it? Common complaisance, the 
common usages of society, to say nothing 
of any thing else, demanded that some lit- 
tle inquiry should be made after him, 
^ome little compliment should be paid; 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 271 

but might not the omission be owing to 
the bustle, the confusion, attendant on the 
circumstance of the morning? Yes, it 
must be so — he would believe it was, and 
that the next morning would bring an 
apology, probably in person, from sir Wil- 
liam for it. 

But the next morning came, the noon 
advanced, and day departed, without 
bringing any visitor from the Vale, or any 
message from it, though the corporal en- 
countered the baronet, with lord Altidore 
and a large party, on horseback, at no 
great distance from the castle. — " Well, 
well, it may be all for the best," thought 
Donaghue, as, with a burning cheek, and 
irregular steps, he paced the library ; " why 
should I regret what may probably have 
been the means of saving me from addi- 
tional disquietude — from greater longings 
after that which is unattainable ? Had sir 
William's conduct been, perhaps, what it 
ought, might I not have been drawn 
into visiting at the Vale, and what but 
augmented wretchedness would have 



S5725 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

been the consequence ? Could I have had 
resolution to resist being in company with 
Eveleen, when I knew I had the power 
of enjoying it? Oh no, I feel I could 
not! let me not then regret or resent 
what I should rather rejoice at. Yet, to 
be treated with this pointed neglect— to 
have the memory of my mother so forgot- 
ten, as it must be ! else could not the friend 
of her youth have so slighted her son — 
ah ! that is a thought indeed tliat stings 
— and then to suppose that Eveleen, by 
her representation, has been the cause, in 
some degree, of this — but, no, no, no, I 
acquit her of any thing of the kind— kind, 
generous, benignant, she would not, she 
could not, intentionally, injure any one : 
besides, did I not— did not the angel, in 
that hour of irreparable offence to her, in- 
directly plight her word, that what then 
occurred should never transpire ? No, 
no, my Eveleen," he continued, distract^ 
edly striking his throbbing forehead, " let 
who will be cruel, or illiberal, or ungene- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 273 

reus, I will still persevere in believing you 
incapable of being so." 

But of any intentional unkindness or ne- 
glect, sir William and lady Erin were both 
as justly entitled, as the reader is doubt- 
less by this time aware, to be acquitted. 
Appearances, however, were against them, 
and by these he judged; for that they 
were allowed to remain in ignorance of his 
being the preserver of their daughter, was 
a thought that never once occurred. 

But they were not allowed to remain 
so. On the third morning after her acci- 
dent, as Kate, Miss Erin's maid, already 
known to the reader by the name of Caty, 
but which, on exchanging the service of 
Mrs. Burros for Miss Erin's, she chose to 
soften into that of Kate, was dressing her 
young lady, after breakfast, to pay some 
visits with lady Erin in the neighbour- 
hood, she kept such a muttering and grum- 
bling, that Miss Erin could not, at last, 
help asking what was the matter — " Has 
any thing happened, Kate," she asked, 
N 3 



274 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" to vex or perplex you ? you seem so dis- 
satisfied and disconcerted this morning." 

*' Och! no, ma'am," replied Kate, but 
with a flounce that contradicted the asser- 
tion ; " nothing in the world," and she 
began to tie some of her lady's ribbons, 
evidently in great agitation of spirits, 
" only that I think it a sin and a shame, 
and a burning scandal, for some people for 
to go to act by other people as they have 
done, robbing them of the thanks that are 
their due for risking their life." 

" And who has been guilty of this in- 
justice?" asked Miss Erin. 

" Oh, ma'am, perhaps it would be better 
for me not to tell ;" for Kate was not ex- 
actly sure of what the sentiments of her 
lady might be for lord Altidore. 

" And why so, if at least any injustice 
can be redressed ?" 

*' Why then, the truth is," said Kate, 
** it was not lord Altidore that saved your 
life, but " 

" Good God !" exclaimed Miss Erin, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 275 

with the wildest emotion, ** not lord Alti- 
dore ! it was then — ~" 

" Mr. O'Brien !*' cried Kate. 

" And do you really tell me this — tell 
me that it was really he who saved me ?" 
said Miss Erin, dropping, through abso- 
lute tremor, on a chair. 

"Faith and I do," replied Kate; "it 
was he himself, and no one else ; didn't I 
hear the whole truth from little Paddy 
Byrne this morning, before ever I met the 
corporal with his story !" 

" Well?" cried Miss Erin, in a tone of 
involuntary interrogation. 

" Little Paddy came this morning to 
borrow one of my new caps for his sister, 
who is going to a dance this evening," re- 
sumed Kate; " and so, while I was pin- 
ning it up in paper for him — * Ah then, 
what a fright it was myself, Kate,* says 
Paddy, who is as cute and cunning as an 
old fox, * got the other morning, when I 
saw the young mistress near drowning !' — 
* You !' says I ; ' why were you by, child; 
when she fell into the water ?' — • Troth, 



276 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

and I was,' said he, * though ne'er a 
one of them knew it, because I got so 
frightened at the big dog, I hid myself 
amongst the bushes, and saw O'Brien, of 
Altoir-na-Grenie, with his great big dog, 

jump into the river to save ' — * Tut, 

you fool !' says I, ' you mean lord Alti- 
dore.' — ' Indeed and I don't,' says he, * I 
know the differ betwixt them well enough, 
^d I'll take my davy of it, it was O'Brien 
saved her; and more nor that, he cried 
and bemoaned over her, and so did his 
big dog, till some fine lady came from the 
house, with lord Altidore, and then she 
forced Miss Erin out of his arms, and 
made him go away; and as soon as he did, 
she gave the young mistress to lord Alti- 
dore, and tould him they'd make belief to 
sir William that it was he had got her out 
of the water." 

" My heavens, what a thought !" ex- 
claimed Miss Erin, starting from her seat 
in irrepressible indignation. 

** Ay, no wonder you are vexed and 
angry, ma'am," observed Kate ; " I was in 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 277 

a fine flustration myself when I heard it ; 
and then to get so affronted as I did on 
account ! Just after Paddy left me, I re- 
collected I had something to say to Judy 
Con ray, just opposite one of the park 
gates, so, as I was crossing the road to her 
cabin, who should I come plump upon but 
corporal M*Cormick, Mr. O'Brien's own 
man, and for the matter of that indeed, his 
foster-brother too — * So is that you, Mr. 
M'Cormick ?' says I ; ' what's the news 
with you this fine morning?' — ' I have 
none for praters,' says he, gruffly, and 
walked on. — * Praters !' says I, bawling 
after him ; ' very well, Mr. Terry, the 
next time I speak to you, I believe you'll 
give a civil answer.' — ' I never wish to 
speak to you,' says he, stopping short, 
* nor any one belonging to the unnatural 
crew you live with.' — * What's that you 
say,' cried I, going up to him, and I was 
going to threaten him, when plump it 
comes into my head, that all this crossness 
was about the trick that had been {^ayed 
about his master ; so, with that, altering 



278 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

my tone, * Terry,' says I, laying hold of his 
arm, I'd lay you a tenpenny I know what's 
put you in this humour this morning.' — 
' Ah, don't be Terrying me,' says he, 
making as though he wanted to shake my 
hand off his arm ; * isn't my heart almost 
broke, through them in that great house; 
for isn't my jewel of a master in a fever 
that may be the death of him, for saving 
the life of a person that has never said so 
much as thank ye to him for his kindness!" 

" Good Heavens ! — so ill ! Of what base, 
what black ingratitude must he have ac- 
cused us!" exclaimed Miss Erin; and, 
without waiting to hear more, she flew 
from her own to her mother's dressing- 
room. 

Her ladyship's surprise and indignation 
at her communication fully equalled her 
own. Lady Jane was sent for, and in- 
formed of what they had heard. In a 
falsehood there was no danger of being 
proved, her ladyship had quite sufficient 
courage to persist; but when the truth 
must be discovered, she was always candid 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 279 

enough to acknowledge it. Accordingly, 
finding that, from what had occurred, there 
would be no use in denying it in this in- 
stance, she at once affected surprise at the 
astonishment she witnessed, protesting 
that she had all along conceived it was per- 
fectly known that Mr. O'Brien was the 
person to whom the family was so much 
indebted on a recent occasion. 

" Oh, lady Jane," a little reproachfully 
demanded lady Erin, " how could you 
think so, when you never heard us men- 
tion him?" 

" Oh, really, because I thought you 
might have some sufficient reason for your 
silence about him." 

*' What ! for ingratitude, for thus slight- 
ing and ill-treating the son of my dearest 
friend! What reason could possibly be 
adduced, that could justify such conduct?" 
said lady Erin, as in much agitation she 
walked about the room ; " and I wonder, 
lady Jane, this did not occur to you, and 
convince you that our silence must be 
owing to some mistake." 



280 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" Why, really so it might," rephed her 
ladyship, " but that I really thought sir 
William must have seen him, as it was 
not till he was close to us Mr. O'Brien 
begged me to let him resign Miss Erin to 
my care, he felt himself so chilled by his 
wet clothes." 

■* And why let him depart?" asked lady 
Erin again, in a tone of reproach. " Had 
you made him come to the house, he might 
have been saved from the illness under 
which he now labours." 

" My dear lady Erin, I really cannot 
help being a little surprised at the many 
whys arid wherefores you ask me ! Do 
you suppose that I have no nerves — no 
feeling ! that I could have been cool and 
collected at such a moment, when I saw 
this dear girl just rescued from a watery 
grave? I really was so shocked, that I 
neither knew what I did or said ; and to 
this, of course, is owing the idle story you 
have heard — one which, upon reflection, 
I am sure you must laugh at. God knows, 
I believe my faculties were never very in- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 281 

ventive ones ; but if they were, I am sure 
it is not at such an instant, and for a mere 
acquaintance like lord Altidore, I should 
have thought of exercising them. He is 
certainly a young nobleman I admire and 
esteem ; but still it is not to be supposed 
that it is for a person I am unconnected 
with, I could be induced to form any con* 
trivances, if indeed naturally inclined to 
them." 

What she said was plausible; and, in 
consequence, lady Erin began to feel vex- 
ed at having communicated to her the 
whole of what she had learned from her 
daughter; now that agitation had in some 
degree subsided, she wondered how she 
could possibly have given credence to the 
insinuation it contained against her; for 
what object could she possibly have, in 
imposing lord Altidore upon the family, 
as the person to whom they were under 
such an unreturnable obligation? There 
was but one end it could have in view, 
that of recommending him to the notice 
of her daughter; and how, unconnected 



282 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

as he was with her, could she be interest- 
ed in bringing about an union between 
them? 

Miss Erin was not at quite so great a 
loss to conjecture. In spite of her natural 
candour, she could not help feeling a slight 
suspicion of the integrity of lady Jane in 
this instance ; she had heard something of 
her attachment to Donaghue, and the re- 
sult of the intimation was an idea of the 
truth; but, for the present at least, she 
determined to confine this suspicion to her 
own breast. She knew she could not dis- 
close it to her mother, without probably 
exciting a prejudice against her ladyship; 
and so abhorrent to the native generosity 
of her soul was the thought of doing any 
one an injury, that she decided on letting 
nothing tempt her to run the risk without 
sufficient grounds. 

Anxious to lose no further time in evin- 
cing their sense of wliat they owed him, 
and the estimation in which he was held, 
on account of his mother, lady Erin sent 
for sir William, that she might get him 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 283 

to call on Donaghue immediately ; but he 
was gone out on a short ride. 

This was a lucky circumstance, lady 
Jane thought, as furnishing her with time 
to carry into effect an idea she had just 
conceived. Accordingly, hastening from 
lady Erin's dressing-roon^, she flew to her 
own, and, without a moment's delay, ad- 
dressed the following note to Donaghue. 



" To O'Donaghue OBrien, Esquire. 

" DEAR, DEAR DONAGHUE, 

" How impossible to speak what 
my disappointment has been, at finding 
no intimacy subsists between you and the 
icy beings here ! Had I earlier been aware 
of this, their invitation would, I believe, 
have been given in vain. Great, however, 
as is the pleasure I should derive from 
your society, I should be sorry to enjoy it 
at the expence of your feelings, as must 
be the case, were it in this dull mansion I 
had the happiness of it. Need I explain, 
or will not your own quick apprehension 



284 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

suggest, what I mean — that sir William 
Erin is, in short, a cold, calculating man 
of the world, too sensible of the prize he 
has in his possession not to be cautious 
and wary about those whom he allows to 
approach it, and to which caution and wa- 
riness you are to impute the shameful 
manner in which your recent conduct has 
been requited. At length, however, he 
and his formal lady have been rendered so 
sensible of the odious light in which this 
must make them appear, I won't say thro' 
whose reproaches or representations, that 
it has been agreed upon between them, 
he should pay you a visit this morning; 
would that 1 could accompany him ! but 
to propose such a thing, and I suppose 
lady Erin would become a petrifaction. 
Oh, Donaghue, how impossible — how 
very impossible, in this way, to do justice 
to the interest you have inspired ! but I 
trust you will yet let me contrive some 
other method of proving it. Adieu ! You 
must contrive to let me soon see you, in 
some way or other, for I have a thousand 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 285 

things to speak to you of. Once more 
farewell! and believe me still, as ever, 
your devoted 

" Jane. 
" Ashley Fakr 



Donaghue's neglect, in letting his clothes 
dry on him, through the agitation he was 
in, brought on a cold, attended with fe- 
verish symptoms, that the increasing dis- 
turbance of his mind did not by any means 
tend to lessen. He tried hov/ever to keep 
up, and was languidly reading in the li- 
brary, when lady Jane's billet was receiv- 
ed. The feelings and determination ex- 
cited by the perusal of it were just such as 
she had foreseen, from her knowledge of 
his proud and lofty nature. Burning with 
indignation — proudly shrinking from the 
idea of any attention that was not the re- 
sult of voluntary inclination, he directly 
rung for the corporal, and gave orders to 
be denied to the baronet, should he call. 

Hardly had he issued these orders, when 



286 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the library door was thrown open, and he 
heard some one advancing into the room ; 
it was not the step of Cormick, and, glan- 
cing to see who it was, he started with emo- 
tion from his chair, at beholding a stranger, 
whom he instantly concluded to be, nor 
was he mistaken, sir William Erin. 

So little, after the command he had gi- 
ven, was seeing him expected, that for a 
moment or two, through the confusion oc- 
casioned by surprise, he forgot the atten- 
tion due to him ; then recollectinfj himself 
a little, he was moving to place a chair 
for him, when sir William prevented him, 
by taking his hand.—" Mr. O'Brien," he 

said, " I am come to apologize But, 

good God !" starting, as he felt the burn- 
ing hand of Donaghue, " what a hand is 
this! I fear you have terribly neglected 
yourself May I ask, have you any me- 
dical advice?" 

Donaghue tried to smile, as he answer- 
ed in the negative. 

" You have been to blame then — very 
much to blame indeed," said sir William ; 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. £87 

" and But, excuse me; you shall soon 

know the reason of my leaving you thus 
abruptly;" and without further ceremony, 
he vanished from the room. 

Donaghue could be at no loss to con- 
jecture the cause of his abrupt departure; 
it was evident to him it was for the pur- 
pose of sending some medical man to him ; 
and determined to owe him no kind of 
obligation, he again rang for Cormick, 
and having severely reprimanded him for 
his inattention to his recent orders, strictly 
commanded, that on no account or pretext 
whatever, he should admit any other per- 
son to him that day. — " But, that's true," 
he added ; " who was it admitted sir Wil- 
liam?" 

The corporal looked confused — " I'll run 
and ask, your honour." 

" No; I think it was you that opened 
the library door for him." 

" But, plase your honour, it v/asn't I 
that opened the gate." 

" Well, take care that neither gate nor 



288 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

library be opened again this day to any 
stranger." 

Yet but for the prejudice excited against 
sir William by the artful representation of 
lady Jane, Donaghue would not have dis- 
dained owing him a kindness, so prepos- 
sessing were his looks and manner, so ut- 
terly different from what he expected to 
have found him. His air and figure were 
noble and commanding, his countenance 
full of expression; it was one of those 
heads that the ancient painters have so de- 
lighted to copy, as indicative of high in- 
tellectual endowments ; the forehead high, 
the temples thinly shaded, the nose roman, 
the eyes piercing, and a great sweetness 
about the mouth; and, altogether, had 
Donaghue been left to his own unbiassed 
judgment, he would have pronounced him 
a very different character from what he 
was led to imagine him ; but as it was, he 
concluded this pleasing exterior to be but 
a specious covering to a cold, worldly 
heart, and accordingly did not permit it 
to have any influence upon him ; his forced 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 289 

notice he determined to reject, and in every 
way to shun and avoid that which was not 
the effect of gratitude or poUteness, but 
reproach and shame. 

The corporal was excessively discon- 
certed by the reprimand he had received, 
not so much on account of the anger it 
imphed, as of the determination to decHne 
society. Donaghue himself could not pos- 
sibly have been more indignant than he 
was at sir William's conduct in the first 
instance; but since the baronet had, at 
length, thought proper to wheel about, 
and evince an inclination to make amends 
for it, why reject his overture, and thus 
deny himself an opportunity of, perhaps, 
obtaining the young hai^e^ as Miss Erin 
was denominated, and of whose not enter- 
taining a secret partiality for his master 
Cormick could not be persuaded. — *' But 
because he hasn't a fortune like her own 
now, his pride won't let him try his chance 
for her; though there's none, I'm sure," 
pursued Cormick, " half so worthy of her, 

VOL. IL O 



290 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

with the right Milesian blood he has in his 
veins, and that handsome face and figure he 
has of his own. Why, though our regiment 
was the handsomest at Waterloo, there was 
not a man in it, gentle or simple, to be com- 
pared to him ; and he to be going to shut 
himself up, like a hermit, here ! Musha ! 
I'm sure it would be as bad as murther to 
let him ; and so the devil a bit of me, if I 
ivas brought to a hundred court-martials 
for disobedience of orders, will be denying 
him ; but, however, not to be bringing an 
ould house about my ears, I'll manage 
nately and cleverly, just to keep out of 
the way when any body's coming. Och 
hone ! how easily matters could all be set- 
tled, if we had but hold of ould squire 
Dennis's pot of money, that we have all 
heard so much about — how I should like 
to hear the rustling of his ould silk gown 
some night on the stairs, coming to tell 
us where it was hid ! But, no fear of that, 
his ould bones are resting quiet enough in 
the churchyard, I'll be bound, without his 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 291 

ever dreaming how much we want a little 
of his money here." 

Hardly had he decided on evading his 
master's orders, when the physician and 
surgeon of sir William Erin made their 
appearance. Could he have brought him- 
self to exclude visitors, it certainly would 
not have been gentlemen of the faculty, 
for whom he had the highest reverence, 
and whose attendance he, just at this mo- 
ment, deemed absolutely essential at Al- 
toir-na-Grenie. Accordingly he conduct- 
ed them into the passage leading to the 
library, and then left them to announce 
themselves. 

This the physician took upon himself to 
do — " Be seated, be seated, Mr. O'Brien," 
he said, on the rising of Donaghue, to 
whom they were entire strangers, from 
his chair at their entrance, in no little sur- 
prise, and with no slight sensation of anger, 
at their appearance, after the peremptory 
orders he had just issued ; " invalids should 
never use ceremony to their medical 
o 2 



292 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

friends; and, between ourselves, give me 
the ready money, and let any one else 
have the other money that likes it better ; 
for, as my friend Demosthenes observes, 
* the root of education is bitter, but the 
fruit sweet ;' that is, the cost it occasions, 
and the fruit it produces. Now, thank 
the stars, the first was my parents', but the 
latter is mine. But, to introduce my self- 
know then, good sir, that I am doctor 
Foley, physician to sir William Erin, lord 
Altidore, sir Ulick Magennis, and a hun- 
dred other baronets, lords, and commoners ; 
and this gentleman here, my friend, or sa- 
tellite, for he is generally seen revolving 
round me, like a secondary round its pri- 
mary, surgeon Hogan O'SulHvan ; and 
that we have both done ourselves the ho- 
nour of calling on you, by the special di- 
rections of sir William Erin, to see and in- 
quire into the nature of the illness under 
which you labour at present, and consult 
and advise what is to be done for it." 

" Really, my good sir," said Donaghue, 
unable, notwithstanding his vexation at 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 293 

being thus intruded on, to suppress a snaile 
^t the coxcomical manner of the fellow, 
** you have given yourself a great deal of 
trouble about nothing, though, of course, 
I must be obliged to sir William for send- 
ing you; but you'll find there's nothing 
the matter with me but a cold," 

" A cold ! and what else would you de- 
sire us to find you afflicted with ? is it 
with the plague? A cold nothing! when 
a cold is the foundation of almost every 
disorder. A fig for the goodness of .your 
constitution, when that insidious innovator 
of one steals upon you, for it often comes 
in such a questionable shape, that we are 
not aware of our danger till too late. One 
friend meets another, and — ' How are 
you?' says he; * you look shockingly !' — 
* Oh, so so ! I have got a cold.' — * A cold ! 
oh ! is that all ? Take my advice, don't be 

slopping yourself with apothecary's d d 

stuff, but take some white-wine whey to- 
night, with a little nitre in it, and, my life 
on it, you will be as well as ever you were 
by to-morrow.' A few days after, some 



294 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

one meets his man, galloping along like a 
race horse — * Holloa! John, whither so 
fast ? how is your master ?' — * Oh, God 
bless yon, sir, don't stop me!' — ' What, 
going for a doctor for him ?' — * Oh ! no, 
sir; he wouldn't have a doctor when one 
might have done him good ; he got a cold, 
and doctored himself, and now I am going 
for an undertaker, because poor madam's 
mind won*t be easy till all is over.' — But 
this is losing time, and I see no time should 
be lost, for your eyes and cheeks have all 
the brightness and hectic of fever. Your 
hand, my good sir. Bless me !" seizing it 
without having it given, " what a pulse is 
here ! — Come, Mr. O Sullivan, prepare your 
lancet ; nothing else, in the first instance, 
will, I see, do here." 

Donaghue tried to resist, but it seemed 
to no purpose ; the bell was rung with au- 
thority by Foley, and on the corporal 
making his appearance, he was command- 
ed to prepare the things requisite for the 
intended operation immediately. 

While waiting his return — " You 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 295 

really should be happy in your mind, Mr, 
O'Brien," observed Foley, conceitedly, 
" when you reflect on the skill you have 
on your side. What says my friend Di- 
ogenes of an accomplished practitioner in 
his day ? and what he says, perhaps, might 
not be inapplicable to some in the present 
— * He did not come to his profession, as 
the saying is, with unwashed feet, but was 
also intimate with the poets, and had re- 
tained most of them in memory, and was 
versed in recitation, and the institutes of 
philosophy, not superficially.' But here 
comes your man — and now, my good 
friend, O'Sullivan " 

" Really this is making an invalid of 
me, whether I will or not," said Dona- 
ghue, drawing back. 

" Well, and what else are you ? I hope 
you won't pretend to say you are well, 
when a medical man tells you you are ill." 

" But I may be allowed to know what 
my illness requires." 

" By no means." 

"Nor 



296 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

"No; grant me two propositions, and 
I shall prove it." 

" Not before I know what they are." 

" Will you admit, when the body is 
diseased, the mind may be affected ?" 

" Certainly." 

" Will you admit, when the mind is af- 
fected, it cannot be clear in its judgment?" 

" Assuredly." 

" Then that's your case at present — so 
to business, my friend," slapping O'Sulli- 
van on the back. 

Donaghue still appearing as if inclined 
to object — " Ah! then what signifies," 
cried the corporal, in an impatient tone, on 
whom indeed he, from time to time, dart- 
ed an angry glance, " giving me all these 
sour looks ?" fearful, if he held out much 
longer, his obstinacy would drive away 
these medical gentlemen in disgust, with- 
out his reaping any benefit from their visit 
— " It's myself that wonders how you can 
make such a piece of work about letting 
your friends take a little of your blood, 
when you never minded how much .your 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 297 

enemies got. Often and often have I 
heard doctor Rosebud say, that let a body- 
be perverse when they may, they never 
should be perverse when they are " 

"What, is that mad Rosebud?" asked 
Foley, 

" Mad ! mad !" repeated the corporal, 
indignantly ; " if he is mad, I wouldn't 
swear that my neighbours are in their 
senses." 

" Ha ! that's very well for you indeed. 
I perceive, my friend, you possess the gift 
of pleonasm." 

Donaghue, now quite worn out, feeling 
himself really ill, and believing, notwith- 
standing the coxcombery of the fellow, he 
must possess skill, or he would not be em- 
ployed by sir William Erin, thought he 
might as well, without further hesitation, 
let his advice be followed. 

" And now, sir," said the doctor, as he 

prepared to take leave, after the operation 

was over, and he had told him how he was 

to be managed, " I leave you to rest. As 

o 2 



298 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

my friend Euripides has it — * Oh sleep ! 
thou reliever of distress, how sweet thou 
comest in time of need! — oh, venerable 
oblivion of evils, and desirable divinity to 
the unfortunate, how good thou art!" 



CHAPTER IX. 



** Cease to lament Eve's fall with tearful eyes^ 
Her fall should make succeeding daughters wise ; 
Yet view the sex, e'en now they thoughtless stray^ 
Where wild imprudence points the devious way ; 
Art's abject slaves, capricious fashion's tools, 
The dupes of gamblers, and the sport of fools. 
Let conscious virtue o'er your heart preside. 
Control each thought, and ev'ry action guide; 
Then in your breast shall Eden bloom anew, 
And long-lost Paradise revive in you." 

Rest was indeed essentially necessary for 
a person who had suffered so much through 
agitation as had Donaghue, but it was 
sought in vain; he retired early to seek 
it, but his sleep was short and broken; 
and as he lay awake, meditating, his 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 299 

eyes involuntarily wandered over the vast 
extent of prospect his chamber command- 
ed, for his bed, by his particular desire, 
had been drawn close to the window. 

The night was stillness itself — not a 
breath disturbed the lightest leaf that com- 
posed the foliage of the various trees — not 
a sound was heard, save the low heaving 
of the waves on the shore, or, at times, the 
barking of the cabin cur, as now he was 
roused from his slumber by a benighted 
traveller, now bayed the moon, which 
shone resplendent in her meridian, and 
shewed the planets, the stars, and the 
whole face of heaven, without a cloud. — 
" How tranquillizing this scene !" sighed 
Donaghue ; " but 'tis in such scenes, in- 
deed, that tranquillity can alone be found ; 
and yet these I must forego, contrary to 
my wish of remaining where I could en- 
joy them as I pleased till the arrival of 
my uncle; for, after what has occurred, 
the secret of my being in the neighbour- 
hood being disclosed, how can I remain 
here, to be exposed to the intrusions of 



300 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

impertinence, the insults of curiosity, and, 
worse than all, the supercilious attentions 
of forced complaisance! Yet, after all, 
whither can I betake me, that I shall not 
be liable to what I wish to avoid here? 
and how can I endure to rush amidst the 
noise and confusion of a populous city, 
without any interest in its pursuits or 
amusements, or to become the stare of an 
insignificant country village ! No, im- 
possible ! and, after standing the brunt for 
a little while of what is disagreeable here, 
may I not hope I shall be allowed to sink 
back into the solitude I at present covet?" 
Yet still he was terribly disquieted at 
the idea of the Erin family being actually 
in the neighbourhood. Since it was so, 
he almost wished, at times, that lady Jane 
had not opened his eyes to the real cha- 
racter of the baronet, since, if still in ig- 
norance of it, a transient pleasure might, 
at least, have been derived from their 
chance encounters. Still, however, nothing 
so deeply, so severely wounded his heart, 
as the detection of the error he had been 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 301 

under, with regard to the real disposition 
of lady Erin; yet could his mother, in 
whose representation of her the error had 
originated, have been so utterly mistaken, 
after her long and intimate knowledge of 
her, as to have described her as she did, 
without just cause! and might not what 
had tempted him to beheve her judgment 
erroneous, have originated, after all, in 
some hint, some inadvertent expression 
from Miss Erin to his prejudice? The 
thought was too painful to be endured ; 
and letting drop the side curtain which he 
had raised, he endeavoured to take refuge 
from it in sleep. 

From this oblivion of care he was sud- 
denly roused, by fancying he felt the bed 
shook under him with great violence ; he 
started up, and, listening attentively, ima- 
gined he heard a stifled breathing in the 
apartment, which was very large, and 
quite remote from every other inhabited 
one in the castle. Drawing aside the cur- 
tain, he cast his eyes about, and by the 
light of the moon, which still shone bright 



302 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

into the room, he saw, or thought he saw, 
a figure gliding along the wall, at the fur- 
ther extremity. He instantly sprang from 
the bed ; but ere he had reached the spot, 
whatever it was he had seen had disap- 
peared. Admitting as much light as he 
could into the chamber, he eagerly exa- 
mined it and the adjoining closet, but to 
no purpose, no one was found lurking in 
either, and accordingly he was induced to 
believe his imagination had deceived him ; 
yet if ever he had seen or heard a human 
being, he thought he had done so at the 
moment ; and what was more, he had not 
been dreaming at the moment he was dis- 
turbed in any way that could have mis- 
led his fancy. 

The remainder of the night was passed 
in a state of watchfulness, so that his 
health was certainly not much amended 
by the repose it had afforded him ; and, 
in consequence, Foley, on paying him a 
visit in the morning, ordered him still to 
keep himself quiet. 

In the course of the day sir William 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. SOS 

Erin paid another visit ; but Donaghue, 
in pursuance of the resolution of the pre- 
ceding one, availed himself of the pretext 
with which he had indeed furnished him, 
namely, illness, to decline seeing him. 

Great was the anxiety which his conti- 
nued indisposition excited at the Vale; 
and how soothed would have been the la- 
cerated heart of Donaghue, had he been 
aware of it ! but there was no one to im- 
part to him an intimation of what would 
have been so consolatory. Lady Jane was 
the only person with whom he had any 
kind of correspondence, and it was not her 
plan to mention any thing that could pos- 
sibly tend to bring him there; in the con- 
tinual billets therefore which she was dis- 
patching to him, to inquire after his health, 
she took care to make no representation 
that was not calculated to make him view 
the family at the Vale in an odious lightj 
and inspire him with the most rancorous 
feelings of dislike towards them. 

But though sir William by no means 
merited the character she gave him, there 



304 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

was a sufficient coolness about him to in- 
duce him to determine on thoroughly un- 
derstanding the disposition and character 
of Donaghue, ere he gave him any posi- 
tive encouragement to become intimate 
there. This determination originated not 
however in any selfish or downright world- 
ly consideration, but the natural anxiety 
of a parent for the happiness of a child, 
and that child an only one. With the ro- 
mantic wish that subsisted between the 
mother of Donaghue and lady Erin he had 
all along been acquainted, nor had the re- 
verse of fortune that the respective parties 
had experienced rendered him more averse 
to it now than he was before ; but ere he 
could be brought to evince any open ap- 
proval of it, he must be satisfied that Do- 
naghue was worthy of the treasure which 
the accomplishment of it would put him 
in possession of To ascertain this, obser- 
vation, and inquiries, and investigation, 
would be requisite; and lest the result 
should not be what he really hoped, both 
prudence and humanity demanded, he 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 305 

conceived, that he should keep the young 
people as much asunder as possible, that 
the separation to which they might be fi- 
nally doomed should not be attended 
with any unnecessary pain; he had re- 
ceived a hint, that they did not view one 
another with absolute indifference, and 
this, of course, shewed the expediency of 
the precaution he had resolved on. 

That Donaghue was a highly prepos- 
sessing and interesting young man, he was 
perfectly aware ere he himself saw him ; 
but he was equally so, that he might be 
all this without being the choice he could 
approve of for his daughter. He trembled 
indeed to think of the pernicious effect 
which the example of a thoughtless and 
dissipated father might have had upon his 
morals, and determined again and again 
to be assured they had escaped the dread- 
ed taint, ere he gave any decided encou- 
ragement to his visits at the Vale. 

Lady Erin attempted not to oppose his 
determination, though her heart yearned 
with even maternal fondness to have Do- 



306 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

naghue with them, and evince her respect 
and affection for the memory of the mo- 
ther by attention and kindness to the son. 
Yet she was too well satisfied of the sound- 
ness of sir William's judgment, and the 
consequent propriety of what he had now 
decided on, to offer any opposition to it ; 
but she hoped — she trusted, that Dona- 
ghue would stand the test of investigation; 
that thus, by being proved worthy of her 
daughter, she might have the happiness 
of thinking, that through their means the 
son of her dearest friend was restored to 
his proper rank and expectations in life ; 
and on their daughter's account, abstracted 
from any considerations about him, she 
hoped this, for with the secret of her heart 
she was acquainted ; and though she had 
not a doubt that her well-regulated mind 
would enable her to overcome any favour- 
able sentiments for him, if assured they 
were unmerited, still she was certain a 
pain must attend the struggle with them 
that she wished her to be saved from. To 
have had a concealment from her mother 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 307 

indeed was a thought that had never en- 
tered the heart of Miss Erin, conceiving, 
as she would have done, to have had one, 
that she was guilty of a breach of filial 
duty and affection, and withdrawing her- 
self from the counsel and guidance of su- 
perior wisdom; but it was stipulated, that 
what she revealed concerning Donaghue 
should go no further; and lady Erin, who 
viewed what had offended in his conduct, 
and been properly and sufficiently resent- 
ed, she conceived, in the same light her 
daughter did, as the result of what reflec- 
tion was only wanting to subdue, felt no 
temptation to forget the stipulation. 

That a young man, followed, flattered, 
and admired, as he had been, should tran- 
siently have been led to entertain over- 
weening notions of his pretensions, she 
could hardly wonder; and what we can 
excuse, it follows must be forgiven. Such 
were the beings, liberal, just, and feeling, 
whom lady Jane represented as cold, cal- 
culating, and selfish ; and their mansion, 
the abode of elegant hospitality and ge^ 



3^08 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

nuine pleasure, as the residence of d ill- 
ness and formality. 

Ashley Vale, the embellished seat of 
sir William's forefathers, was indeed a 
place well adapted for being the scene of 
elegant enjoyments, and worthy of being 
the residence of a person of taste and for- 
tune. We shall not enter into an elabo- 
rate description of the house, the dazzling 
whiteness of the stone of which it was 
built, its porticoes, pediments, or pillars, 
of the composite order, or noble ranges of 
apartments, furnished with all that was 
requisite for comfort and magnificence, 
with some of the finest specimens in paint- 
ing and sculpture of the ancient schools, 
but content ourselves with saying, it was 
a noble mansion, reflecting on all who had 
been employed in erecting or adorning it. 
Its site was a beautiful vale, fertilized by 
a fine piece of water, environed by hills, 
laid out in the most tasteful manner, and 
embellished with ornamental buildings. 
The first of these that particularly attract- 
ed the attention, was the banqueting- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 309 

house, containing a handsome, well-pro- 
portioned apartment for dining, and an- 
other for sleeping, with a sofa, within a 
screen of light covering, and both furnish- 
ed with statues and paintings. At a cor- 
ner of the lawn, in front of this building, 
was an Ionic dome temple, in ruins, from 
which the views were various and pleasing 
— some of water, surrounded with wood, 
others up to a Gothic tower, and some 
down upon a steep glen, with a mountain 
torrent rushing through it. 

Advancing up the hill to the right, you 
looked down upon a double cascade, one 
falling, to appearance, out of a cavern of 
rock, into a canal that, a little lower down, 
formed another, and was then lost to the 
view amidst the woods. Winding yet 
farther in the same direction, you mount- 
ed a little hill, with a tent on the summit, 
in a very picturesque and agreeable situa- 
tion; for you looked down upon a fine 
winding lake, the same that floated the 
valley before the mansion, nearly sur- 
rounded by a bold shore of wood. 



SIO TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

From this bill yon next visited the ro- 
mantic and extensive ruins of an old abbey. 
Returning from this, you descended to the 
valley, whence the view of the tent hill, 
with its rising woods, was exquisitely 
beautiful. From hence the walk rose 
upon the edge of the surrounding hills, 
which were covered with wood, and through 
the trees you caught many obscure views, 
that were extremely picturesque ; in one 
direction you looked down upon the lake, 
in another you caught a most beautiful 
view of the abbey, with the river mean- 
dering towards it, the whole encircled by 
an amphitheatre of hanging woods, of an- 
cient growth and varied foliage. 

Farther on, from a deep hollow of wood, 
you viewed an obelisk, rising from above 
the umbrageous shades at the opposite 
side; and hence again ascending, came to 
the Gothic tower, a tasteful building, com- 
manding various views, finely diversified. 
To the left you saw a tower, rising out of 
hanging woods; next to that a building, 
peeping over trees in a beautiful manner; 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 311 

then the ruined dome temple, besides a 
variety of other objects equally pleasing 
and picturesque. From hence you were 
led to the edge of a vast woody precipice, 
bounding the winding valley in which the 
ruins of the abbey stood, with a rapid river 
rolling through it, the views of which, 
through steeps of wood and romantic 
rocks, had a very fine effect. 

Winding from this again towards the 
house, after passing a Roman mount and 
Chinese bridge, you came to a prospect 
that formed a pleasing contrast to the 
wildness of this, that of some well- culti- 
vated grounds and gentlemen's seats, with 
a neat village, and the steeple of its rustic 
church ; and, upon the whole, Ashley Vale 
was well calculated to please the lover of 
romantic scenery, with its fine deep glens, 
its winding streams, falling in cascades, 
and the solemn grandeur of its woods ; 
and no one seeing it, or participating in 
its elegant hospitality, or varied amuse- 
ments, would have allowed the necessity 



312 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

of flying from Ireland, as a scene of sa- 
vageness and sterility. 

Fond of society, and not wishing to be 
continually forsaking home in quest of it, 
sir William had collected a large party of 
friends about him, who, when the mind 
sought to unbend itself, gave an agreeable 
variety to the passing hours. But, in al- 
lowing himself the enjoyments permitted 
by fortune, he never for a moment forgot 
that it was not granted solely for the pur- 
pose of his own personal gratification ; va- 
rious were the benevolent plans that were 
suggested, and carried into effect, for the 
relief of present misery, and the gradual 
improvement and amelioration of the con- 
dition of those about him. In many of these. 
Miss Erin was allowed to exercise her judg- 
ment; in particular, in the formation of a 
female school on the estate ; and the libe- 
ral and judicious plan on which she had 
this established, met with her father's high- 
est approval. 

In this manner he wished, or rather 
sought, to ascertain her judgment and real 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 313 

bent of mind; for, till positively put to 
the proof, by having the power of acting 
as we please, he knew it was impossible to 
form a decided opinion of them. Tlie 
moment for putting them to the test had 
arrived, and she bore it as a rational and 
accountable being should do, with no ex- 
travagant elation at the unexpected change 
in her prospects, or forgetfulness of there 
being higher aims in view than the pur- 
suit of pleasure, or adulation of a giddy 
multitude. 

Yet, while she never lost sight of the 
high responsibihty attached to our condi- 
tion here, her cheerfulness and vivacity 
were just what were natural to her period 
of life and situation; but where are either 
to be sought or expected, if not in a well- 
regulated mind, and the heart that is guilt- 
less of offence towards God and man ? 

Still, however, there were moments when 
she was more inclined to pensiveness than 
to either, strongly interested as she was 
about Donaghue, and uncertain as she 

VOL. II. p 



314 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

was of wliat her father's sentiments or in- 
tentions were respecting him ; for sir Wil- 
liam had made it an express condition with 
lady Erin, that she should enter into no 
explanation on the subject with her, lest it 
should be the means of giving rise to 
hopes that might never be realized, for he 
knew on what a slight foundation the hu- 
man mind, particularly the youthful one, 
is apt to build a fabric it likes on. 

Feeling what she did for Donaghue, it 
may naturally be supposed she repented 
her positive rejection of him ; but no, the 
offended pride and delicacy of her sex 
would not permit this ; but, having satis- 
fied these by the resentment she had evin- 
ced, she could not but wish that an oppor- 
tunity might be afforded her for proving 
that her indignation was not unappeasable, 
so thoroughly was she convinced of the 
superiority of Donaghue's mind, of his 
needing but a transient check to be awa- 
kened to a conviction of any thing that 
was reprehensible in his notions or con- 
duct, and so deep was the interest, that 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 315 

what had befallen him, and all she had 
learned of him since their parting, had ex- 
cited in her mind. But she strove, as 
usual, to keep her feelings in subjection, 
aware that inordinate anxiety about any 
thing is a kind of wresting of our fate out 
of the hands of that watchful Providence, 
that best knows what will most essentially 
conduce to our happiness and weal. In 
short, she was all her fond parents could 
wish, and the more thoroughly they un- 
derstood her various excellencies, the more 
anxious, of course, they naturally became 
to ensure her felicity. 



CHAPTER X, 



" Oh ! she is all that painting can express, 
Or youthful poets fancy when they love.'' 

But though sir William Erin did not 

mean, at present at least, to deport him- 

p 2 



316 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

self in such a way to Donaghue, as should 
induce him to think he was a privileged 
visitor at the Vale, yet he by no means 
intended to slight him, or evince a disin- 
clination to his acquaintance. Owing him 
the debt of gratitude He did, such conduct, 
exclusive of any other consideration, would 
have been out of the question. Accord- 
ingly, as soon as he understood he was on 
the mending hand, he sent to request his 
company to dinner; but the invitation 
was unhesitatingly refused, to the great 
disappointment of Miss Erin, and the equal 
joy of lady Jane, who had done all in her 
power, indeed, to prevent its acceptance, 
by informing Donaghue, the moment she 
knew it was in agitation, that it was en- 
tirely the result of a battle between sir 
WiUiam and his lady, the latter feeling 
some little shame, from the regard she had 
professed for his mother, at the idea of his 
not receiving some little attention from 
them. 

But though Donaghue refused this in- 
vitation with all the internal disdain he 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 317 

"Conceived it merited, politeness required, 
he thought, that he should return the visit 
of sir William, and leave his card for the 
ladies, after their polite inquiries after him 
during his indisposition ; and this he ac- 
cordingly did, at a time when he knew 
the family were out, with a determination, 
that as it was his first, so it should be his 
last, visit at the Vale. 

Every day he had some additional rea- 
son for regretting the arrival of the family 
there, since to that he imputed the disco- 
very of his being in the neighbourhood, a 
circumstance that exposed him to a good 
deal of what he had apprehended from it, 
several visits, as he conceived, of curiosity, 
and some invitations he found it difficult 
to decline, but which he nevertheless forced 
himself to do, hoping, by persisting in still 
refusing them, he should, at length, cease 
to be teazed with them, and allowed to re- 
main quiet in the retirement he chose. 

Amongst those who proved very trou- 
blesome was sir Ulick Magennis, partly 
through the suggestions of his lady, and 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

partly through the vapidness of his own 
mind, that occasioned him always to have 
a burthen of tediousness ready to bestow 
on any one who would let him. Her la- 
dyship had got her eldest hope provided 
for, major Mackenzie not having disap- 
pointed the expectations his gallantries had 
raised by not proposing for her; but the 
two other young ladies still remained on 
hand, and, in consequence, lady Magennis 
did not neglect any circumstance that held 
out a chance of getting them off. — " It 
would not be amiss," she observed to the 
baronet, " to just look in now and then 
upon Donaghue, since, if it could be as- 
certained that he could contrive to keep 
Altoir-na-Grenie, she did not know but 
that, as it was a thing she was positive he 
was himself solicitous for, she might be 
induced to consent to his allying himself 
with their family, even though not assured 
of general Donaghue, from his capricious 
temper, and perhaps yet meditating to 
marry himself, doing any thing more for 
him — since, though there would be no 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 319 

great fortune in the case, still, with such a 
residence as the castle, there would be 
something very imposing in appearances ;'* 
and sir Ulick, who, on all occasions, acted 
as if it was he, not she, that had vowed 
obedience at the altar, readily promised 
what she desired. 

But nothing so greatly disconcerted and 
agitated Donaghue, as the continual en- 
counters that began to take place between 
him and sir William Erin. At first he 
imputed these to accident; but when, at 
length, through various channels, he dis- 
covered that the baronet seemed to be em- 
ploying himself on nothing so much as on 
his affairs, by questioning every one close- 
ly that could give him the slightest infor- 
mation on the subject, he began to think 
he was wrong in his opinion ; and as he 
could only account for this conduct by 
ascribing it to an idle and invidious curi- 
osity, he, of course, became highly offend- 
ed and exasperated by it. 

These feelings of resentment and anger 
rendered him more peremptory than ever 



320 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

in declining all kind of acquaintance at the 
Vale; and to be better enabled to shun 
sir William, he relinquished the exercise 
he had begun to take on horseback, and 
resumed his solitary rambles on foot. He 
always set out with an intention of pro- 
ceeding in quite a contrary direction to 
the Vale, but, he knew not how it was, he 
certainly vseldom returned home without 
finding he had got into its vicinity, though 
assuredly he often entered upon it una- 
wares, from being utterly unacquainted 
with its extent and several parts of it. 

Hastily making his escape from the di- 
rect road one morning, he struck into a 
track altogether new to him, and hurried 
on till he found himself at a considerable 
distance, when he slackened his speed to 
look around him, and enjoy the scene. It 
was a delicious morning — all nature looked 
gay and cheerful — the songsters of the 
grove were in full chorus, the fleecy tribe 
Avere browsing on the verdant plains, while 
their young joyously skipped and frisked 
around them ; the generous kine lay ru- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 321 

m in a ting, in readiness for the cheerful 
milk-maid, that tripped along, dashing the 
.sparkling dew off the wild field flowers, 
whilst the merry whistle of the plough- 
boy at a distance, shewed the contentment 
of a heart free from the intruding cares of 
those pursuing more exalted walks in life. 
The sun was sufficiently elevated to have 
touched, with its magic beams, many of 
the surrounding objects o'er hill, o'er dale, 
so as to have given a greater variety to the 
landscape. 

Such scenes, at such an hour, when the 
mind is generally buoyant, and conse- 
quently well adapted to receive those de- 
lightful impressions of nature, have almost 
a resistless effect on the spirits, in tran- 
quillizing and cheering them. The mind 
of Donaghue presently felt the influence 
of the present one, and, lost in the indul- 
gence of the pleasing feelings it excited, 
he continued following the winding course 
of a green lane, till he was suddenly 
stopped in his further progress by a rustic 



322 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

gate. After a little hesitation, he ven- 
tured to raise the latch of this, and enter 
the rich shrubbery it gave admission to, 
without knowing whose grounds he was 
advancing on. 

After proceeding some way through a 
profusion of intermingled shrubs and 
plants, he found himself on a sloping lawn 
of the finest verdure, bespread with forest 
trees of the most luxuriant growth, with 
honeysuckle trailed round many of them, 
and beneath the spreading branches of se- 
veral, rustic seats, completely sheltered 
from the sun. Various walks, intersecting 
each other, led to different parts of the 
grounds, and were kept in the nicest or- 
der, bordered by shrubs, plants, and a pro- 
fusion of flowers, that scented the morning 
air with the most refreshing aromatic per- 
fume, regaling the senses in a delightful 
manner. 

On advancing more immediately to the 
point of ground from which the slope 
commenced, Donaghue found he was on 
a hill of some elevation, commanding a 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 323 

most extensive prospect. Beneath was a 
winding valley, watered by a fine clear 
stream, bounded on the opposite side by 
cliffs of rock and wood ; the rocks, in some 
places, were perpendicular, and the inter- 
mixture of wood, hanging in many places 
completely over the cliffs, had a most ro- 
mantic effect. 

Donaghue at length descending, pur- 
sued the course of the stream, as it swept 
through lawns and flowery meads, till it 
was suddenly stopped in its course by 
some rocks rudely rising in the midst of 
it, and against which it dashed, lashing 
them in all directions, as if indignant at 
the obstacles they opposed to its progress, 
and threw up a high spray, on which the 
sunbeams formed a perfect rainbow. 

While Donaghue stood involuntarily 
admiring the beautiful effect they pro- 
duced, he felt a sudden pull at the skirt of 
his coat, and turning to see what had oc- 
casioned it, beheld a little English spaniel, 
that he had two or three times before, in 
the course of his rambles, met and noticed. 



324 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

and which now, by the joy it evinced at 
its recognition of him, seemed as if wel- 
coming him to some place to which it be- 
longed. 

Having played with it for some time, 
he was resuming his observations on the 
scene before him, when it kept such a 
barking, puHing him by the coat, and run- 
ning backwards and forwards, that Dona- 
ghue began to find this impossible, and to 
think at last that it had some other object 
in view than mere play. He had heard 
and read of sucli extraordinary instances 
of the sagacity of dogs, that it now occur- 
red to him this animal had some particular 
reason for wishing to allure him onward, 
as all along it had seemed anxious to do, 
and giving way to the surmise, he pre- 
pared to follow it, to its unbounded joy. 

Leaping, and skipping, and barking be- 
fore him, it led him on, through a succes- 
sion of winding walks, till, at length, it 
reached a little rustic gate, through the 
l>ars of which it crept, and then jumping 
up at the opposite side against the latch, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 325 

Seemed inviting him by this to enter. 
Donaghue's curiosity being now raised to 
the utmost, he could not refuse. Opening 
the gate, he found himself in a perfect pa- 
radise of sweets; a beautiful shrubbery, 
with a verdant mount in the centre, on 
which a grotto was constructed, formed of 
costly shells, wrought into fanciful de- 
vices, with doors of Gothic architecture, 
glazed with brilliant stained glass, and a 
roof of India bamboo, rising in the form 
of a cone. A clear stream ran purling 
over a bed of golden sand and shining 
pebbles round the mount, a Chinese bridge 
was throwrf over it, in front of the grotto, 
and the whole of the mount was laid out 
in sweeping walks, bordered with the 
finest and most fragrant flowers, inter- 
spersed with evergreens, amongst which 
the red berries of the arbutus, and the shin- 
ing leaves of the myrtle, were conspicuous. 
A peculiar serenity seemed to pervade 
the place ; no sounds were heard here but 
such as, Douglas says, were of a " stilly 
nature" — the murmuring of the rivulet 



326 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

over its pebbly bed, the soft sighing of the 
breeze, as through the foliage of the shrubs 
it wafted around the perfume of the flow- 
ers, and the sweet notes of the linnet and 
the goldfinch, as they hopped from spray 
to spray, apparently in conscious security ; 
and, altogether, Donaghue was convinced, 
from what he saw, that it was the elegant 
retreat of some accomplished mind. But 
who was the fair divinity of the place? 
for every thing here was indicative of the 
delicacy of female taste : he knew not in 
whose grounds he had intruded, and, of 
course, was at a loss to conjecture. 

Crossing the bridge, he approached the 
building, the door of which he had pre- 
viously observed lying invitingly open, 
and glancing in, without perceiving any 
one there, entered, to gratify his curio- 
sity by a view of the interior. He found 
it furnished with books, drawings, musical 
instruments, and costly China vases for 
flowers, with glasses to reflect the adjacent 
scenery, so that the landscapes of nature 
might be here said to be intermixed with 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 327 

those of art, several beautiful ones, evi- 
dently of the Italian school, ornamenting 
the walls, indicative of the exquisite taste 
of the person who had selected them. 

A book was lying open on a small ta- 
ble, with a ribbon, to mark where it had 
been laid aside. Donaghue casting his 
eyes on it, found it was " Thomson's Sea- 
sons," and the lines on which the ribbon 
rested the following : — 

" But happy they, the happiest of their kind, 

Whom gentler stare unite, and in one fate 

Their hearts, their fortunes, and their beings blend. 

'Tis not the coarser tie of human laws, 

Unnatural oft, and foreign to the mind, 

That binds their peace, but harmony itself 

Attuning all their passions into love; 

Where friendship full exerts her softest povv'r. 

Perfect esteem, enlivened by desire 

Ineffable, and sympathy of soul ; 

Thought meeting thought, and will preventing will. 

With boundless confidence ; for nought but love 

Can answer love, and render bliss secure." 

Donaghue had hardly glanced over 
these lines, when the little dog that he 
had lost, soon after his passing the gate, 
dashed in, and began again skipping and 



328 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

jumping about him; in the midst of its 
extravagant joy at again finding him, as it 
seemed, a panel rolled back, and, to the 
utter surprise of Donaghue, Miss Erin 
stepped forward, and stood before him. 

It would be difficult, however, to say 
which was greatest, her surprise or his, or 
rather agitation at the moment, for she 
had no idea that he haunted the Vale, and 
he actually knew not that it was there he 
was; Miss Erin, however, was the first 
who recovered from her emotion, for his 
recent conduct had piqued her, and of- 
fended pride quickly enables us to collect 
ourselves; but poor Donaghue had no 
feeling of the kind, to render the assump- 
tion of indifference easy at the moment, 
and overwhelmed by the obtruding recol- 
lection of what had occurred in their last 
interview — a recollection that had made 
him ever since absolutely dread the idea 
of being ever again alone a moment with 
herj from the awkwardness he was con- 
vinced the circumstance would make him 
feel— had hardly power to stammer out an 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 329 

apology for what he now considered his 
intrusion. 

Miss Erin received this in a manner 
very unlike her usual gracious one; but 
she was hurt at his persistance in decli- 
ning to make any acquaintance at the Vale, 
and she could not now forbear shewing it ; 
it is true, if his doing so argued a now^ ut- 
ter carelessness about her, so it did also, 
notwithstanding the very contrary belief 
her ladyship had tried to create ; but still 
this could not prevent her being vexed at 
it, nor letting her manner now evince this. 

Donaghue, however, imputing to a very 
different cause thekind of supercilious smile 
with which she hearkened to his apology, 
with heightened confusion took a hasty 
leave, and was crossing the bridge, when 
Miss Erin, suddenly recollecting herself, 
and ashamed of the petulance she had be- 
trayed — the ingratitude her manner had 
evinced towards a person who had risked 
his life to preserve hers, and suffered so 
much on her account, who besides might 
have motives for acting as he did, and 



330 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

which she now indeed began, from his ex- 
treme agitation, to suspect to be the case, 
that, if known, could not fail to heighten 
the interest he had already excited, hastily 
called him back. 

He turned with quickness; but at the 
entrance of the grotto stopped, as if there 
to await her pleasure. Her pleasure ! ne- 
ver had she felt so confused ; her presence 
of mind utterly forsook her — she could re- 
collect no excuse for what she had done, 
and, in utter dismay at the construction 
that might be put on her conduct, her 
evident confusion, her sight grew dizzy, 
and she would have fallen, had not Do- 
naghue, as he saw her making a catch at 
a chair, rushed forward to catch her in his 
arms ; and — " Good God !" he exclaimed, 
in extreme emotion. He cast his eyes 
around, but there were none to aid him 
in her recovery ; again they were turned 
on her, and involuntarily, perhaps uncon- 
sciously, he strained her to his throbbing 
heart, as they rested on her bewitching 
countenance, where still a smile lingered 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 331 

round her beauteous mouth, as if loth to 
forsake what was the abode of smiles and 
graces. 

At length she began to shew symptoms 
of reviving, and was rising from his arms 
when lady Jane Morley rushed into the 
building. The party at the Vale break- 
fasted this morning in the grounds ; while 
it was preparing, Miss Erin repaired to 
the grotto, her favourite retreat ; and lady 
Jane was sauntering about, watching for 
lord Altidore, who was expected, and with 
whom she wanted a little private conver- 
sation, when she caught a glimpse of Do- 
naghue, following in the direction Miss 
Erin had taken ; and it instantly striking 
her that an appointment might have been 
made between them, she determined on 
ascertaining by ocular demonstration. — 
" What! another drowning affair!" she 
exclaimed, as she rushed in, more vexed 
than surprised at what she beheld. 

'' Oh, no ! nothing so bad as that," said 
Miss Erin, with a faint smile, and deep 
suffusion on her cheek, as she disengaged 



332 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

herself from the gentle hold of Donaghue, 
and seated herself on a sofa ; " only — only 
a slight indisposition." 

" Which this gentleman was luckily at 
hand to assist you in recovering from !" 
observed lady Jane, sarcastically. ** Well, 
how lucky some people are, by being al- 
ways in the way to render a service when 
one is wanting from them !" 

" Whoever has the happiness of obtain- 
ing an opportunity of being serviceable to 
Miss Erin, must certainly consider him- 
self fortunate," said Donaghue, with some 
severity, perfectly comprehending what 
her sneer implied, and highly exasperated 
at the confusion he saw it occasioned Miss 
Erin. She was indeed extremely discom- 
posed at what had occurred, from the con- 
struction she saw lady Jane seemed in- 
clined to put on it; for should she choose 
to persevere in believing the meeting not 
accidental, and, in consequence, rally her 
elsewhere about it, even though her father 
should acquit her of any thing clandestine, 
as indeed, from the confidence he reposed 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. SSS 

in her, she was convinced he would, yet 
he might not so readily be induced to be- 
lieve that Donaghue was not aware of 
what w^as likely to happen, and be led ac- 
cordingly to suspect him of some unwor- 
thy motive for refusing to visit openly at 
the Vale, while he privately frequented it. 
That he was capable of being actuated by 
one of the kind, she herself had not the 
slightest idea ; but her father knew him 
not so thoroughly as she did, and there- 
fore might not so readily admit the same 
belief. 

" Oh ! no doubt," cried lady Jane, af- 
fecting a laugh, in reply to Donaghue's 
irritative observation — an observation that 
roused all that was jealous — that was ma- 
licious in her nature ; " and chance seems 
lately very much inclined to befriend you, 
I think." 

" If I have had the good fortune of be- 
ing any way serviceable to Miss Erin now, 
I certainly am indebted to chance for it; 
for in approaching this, I neither knew 



334 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

on whose grounds I was, nor whither I 
was coming." 

** Indeed ! How lucky that your in- 
stinct made you take the right direction !" 

" If I did take it," said Donaghue, try- 
ing to speak with carelessness, but every 
moment becoming more agitated, " it was 
not owing to my own instinct, but to that 
of this little creature," stooping as he spoke 
to caress the dog, that had renewed its 
friskings about him, and he related the 
incident about it. 

Lady Jane, after having hearkened to 
him attentively, affected a most immode- 
rate fit of laughter on his concluding — 
" Well, really, O'Brien," she said, " I give 
you credit for this story ; and this darling 
little animal," patting the dog, " much as 
I have heard of the sagacity of animals of 
the kind, the sagacity of this exceeds them 
all, for it seems to have implied a know- 
ledge of what would be agreeable." 

" Really, lady Jane," said Miss Erin, 
colouring violently, and rising from the 
sofa, on which she had been obliged, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 335 

through agitation, to repose her trembling 
frame for a few minutes, " you appear in 
a strange humour this morning." 

" Oh ! as to that, my dear, that is no- 
thing new, as my friend here, Donaghue, 
who knows me longer than you do, will 
tell you — won't you, Donaghue?' laying 
her hand on his arm, and looking up sig- 
nificantly in his face. 

Donaghue was so provoked with her at 
the moment, that he could with pleasure 
have shook her hand from his arm; but 
constraining his feelings — " It would be 
unpolite to contradict a lady," he replied, 
with a sarcastic smile. 

Lady Jane affected to push him away. 
— " You abominable creature !" she cried ; 
but suddenly turning to Miss Erin — 
" Pray, my dear, are we to have any 
breakfast this morning? If we delay 
much longer, we shall have the whole par- 
ty seeking about for us, under the appre- 
hension of our being spirited away." 

Miss Erin hesitated ; she knew not how 
to depart without asking Donaghue to ac- 



336 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

company them, and yet, wishing, as she 
did, to have nothing mentioned of the in- 
cident of the morning, she felt a reluctance 
at the thought. 

Perceiving her hesitate — " Oh ! very 
well," said lady Jane, " I see you are un- 
willing to leave this delightful abode, so I 
shall leave you and this gentleman to the 
enjoyment of a further tete-a-tete, which 
no doubt the sentimental turn of each 
will render extremely delectable !" and as 
she spoke, she made as though she would 
have quitted the place. 

" Good Heavens, lady Jane !" exclaimed 
Miss Erin, in a tone of alarm, and catch- 
ing her by the arm, *' how can you be so — 
so very strange !" and then turning to Do- 
naghue, was about forcing herself to give 
the invitation which she thought she could 
not avoid, when Donaghue, clearly per- 
ceiving by her looks and manner what 
was passing in her mind, saved her from 
all further embarrassment on his account, 
by suddenly looking at his watch, and 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 337 

pretending, from the lateness of the hour, 
that he must hurry away. 

The moment he was out of sight — 
" Really, lady Jane," said Miss Erin, " I 
wish you had not spoken as you did ; for 
your insinuations, I am afraid, may be the 
means of preventing Mr. O'Brien from in- 
dultrine: himself with occasional rambles 
here." 

" Afraid ! oh, are you, my dear ?" said 
lady Jane, emphatically. " Oh, then it is 
your wish to meet him here! Well, real- 
ly I don't wonder at it, for he certainly is 
handsome and agreeable, and a pleasant 
companion enough, he is so sentimental, 
as I have already observed, to pass away 
an hour or so in a grotto, or some such 
romantic retreat, conversing on subjects 
of taste or science, as, for instance, the 
loves of the plants, or " 

" Nay, lady Jane, I must beg there 
may be a truce to raillery at present, for 
I am serious in saying, I would not, on 
any account, it should be intimated or in- 

VOL. II. Q 



S3S TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

sinuated that Mr. O'Brien had any parti- 
cular object in view in coming here, or 
rather, that his doing so was not the ef- 
fect of chance or accident, lest an errone- 
ous construction should be put on the cir- 
cumstance, by people that do not know 
him so well as you and I do." 

" Well, my dear, and how do you know 
that my knowing him as I do would be a 
means of preventing what you fear? But 
this is the error of all romantic minds, to 
suppose that whoever they admire must 
have no feelings in common with others. 
Why, to suppose what you seem to want 
me about Donaghue, and I should sup- 
pose that he walked about like the man 
in the moon, with his head under his arm, 
without knowing whither he was going; 
but, no, no, my dear, he is not quite so 
great a simpleton as that, I promise you. 
— But don't look so confused, child ; I am 
not going to insinuate that he came here 
on your account; you don't forget, I hope, 
that though superlatively lovely, and all 
that, you are not the only charming crea- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 3S9 

ture at present at the Vale, or that Mr. 
O'Donaghue O'Brien was once one of my 
most devoted ; and that I have reason to 
believe, if I could forgive the outrage- 
ous manner in which he resented my 
marriage, I should again have him at my 

feet ; and so " 

Miss Erin almost started, and felt for a 
moment a sickening sensation, but it was 
only for a moment ; in the looks, the man- 
ner, the agitation, the silent language of 
Donaghue's eyes, every glance she caught 
from him, she read a refutation of what 
lady Jane would have insinuated, and 
could not help a transient sensation of con- 
tempt for the belief she would have im- 
posed on her. As soon as she had got the 
better of the slight emotion she had occa- 
sioned her, she returned to the point from 
which they had diverged, that of intima- 
ting a wish, that nothing might be said 
of Donaghue's having been met by them 
that morning; but lady Jane laughingly 
evaded any direct promise to that effect, 
Q 2 



340 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

being secretly determined on taking the 
first convenient opportunity for making 
it known to sir William, under the hope 
and belief of that very construction being 
put on the circumstance, from the man- 
ner at least in which she meant to men- 
tion it, that his daughter was apprehen- 
sive of; for notwithstanding all his libera- 
lity of sentiment, yet, as a w^orldly man, 
or rather a man of the w^orld, she did not 
think it would be difficult to awaken sas- 
picion in his mind, or induce a belief, that 
however Mr. Donaghue might decline vi- 
siting at the Vale, from the notice his at- 
tentions to the heiress must there attract, 
he had no objection to meeting her where 
they would escape observation : to induce 
this belief, to empoison his mind against 
Donaghue, by creating doubts of his open- 
ness and honour, and there was an end to 
all apprehension of his ever sanctioning 
his addresses to his daughter, without 
which she was convinced, whatever might 
be Miss Erin's attachment to him, she 
would never become his. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 341 

^ In entertaining this opinion, she was 
indeed right; but whatever might be 
her father's views for her, with regard 
to her final establishment in life. Miss 
Erin felt persuaded that it would not be 
want of esteem for Donaghne that would 
prevent his approving of him for her, if 
once he really became acquainted with 
him ; that is, if he obtained opportunities 
<5f really understanding and knowing what 
his sentiments, his understanding, and at- 
tainments were, the turn of his mind, and 
his favourite pursuits, and this persuasion 
made her indeed regTet Donaghue's so ob- 
stinately declining' every overture that had 
hitherto been made for any kind of inti- 
macy at the Vale; but though she could 
not avoid still regretting it, she no longer 
felt piqued or hurt by it, as had been the 
case in the first instance, since, from what 
had occurred in the recent interview, she 
could no longer ascribe the circumstance, 
as she had previously been tempted to do, 
to sullen pride, but to the melancholy na- 
turally attendant on what he had to de- 



342 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

plore, or to the embarrassing recollections 
being in her company could not fail, per- 
haps, of occasioning, or to both, perhaps, 
united; and under this idea she almost re- 
solved, should she accidentally encounter 
him again, to take advantage of the cir- 
cumstance to remonstrate with him on 
the subject of keeping himself so great a 
stranger at the Vale. 

But whatever was the effect of the re- 
cent interview on Donaghue, his mind 
was, for the present, diverted from dwell- 
ing on it, by the agreeable surprise he ex- 
perienced on his return home, at finding 
his friend, doctor Rosebud, just arrived 
there, and impatiently looking out for him 
to breakfast. 

We have passed over the numerous let- 
ters which the doctor wrote on the subject 
of his long detention from him ; the last 
threatened, that if he did not speedily get 
rid of his visitors, who, from their pro- 
tracted stay, seemed, in his opinion, to 
have come for the purpose of rendering 
themselves fixtures with him, he would. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 348 

in some way or other, destroy the old 
walls of St. Cathala, rather than be longer 
plagued with them. Malice indeed could 
not have contrived a severer punishment 
for him, than that of forcing him to be- 
come stationary for any particular time. 
He now had all the appearance of a great 
boy, just let loose from school, who thought 
he could never sufficiently enjoy his libe- 
ration from restraint; he inundated Dona- 
ghue with questions, raced over the castle, 
made himself perfectly acquainted, in less 
than three minutes, with the whole es- 
tablishment there, which, to be sure, was 
not a very difficult matter, being but 
small at present ; and while he shook hands 
with the master, winking at the man, said 
it should go hard if they had not another 
merry summer at least; but his mirth re- 
ceived a damp, when he found how en- 
tirely Donaghue had withdrawn from all 
intimacy in the neighbourhood, company 
and amusement being absolutely essential 
to him. With all his regard for Donaghue, 
he could not control his indignation at 



344 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the circumstance; and indeed it was his 
very regard for him that made him per- 
haps so angry at it, for what an injury 
might it not have been to him? since, 
with his personal advantages, he could not 
avoid believing that his continuing to keep 
up his usual intercourse with the world 
was all that could be wanting to restore 
him to fortune; and how provoking, there- 
fore, to think, that here, where there were 
blooming heiresses and rich dashing wi- 
dows, he should take it into his head to 
turn hermit! 

Donaghue tried to sooth him into good 
humour, by intimating his conviction, that 
his arrival would be no sooner known, 
than he w^ould receive the usual compli- 
ments from the gentlemen belonging to 
it, and have, in consequence, an opportu- 
nity of mixing in company as much as he 
pleased. 

The doctor, however, was not quite so 
sure of this as he seemed to be ; and being 
all impatience, from what he heard of the 
Vale, to become acquainted there, he 



l?RADlTION OF THE CASTLE, 345 

availed himself of his knowledge of one 
of the guests then there, sir Edward Sur- 
rey, a young baronet of some fortune, and 
colonel of a militia regiment, to call, ere 
he was well a day at Altoir-na-Grenie, in 
hopes, by so doing, to be introduced, with- 
out .any delay, to sir William. He was 
not disappointed in these; and sir Wil- 
liam was so amused with his manner, and 
so convinced besides, from his intimacy 
with Donaghue, that he could, if he 
pleased, give him that insight into his 
character and disposition that he wished 
for, that he gave him a general invitation 
to the Vale, which the doctor soon gave 
him reason to know he took as was meant, 
as one that was really given with a wish 
to be accepted. But nothing could in- 
duce Donaghue to accompany him there; 
and at length, finding arguments and en- 
treaties useless, the doctor gave up the 
point, exciTsing himself for leaving him as 
he did to go there, by the belief, that 
leaving him to uninterrupted solitude 
q3 



346 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

would be the best method that could be 
taken to cure him of his passion for it. 

The doctor was so pleasant and so ec- 
centric, that he soon became the very life 
and soul of the parties at the Vale, being 
the first to promote mirth, and the last to 
end it. He had hardly established him- 
self there an intimate, indeed almost an 
inmate, when preparations began to be 
made for an entertainment on an extensive 
scale, in honour of the birthday of Miss 
Erin. 

The wisest of men has said, " there is 
nothing new under the sun ;" and such 
indeed always appears to be the case, to a 
person satiated with the enjoyments of the 
world. This was a complaint, however, 
that few of those assembled on the even- 
ing of this day, before the hospitable man- 
sion of sir William, had to make, and their 
delight was in proportion at the entertain- 
ment provided for them. 

The house was crowded with all the 
fashion of the neighbourhood, and the 
grounds were thrown open for the tenan- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 34? 

try, and all such as, in their rank, chose to 
partake with them of the festivities of the 
evening. Two vessels, that, to give life 
to the scene, were generally moored op- 
posite the windows, were, on this occa- 
sion, hung with coloured lamps, and, with 
music, kept moving up and down the 
lake; the banqueting-house, the Ionic 
temple in front of this building, the Go- 
thic tower on a fine rising ground, the 
Chinese temple, looking down, from the 
summit of an isolated rock upon the 
valley, the seat that looked down upon 
the double cascade, the obelisk appear- 
ing above the umbrageous shades at the 
other side, and the extensive ruins of 
the abbey, were all studded and defined 
by various coloured lamps, producing a 
truly magical effect, such as absolutely 
spell-bound the lower classes, filling them 
with astonishment, as the work of abso- 
lute enchantinent. 

On the most convenient and agreeable 
spots before the house, Turkish tents, and 
large marquees, were pitched, each bril- 



S48 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

liantly illuminated by numerous lights, 
suspended from the centre of each, so that 
the lads and lasses were seen to great ad- 
vantage, engaged in the merry dance, 
while their parents and friends, advanced 
in life, enjoyed the comforts of well-sup- 
plied tables, and amused themselves with 
tales of other times, when his honour's fa- 
ther and grandfather, with similar good 
cheer and Irish hospitality, entertained 
their friends and dependents, or in ex- 
pressing their wonder and astonishment at 
what they saw. 

- When the regular dancing ceased for 
awhile, the drones of their favourite in- 
strument were heard, setting off old and 
young to foot it on the sod, to the lively 
air of Patrick's Day in the Morning, oi' 
still more, perhaps, gratifying them by the 
soft expressive airs of Ellen a Roon, or 
Molly Astore. 

There was also a fair, which Miss Erin 
and her fair companions found great 
amusement from. The former, having 
made herself mistress of many little inno- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 349 

cent anecdotes of the young married peo- 
ple, and those who were about changing 
their state, was enabled to furnish hints, 
for she and her companions were the ven- 
ders, that rendered applications to them 
for their wares diverting, and long after 
furnished amusement to these unsophisti- 
cated children of nature. One received a 
rattle, to assist him to drown his good 
woman's tongue; another a string, to 
fasten the leg of a rambling spouse to the 
table ; and another a smooth ball, that still 
rolled away whenever he attempted to 
grasp it, to teach him patience, and so on. 
French horns, and other wind instru- 
ments, were heard at intervals, from the 
temples and other buildings, now exhila- 
rating the spirits with lively tunes and 
marches, then again thrilling the soul with 
the softest airs of melancholy ; now, as 
they gaily swelled upon the ear, intermin- 
gled with the tinkling sound of the cym- 
bal, and the deep reverberation of the 
drum, one might have fancied they heard 
bacchanalian groupes advancing ; then, as 



850 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

they seemed to die away, and sink within 
the woods, that melancholy herself was re- 
treating there for shelter. 

If this scene be filled up, with nearly 
five hundred persons, old and young, gen- 
tle and vsimple, all busily engaged amusing 
themselves in the way most agreeable to 
their respective tastes and inclinations — 
some walking, others dancing — some sit- 
ting, others standing in groupes — children 
playing hide and go seek among the tents, 
and numerous waiters running backwards 
and forwards, the reader may form a lively 
idea of the bustle and hilarity of it. 

The toys being all disposed of, and the 
fair over, the next step was, for the queen 
of the evening to present herself to the 
particular notice of her humble visitors, so 
that she might give them all an opportu- 
nity of gratifying their curiosity about 
her, and honour the son of some one of 
the tenants with her hand for one dance, 
an ancient custom on such occasions as 
the present, which she knew, if not &till 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 351 

adhered to, would cause great disappoint- 
ment. 

Lady Jane quite ridiculed the idea of 
it; but ridicule could not turn Miss Erin 
from any thing she conceived right ; and 
where, by a trifling condescension, so much 
pleasure could be afforded, she conceived 
she should be very much to blame if she 
could be laughed out of it. Accordingly, 
with a long train of ladies, she entered the 
largest of the marquees, and, with her 
companions, seated herself there. The 
men, immediately understanding what 
this was for, retired to a distance, to con- 
sult which was tlie properest person a- 
mongst them to claim the intended ho- 
nour. This, however, was not a very easy 
matter to decide, as the honour of dancing 
with the young hare was too great not for 
them all to be anxious in the extreme for 
it ; but as all could not have it, it was at 
length agreed that lots should be drawn 
for it ; this was done by putting strips of 
paper in a hat, and he who drew the 
longest was to be the fortunate person. 



S521 TKADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

The lot fell upon a handsome young man, 
about twenty ; and that it had done so 
seemed to afford general satisfaction, Pat 
Dunnacarney being esteemed the best jig 
dancer in the barony, so that no doubt was 
entertained of the young hare being satis- 
fied with her partner. 

Mr. Dunnacarney approached Miss 
Erin with great modesty, and with cheeks 
suffused with a deeper shade of crimson 
than had perhaps ever before tinted them, 
with a rustic bow begged the honour of 
her hand for the dance. This was readily 
granted, and a merry jig being called for, 
to the unutterable delight of the lookers 
on, at least those who were of Pat's party, 
they commenced one. 

Nothing could exceed the applause 
which Miss Erin received — it was herself 
that knew how to do the thing genteelly ; 
but she wouldn't be an Erin if she hadn't 
nate limbs, and didn't make good use of 
them. 

It was expected that the rest of the la- 
dies would follow the example of Miss 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. S5S 

Erin. No sooner had she resumed her 
seat, therefore, than Black Hugh, the de- 
scendant of the king of Leinster, and 
Rosebud's steward, as may be recollected, 
and who, through urgent business, that 
could not be settled without seeing him, 
had been compelled to follow his master 
to Altoir-na-Grenie, and, with some of the 
people belonging to that, had come to the 
Vale, with a meekness of look and man- 
ner not very usual with him, approached 
lady Jane, to solicit the same honour from 
her that Miss Erin had conferred on Mr. 
Dunnacarney, that of dancing a jig with 
him. 

" A jig ! and with such a savage !" and 
lady Jane, who was excessively discon- 
certed at being dragged into the marquee, 
amongst such a set of wretches, as she 
called them, distended her eyes as wide 
as she possibly could, with a stare of asto- 
nishment. 

" Don't you understand him ?" asked 
Miss Erin, stepping up to her. 

" Understand him !" replied lady Jane, 



354 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

with a look of extreme disgust — " the sa- 
vage ! But really it is abominable to en- 
courage such freedoms, by coming amongst 
such creatures ! in clannish times it was 
all very well, when it was necessary to 
conciliate one's retainers for one's safety ; 
but now " 

" That there's no occasion for them, on 
that account they may go to the devil l" 
said Rosebud, to whom the scene in the 
marquee was too amusing not to have made 
him eagerly follow to it; " but, if you 
don't get up and stir your marrow-bones, 
do you know what they'll think of you ? 
either that you don't know how to dance, 
or that you are, as we vulgarly say in Ire- 
land, beef to the heels, like a MuUingar 
heifer, and so are afraid or ashamed to 
shew them." 

" I neither know nor care what they 
think," returned lady Jane, petulantly; 
" I shan't do what I dislike to humour the 
absurd whims of any one here, I assure 
you." 

** Oh ! if that be your determination," 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 355 

said Rosebud, " I must try what I can do 
for my illastrious friend here;" so turning 
to Aod Dubh — " I beg your majesty may 
permit me." he cried, " as master of the 
ceremonies here, to introduce you to a 
partner; for, between ourselves and the 
post, the lady you have just asked," and 
here affecting to have lowered his voice, 
by inclining his head towards the ear of 
the king, " is not exactly made for dan- 
cing ; but here," presenting him to Miss 
Bond, " your majesty will have a partner 
that, I'll answer for it, you'll not find one 
of the Muilingar heifers." 

Miss Bond, now on a visit at the Vale, 
had, since her first introduction to the 
reader, been with her brother Bob, not 
only to London, but Paris; till her visit 
to the latter, the former had been her con- 
stant theme ; but no sooner was this paid, 
than, superceding the former completely 
in her opinion, nothing else was talked of, 
conceiving nothing more than the an- 
nouncement of her having been there 
wanting to make her be thought every 



356 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

thing she could desire with regard to 
fashion and consequence. — " Oh dear ! oh 
dear!" she exclaimed, drawing back on 
this introduction to her, " when I was at 
Paris " 

" No king solicited your hand for the 
dance," interrupted Rosebud. 

" King ! king ! what king ? when I was 
at Paris, 1 thought I saw all the kings." 

" Did you see the one now before you ?" 

" No ; but then he might have been 
there for all that — what's his name?" 

" Aod Hugh Dubh Black, king of 
Leinster." 

" No, I don't recollect such a name a- 
mongst them— one would suppose he was 
a Russian, by the length of it." 
: " No, he's of foreign descent, but not 
quite so far North as that ; — but come, he 
waits your pleasure." 

Miss Bond, with great agility, now al- 
lowed herself to be handed forth, and, in- 
spired by what she had heard, went 
through the jig in a manner that gained 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 357 

her the universal approbation of the com- 
pany. 

cfrOn being handed back to her seat by 
her partner, she endeavoured to make room 
for him beside herself To be able to do 
this, she was compelled to encroach a little 
upon lady Jane, who occupied the same 
form. Her ladyship finding this, and not 
being by any means in one of the best 
tempers imaginable that evening, being 
extremely vexed that Donaghue, whom 
she thought, in such a party, she could 
have very well contrived to have kept 
from any particular communication with 
Miss Erin, had refused her pressing en- 
treaties to make one of it, turned sharply 
about, and demanded what she meant by 
pressing on her in such a manner ? 

" Nothing in the world," said Miss 
Bond, in a low tone, " only just, if not 
disagreeable to your ladyship, to get a seat 
for his majesty beside us." 

" What, for that savage !" exclaimed 
lady Jane; "why, do you suppose I am 
out of my senses, to allow such a fellow to 



358 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

occupy a seat with me?" and, as she 
spoke, she gave so violent a push to reco- 
ver the room she had lost, that, had it not 
been for his majesty of Leinster, poor lit- 
tle Miss Bond, who, as she greatly resem- 
bled a butterfly in fluttering, so she also 
did in lightness, would certainly have 
been precipitated to the ground. 

As soon as she had recovered herself — 
" Well, 1 declare," she cried, with a toss 
of her head, '* this is such conduct as I 
never before met with ! when I was in 
Paris, I never experienced any other treat- 
ment than " 

" I am sure," interrupted lady Jane, 
with a sneer, " your travels have been of 
very little service to you, when an Irish 
ploughman can pass on you for a king !" 

With the exception of this little Jracas, 
every thing passed off to the entire satis- 
faction of Miss Erin in the marquee ; the 
gentlemen danced with the country girls, 
the ladies, all but lady Jane, with the 
young farmers ; and Rosebud, in the most 
extravagant spirits, from the gaiety of the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 359 

scene around him, was as much on the 
alert as any one else, proving himself, to 
use their own expression, quite as handy 
at the jig as any one present, having, more 
than once, tired down several of the girls. 

At length Miss Erin, conceiving quite 
sufficient was done for the gratification of 
the party there, took leave, and adjourned 
with her own to the house, where, as soon 
as she entered, regular dancing commenced. 

At a late hour a discharge of rockets w^as 
the signal for supper. Miss Erin led the 
way to the great hall, where the tables 
Were arranged. Of course it must be su- 
perfluous to say, they were furnished with 
every thing that was requisite for so splen- 
did an entertainment. Nothing but smi- 
ling countenances surrounded them ; for 
lady Jane, the only person who had, per- 
haps, throughout the evening, felt any 
thing like ill-humour, had, by tliis time, 
through the dint of flattery, which, come 
from whom it might, was always accept- 
able to her, recovered her temper. 

But, alas! how often is a sighing heart 



360 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

concealed under a smiling exterior! the 
fair, the amiable, and adulated idol of the 
evening — she, on whose very look and 
step admiration and attention hung — she 
was, or rather, would have been, a proof 
of this, had her feelings at the moment 
been known ; for she could not think of 
the absence of Donaghue from the festive 
scene, of which the assembled guests now 
reminded her more forcibly than before, 
without a sinking of her spirits she could 
with difficulty conceal. 

But let who would counterfeit cheer- 
fulness, it was not Rosebud ; for never in 
his life had he passed so delightful a night. 
He was now sitting by sir Edward Surrey, 
whom he very often amused himself with, 
by making him contribute to his pleasure. 
— " Do you perceive that person yonder ?" 
he suddenly demanded of the baronet, 
making him understand whom he meant 
by a motion of his head. 

" Yes ; is there any thing particular 
about him ?" 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 36l 

" Particular! I have just begun to con- 
sider how he got into this company." 

" God bless me, you don't say so! why, 
isn't he a gentleman ?" 

" A gentleman ! you shall judge when 
you hear how I'll accost him by-and-by." 

" What, here! God bless me! attack 
him here! no, I hope not; it would be 
such a terrible thing to have any fracas, 
any commotion here — such an utter viola- 
tion of every rule of etiquette." 

" Oh ! leave that to my consideration," 
said Rosebud ; " when once my indigna- 
tion is raised, it never can be allayed until 
I have given it vent ; and see, he's coming 
this way." 

" Then I must beg," said sir Edward, 
making a movement to rise from his chair, 
" to leave this ; for, as I cannot be of any 
service, and I apprehend something se- 
rious may occur " 

" So do I," cried Rosebud, holding him 
firmly by the arm ; " and that's the reason 
I'll keep you here, for there's no knowing 

VOL. II. R 



362 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

but that the services of a friend may be 
necessary ; and as I estimate you as one, and 
consider, besides, that I have a claim on 
yours, from being, as I may say, a military 

man, as well as yourself But here he 

comes, and now for it ;" and, as he spoke, 
he rose with much formality from his 
chair, and pulling himself up in his waist- 
coat, and giving a great hem, as if by 
way of clearing his throat — " So, sir," he 
said, turning full upon the stranger as he 
approached — " so, sir, I see you are here !" 

" So it appears," cried the other, with a 
good-humoured smile, and extending his 
hand; for, as it proved, he was an old 
friend of the doctor's. 

" No, sir," said Rosebud, waving his 
hand aside—" no, sir, excuse my taking 
the hand of a man I am about accusing, 
as I am you." 

" God bless my soul !" cried sir Edward, 
in an absolute agony, " was there ever such 
a man? — Doctor, I implore," twitching 
him by the sleeve. 

But the doctor only replying by a 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 363 

" Pish," went on — " Yes, sir, you may 
stare, and look surprised, but it is the fact. 
Is it not well known, that, regardless of 
your birth, the consequence it gives you 
in society, the elegant resources with which 
your own mind furnishes you, you are 
every day seen mixing amongst the low- 
est of your species, the miserable and the 
forlorn, listening to their vulgar complaints 
with attention, and, if a smile can be ex- 
tracted from them, quite seeming to enjoy 
it ; that the felon in the prison, the men- 
dicant in his hovel, the ragged and the 
wretched, have to boast of your presence, 
while the fashionable and the gay are, per- 
haps, seeking it in vain; and that, from 
this terrible defalcation of taste, it is to be 
presumed that " 

" You are the same Rosebud you ever 
were," cried the other, slapping him on the 
shoulder ; " an oddity you were born, and 
an oddity you will die ; but, faith, so plea- 
sant a one, that I shouldn't care if we had 
a few scions from the same stock." 

"So you were in jest all this time!" 



364 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

said sir Edward ; " well, really, doctor, 
you are a very odd man !" 

" Well, if I am, I am not to be blamed 
for it, but nature ; for have you not heard 
my friend here just say that I was born an 
oddity? — But, permit me, Mr. Medhcott," 
turning to the stranger, " to present to you 
my highly-estimated friend, sir Edward 
Surrey." 

" Assuredly," said INIr. Medlicott, pre- 
senting his hand to the baronet ; " and as 
such, he may rely on it, that I shall place 
him, as my friend Sancho Panza says, ' on 
the very crown of my head." 



END OF VOL. II. 



Piinted bj J. Darling, Leadeuh all-Street, London 
TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 



Printed by J. Darling, Lcadenhall-Street, London. 



TRADITION OF the CASTLE ; 

OR, 

SCENES IN THE EMERALD ISLE. 
IN FOUR VOLUMES. 



BT 

REGINA MARIA ROCHE, 

AUTHOR OF 

THE CHILDRJEN OF THE ABBEY, VICAR OF LANSDOWN, MAID OF THE 
HAMLET, See. 



" Ob Erin, my country ! though sad and forsaken. 

In dreams I revisit thy sea-beaten shore; 

Bat, alas ! in a far foreign laud I awaken. 

And sigh for the friends who can meet me no more. 



VOL. III. 



-i9SS*»'^^<*<<^ 



LONDON : 

PRINTED FOR 

A. K. NEWMAN AND CO. LEADENHALL-STREET. 



1824. 



V, 3 



THE 

TRADITION OF THE CASTLE 



^^^^.^•^^ 



CHAPTER I. 



** We may hold it as an established maxim, that as no one 
was ever so completely wretched as not to have some 
intervals of joy, so no one was ever so happy as not to 
have some portion of bitterness mingled with the sweets 
of life." 

J_jADY Jane, never forgetful of any 
thing that concerned her own interests, 
failed not to take an opportunity of men- 
tioning to sir William the secret visits of 
Donaghue to the Vale; but though she 
was decided on doing so, in the most in- 
vidious manner,, she, at the same time, 
wished to do so in such a way as should 

VOL. III. B 



2 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

excite no displeasure in the breast of Miss 
Erin, or create any suspicion of the fact. 
Accordingly, one morning that they chan- 
ced to be sitting together, that is, she, sir 
William, and Miss Erin, affecting to have 
forgot the date of a newspaper, in which 
she pretended there was something she 
wanted sir William to peruse — " Let me 
see, let me see," she said, musing, "what 
morning it was I read that paper — oh ! ay, 
now I recollect, it was the very morning, 
my dear," turning to Miss Erin, " in which 
you met Mr. O'Brien in the grotto; so 
you may know from that how many days 
ago it is." 

" Met Mr. O'Brien in the grotto ! my 
daughter meet Mr. O'Brien in the grotto !" 
repeated sir William, in a tone of utter 
astonishment, not unmingled with indig- 
nation. 

" Oh dear, yes,** said lady Jane, with af- 
fected innocence, " that — that is — I mean," 
pretending to stammer, in order to have 
aYi appearance of confusion, while Miss 
Erin blushed up to the very temples, and 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 3 

trembled with agitation — " I — I mean by- 
chance ; for it was entirely owing to that, 
that Mr. O'Brien said he came there." 

" At all events, whether it was or not, 
it was to chance, I am convinced," said sir 
WiUiam, in a still more indignant tone, 
and pacing the room in evident discom- 
posure, " that Miss Erin's meeting him 
there was owing." 

" Assuredly," said Miss Erin, making 
an effort to recover herself; though not 
without darting an angry glance at lady 
Jane, for what she conceived her girlish 
inadvertence, for she knew not how to im- 
pute to any thing else what had occurred 
— " And I am equally certain that the 
meeting was as much a matter of surprise 
to Mr. O'Brien as it was to me." 

" To be sure," said lady Jane, as if the 
remark had been addressed to her ; " how 
can that be doubted when he said so him- 
self? and really," laughing immoderately, 
" he gave the most amusing account of 
the chance that brought him to the grotto; 
b2 



4 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

for, in the first place, only think of his be- 
incr such an absent creature as not to know 
whither he was going, and, in the next, 
of his letting little Bill be his guide!" 
and she told the story of the day in a way 
well calculated to have it turned into ri- 
dicule, and create a belief of its being ow- 
ing to a consciousness that made him fear 
suspicion, taking care, of course, to give 
no hint of the looks, or sneers, or inuen- 
does, that forced him to give the explana- 
tion she now, by her manner, appeared so 
evidently to deride. — " I couldn't help 
rallying him," she invidiously continued, 
" on the lucky chance, or instinct, or what- 
ever else he pleased to call it, that always 
brought him to the exact spot where he 
could be serviceable, and just at the criti- 
cal moment; as for instance, when this 
dear creature here met with that frightful 
accident, and then again, the other morn- 
ino, when she was taken so ill in the grot- 
to ; so that really it would almost tempt 
one to imagine he was always wandering 
about here by himself, if one could possi- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 5 

bly account for his wishing to make a se- 
cret of what there is not the slightest ne- 
cessity for, from his acquaintance with the 
family." 

" 111 do you say?" cried sir William, 
catching at what she had said of the in- 
disposition of his daughter — " Eveleen 
ill ! — the other morning in the grotto, and 
nothing mentioned of the circumstance ! 
— really this seems altogether an extraor- 
dinary affair — such silence, such mystery 
about it." 

" Indeed, my dear father," said Miss 
Erin, in a tone perfectly collected, though 
still more provoked with lady Jane, going 
up to him, and taking him by the hand, 
" it was not worth, at least so I thought, 
mentioning;" and she proceeded to ex- 
plain, that while breakfast was preparing 
she had strolled to the grotto, and hearing 
the dog bark, had come out from the in- 
ner apartment, when she found the person 
he was jumping about was Mr. O'Brien, 
who was just retiring, being in a hurry, 
as was afterwards ascertained, to get home. 



b TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

owing to an engagement he had there, 
when she was seized with a — a dizziness 
(here she did perhaps hesitate for an in- 
stant), that rendered his support needful 
for a minute or two. " And this was all," 
she added ; "and I am sure you will allow 
not of sufficient consequence to mention." 
" Assuredly," involuntarily escaped the 
lips of sir William ; but he could not, or 
rather would not, have refrained from say- 
ing what he thought ; and let it be who 
it might that deserved to be accused or 
suspected of duplicity, or want of open- 
ness in their conduct, he felt exultingly 
convinced, from this simple little detail, 
that it was not his Eveleen ; and in the 
joy of his heart at the conviction, kissed 
her polished forehead. What an addition 
to his happiness would it have been, could 
he equally have acquitted others of these ! 
Various circumstances indeed had com- 
bined to render him highly interested 
about Donaghue, and inspire him with a 
sincere and fervent wish that he might be 
found worthy of that sincere friendship he 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 7 

desired to evince towards him. But the 
invidious insinuations of lady Jane, or ra- 
ther, the inferences they led to, were not 
thrown away upon him. Anxious to 
cultivate the regard of his daughter, but 
ignorant of his real sentiments, Donaghue 
might have been led to decline the invita- 
tions to the Vale, for the purpose of letting 
all suspicion about him cease, while, in se- 
cret, he sought to win her regard, but in 
such a way, so much through seeming ac* 
cident, as would, probably, prevent their 
meetings being mentioned, where the 
cause of them might be suspected, or could 
not be without injury. 

Should this be proved to be the case — 
should it really be ascertained that he was 
capable of such degrading artifice, sir Wil- 
liam resolved, from that moment, to en- 
deavour to forget there was such a being 
in existence. But no, he would not give 
way to an apprehension of the kind; it 
might, it probably was, exactly as the 
young man himself had represented,though 
the decisive manner of lady Jane, who 



8 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

was certainly keen and penetrating, seem- 
ed to imply the contrary. But come, was 
all fair and clear about her ladyship? 
Might not the spleen of jealousy have led 
to her speaking as she had done? for sir 
William had not been without hearing of 
the penchant with which her ladyship had 
once honoured the gentleman, or that it 
was generally supposed it would not, if he 
pleased, be a very difficult matter to occa- 
sion its renewal. But, in short, sir Wil- 
liam was of a disposition and way of think- 
ing that always inclined him to lean to 
the favourable side, and put the best con- 
struction on every thing. Aware of the 
fallibility of human judgment, he never 
could avoid remembering the necessity 
there was for our closely investigating 
every circumstance, ere we allowed our- 
selves to form a final judgment upon any ; 
so convinced was he of this, that he never 
suffered himself to be easily biassed or pre- 
judiced against any one; no matter whe- 
ther friend or foe, they were equally en- 
titled to be considered innocent, till ir- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 9 

refragable proof to the contrary was addu- 
ced. In this way he resolved to consider 
Donaghue, and believed he should be 
able; but the poison of suspicion is uncon- 
sciously imbibed. . From the moment of 
lady Jane's communication, he became 
restless and uneasy ; if he rode out, he was 
sure of returning with precipitancy, and 
if he kept walking about the grounds, 
which he now often did for the whole of 
a day, he failed not of asking every one 
he met something about Donaghue ; but 
he heard little of him, and saw less; for 
after what had occurred at the grotto, and 
the construction which lady Jane seemed 
maliciously determined on putting on it, 
prudence compelled Donaghue, for some 
days, to refrain from approaching the Vale ; 
but one morning he thought he should 
like to amuse himself with angling in a 
trout stream that lay in its vicinity. The 
thought had no sooner occurred than mat- 
ters were quickly prepared for the pur- 
pose; and taking his fishing-rod in his 
b3 



10 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

hand, and giving the basket, with his 
tackle, to Neptune, that eagerly snapt it 
up between his ivory teeth, he set out. 
But it so happened, that by the time he 
reached the stream, all inclination for ang- 
ling was over; he wished, however, to 
rest himself for a while, but there was no 
pleasant seat or shelter here ; yet the moun- 
tains, amidst which the stream ran, were 
smooth and verdant, and in some places 
projected so far as to cast a shadow on the 
path ; but, somehow, Donaghue did not 
like stopping here ; a little further on was 
an entrance to the Vale, and in one of its 
delightful bowers, indeed, it would be a 
luxury to repose for a short time; and so, 
after a faint struggle with it, he suffered 
inclination to get the better of every other 
consideration, as is but too often the case 
with many, and entered the forbidden 
ground, closely followed by Neptune, with 
the basket still between his teeth. 

He had not advanced very far, when, 
through some flowering thickets, he espi- 
ed a beautiful circular building, raised on 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 11 

a gentle elevation ; he immediately, though 
cautiously, made his way to it, and hav- 
ing ascertained that there was no one 
within it, ventured to ascend the steps on 
which it stood, and take possession of an 
inner apartment, furnished with sofas and 
small reading-tables, and elegantly orna- 
mented; here he had been for some time, 
literally indulging all to thought, when 
Neptune, who having set down his basket, 
had stretched himself at his feet, to take a 
little nap, suddenly started up with a Avag 
of his tail, and, at the same moment. Miss 
Erin was seen tripping up the steps. 

To describe what the embarrassment of 
Donaghue was at this moment would be 
impossible ; though to see her was the wish 
of his soul, yet to be surprised thus, con- 
tinually intruding, as it should seem, where 
he ought not, was not endurable ; and ra- 
ther than it should have happened again, 
he could have wished himself a thousand 
miles off; but there was no help for it ; 
he looked about him, but there was no 



12 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

way of escape, and he strove, but certain- 
ly in vain, to collect himself. 

But if he was confused at what had 
happened, not less so was Miss Erin. She 
stopped for an instant, not merely through 
surprise, but from something of dismay 
at beholding him, but too well aware of 
the confirmation his thus continuing to 
visit the place clandestinely might, if dis- 
covered, be of the suspicions which, it 
was but too evident, lady Jane had infused 
into her father's mind respecting him. 
Making an effort, however, to recover her 
presence of mind, from a hope and trust 
that what she was apprehensive of might 
not be the case, she proceeded to ask Do- 
naghue whether he had found any one in 
the building, saying, when she had left it 
a short time before, to feed some favourite 
peacocks she had near it, she had left some 
friends there. 

Donaghue replied in the negative, add- 
ing, that if he had ascertained any one 
being there, he certainly should not have 
thought of entering it. — "But my being 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 13 

certain there was not, does not, however, I 
feel convinced," he continued, " exempt 
me from the necessity of making an apo- 
logy for what, I am aware, must be consi- 
dered an intrusion ; but I don't know how 
it has happened, that I have lately been so 
unfortunate as to be continually acting in 
a manner to incur the imputation ; to 
prevent any thing so disagreeable, I really 
could wish that sir William would bar his 
enchanting grounds to all strangers." 

" Then I am sure, if he did," replied 
Miss Erin, with one of her most bewitch- 
ing smiles, " he would not bar them against 
you ; though, indeed," recollecting the re- 
solve she had made, to take advantage of 
the first opportunity that occurred, for 
speaking to him on the subject of his de- 
clining the overtures that were made to 
induce him to visit at the Vale, " I cannot 
avoid observing, now that you have 
brought it to my mind, that it seems to 
be your wish that we should all here con- 
sider you in the light of a stranger. How 
is it, Mr. O'Brien, that we never see you 



14 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

at the house? of the pleasure — rather let 
me say the happiness, my mother would 
derive from the circumstance, you cannot, 
I think, be a stranger ; and as to my fa- 
ther, he must himself, I should suppose, 
have satisfied you on this head." 

Donaghue, who, at the mention of her 
mother, involuntarily opened his lips, to 
try and make some excuse for what she 
thus gently reproached him for, at this al- 
lusion to her father — her cold, her unfeel- 
ing father, who, under a specious shew of 
complaisance, had done so much to wound 
his feelings, started back, with an expres- 
sion of haughty emotion that did not es- 
cape her. — " Why, surely," she resumed, 
after earnestly regarding him for a minute 
in silence, " no one can have misled — no 

one can have prejudiced " but ere she 

could finish the sentence, Neptune, that, 
during this short scene, still keeping watch 
over his basket however, had been sitting, 
apparently admiring both of them, gave a 
sudden bark, and sprang towards the door. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 15 

and both turning to it, in consequence, 
they beheld sir William Erin entering. 

Unutterable was the confusion of both 
at the instant. Donaghue, without hav- 
ing heard any thing of lady Jane's invi- 
dious insinuations, was perfectly aware of 
the awkwardness there was in being thus 
found conversing, in private, with Miss 
Erin, while he declined opportunities of 
doing so in public; and Miss Erin, ac- 
quainted with these insinuations, trembled 
to think of the confirmation they might 
now receive. Of her father's giving way 
to any idea injurious to her, she had no ap- 
prehension, but she could not indulge the 
same confidence with regard to Donaghue, 
and her agitation was exceedingly extreme. 

" Don't let me disturb you, sir," said sir 
William, stiffly bowing to Donaghue, 
who, rather through the confusion he was 
thrown into, by his unexpected entrance, 
or his eagerness to fly him, had begun to 
scramble up his gloves, fishing-rod, and 
hat, all of which he had carelessly thrown 
on the floor, as he rested himself on a sofa. 



16 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

*' You don't, sir," replied Donaghue ; 
" having apologized to Miss Erin for be- 
ing found here, I was on the point of de- 
parting as you entered." 

" Yes," said Miss Erin, catching at what 
seemed to give an opening for an explana- 
tion, " Mr. O'Brien has been making 
quite as serious an affair of being found 
resting himself here^ ^ter his long, fa- 
tiguing walk, this warm morning, to the 
mountains, as if he knew not that the 
grounds were ©pen. to visitors; and I — I," 
continued she, a little disconcerted by per- 
ceiving no relaxation in her father's mus- 
cles, " I have been asking him why he 
makes himself so great a stranger at the 
house." 

" Indeed ! I should have conceived the 
question superfluous; for, from the over- 
tures he has received to visit there, I 
should have presumed he would have 
done so, if agreeable." 

Donaghue coloured like crimson, at the 
cold, repelling tone in which these words 
were uttered ; his heart heaved with in- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTTE. 17 

dignant feelings, and involuntarily casting 
a look of bitter reproach on sir William, 
was abruptly departing, when Miss Erin, 
still anxious to effect what she wished, 
stopped him, by saying she wanted to let 
her father notice his dog — " The fine 
creature, my dear sir," she said, patting 
the head of Neptune as she spoke, and be- 
ginning to give him some cakes from off 
one of the tables, " to which I am so 
much indebted — is he not a noble animal?" 

The features of sir William now, in- 
deed, relaxed — " A noble one," he said, 
" indeed !" laying his hand on the head of 
the dog. " Should his master ever get 
tired of him " 

" Tired !" repeated Donaghue, in a tone 
of indignation, as if at the bare possibility 
of such a thing — " tired of a creature, ex- 
clusive of every other consideration, that 

was the means of preserving " He 

stopped, checked by the rising blush on 
Miss Erin's cheek, from giving further ut- 
terance to his feelings at the moment; but 
he had said enough to betray them, and 



18 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

but too fearful of this, he again became 
confused, and hastily repeating his parting 
bow, was out of sight in a minute. 

Well now, after this, what remained to 
be done, but indeed decidedly to shun 
every place where he was likely to meet 
Miss Erin — to resolutely avoid every path 
where it was probable the impress of her 
steps could be traced. Yet to deny him- 
self — to give up the only gratification he 
now allowed himself, or rather the only 
thing from which he derived any gratifi- 
cation, that of frequenting the scenes with 
which her idea was associated ! but it must 
be done; there was no other method of 
clearing — of redeeming himself from the 
degrading imputation of having frequent- 
ed them for the purpose of throwing him- 
self in her way — an opinion which, it was 
evident to him, sir William entertained, 
and which, no doubt, made him highly 
applaud himself for the cold, calculating 
caution w^ith which he had previously 
acted towards him. He returned home in 
a state of agitation and abstraction, that 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 19 

rendered his movements absolutely me- 
chanical ; in this way he continued walk- 
ing up and down the parlour, unmindful 
of Rosebud, whom he found sitting there, 
looking over some English newspapers, 
which he had just collected at the Vale. 
The doctor, however, was not equally un- 
mindful of him ; he soon perceived he was 
under some great disturbance of mind ; 
and, from some broken sentences that, 
from time to time, unconsciously escaped 
him, almost as quickly understood what 
the cause of this disturbance was. For 
some time he continued to watch him 
quietly; at length, unable longer to con- 
trol or contain himself — " Ah, boy, boy !" 
he exclaimed, suddenly starting from his 
chair, and throwing aside the papers, " is 
this the way you are going on, making 
a fool of yourself about one woman, 
when there are perhaps twenty others 
her equal, that you might have by only 
asking !** 

" Her equal !" repeated Donaghue, in 
a tone of lofty contempt, quite forgetting. 



20 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

in the indignation excited by the sugges- 
tion, that he was, by this reply, admitting 
the fact of which he was accused by the 
doctor, that of being violently in love with 
some one. 

" Ye^ her equal !" returned the doctor : 
" I allow the lady in question — for it's use- 
less any longer to conceal, Donaghue, that 
I have, for some time past, being perfect- 
ly aware of the state of your heart — to be 
very beautiful, and very amiable, and, of 
course, very deserving of admiration ; but 
then it does not follow, that, in allowing 
this, 1 do not think others equally so. 
God help us all ! if there were only one 
Helen at a time in the world, the wars 
between the Grecian and Trojan worthies 
would be nothing to the wars we should 
have then amongst us ; though I am aware, 
for the time being, every lover esteems 
his mistress a Helen. Yet, go where we 
will, be thrown on what coast we may, 
where is the place where beauty, and 
merit, and agreeableness, may not be 
found? and how consolatory should the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 21 

reflection be to a person suifering, as he 
conceives, under a hopeless passion, if a 
man will but open his eyes !" 

" Consolatory !" said Donaghue, " what, 
when he would not, if he could, divest 
himself of the idea of her he loves ?" 

" Pshaw ! this is the rant of romance. 
If I long for a thing that is unattainable, 
can I give a better proof of sense, than by 
endeavouring to banish the thoughts of it 
as speedily as possible from my mind ?" 

" No, not an idea that while cherished 
in the mind must preserve it from any 
thing that is base and degrading, by keep- 
ing alive in it the recollection of what is 
lovely and excellent; while it dwells with 
delight on the idea of these, it is not pro- 
bable it will become perverted and de- 
based." 

" Pshaw !'' exclaimed the doctor again ; 
" but I see there's no arguing rationally 
with a man who is an enthusiast in every 
thing, as you are; when advancing life, 
however, has a little chilled the glow of 
blood that occasions this, I make no doubt 



22 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

you'll allow I have not been incorrect in 
my observation." 

" Without waiting till then, I allow it 
now, notwithstanding what you have ac- 
cused me of being." 

" Not without reason," rejoined the 
doctor; " now do acknowledge that also." 

" Well, supposing I do," said Dona- 
ghue, with a smile, " may I not retort the 
charge on you ? for if warm friendships, 
a zeal in the cause of humanity that no- 
thing can cool, nothing intimidate, a 
readiness to brave every thing, even with- 
out solicitation, in the cause of the help- 
less and the oppressed, be not enthusiasm, 
I know not what is. Let neither, there- 
fore, my dear doctor, blush to be accused 
of it. The vulgar rail at, and sneer at it, 
because they do not understand it; to 
them it means nothing more than folly, 
or madness, or the extravagance of Hot- 
spur, that would make us attempt to 
' pluck bright honour from the pale-faced 
moon;' but the feeling and the enlight- 
ened comprehend it better. As sensibili- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. ^3 

ty is the source inexhausted of all that is 
precious in our joys, and costly in our sor- 
rows, so are they aware that this is the 
stimulus to whatever is great and glorious 
in our actions ; or, in other words, that 
nothing ever great or glorious was at- 
tempted without it; and that, therefore, 
to strike this spirit out of the human con- 
stitution, would be to check some of the 
main wheels of society ; since, if enthusi- 
asm did not add, at least an imaginary, 
value to most of the objects of our pur- 
suits — if fancy did not give them her 
magical colouring, they would generally 
be found too contemptible perhaps to ex- 
cite ardent desire." 

" Ay, this is all very fine," said the doc- 
tor, not however displeased at the compli- 
ment that had been paid him ; " but it 
won't, for all that, divert me, Donaghue, 
from speaking on a subject that I have 
long been anxious to converse with you 
on — that of your giving way to a passion 
that must be hopeless." 

" Must!" repeated Donaghue, witli ex- 



24 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

cessive emotion. " But why allow my- 
self to be disturbed at hearing what I 
was before but too sensible of? — Yes, my 
dear doctor, since your penetration has 
enabled you to dive into the secret of my 
heart, I will own I love, with all the ar- 
dour of my nature, but love despairingly." 

" Then why, in the name of common 
sense," said the doctor, " encourage a pas- 
sion you confess to be hopeless ?" 

" Encourage it !" said Donaghue. 

" Yes, must you not confess it is en- 
couraging it, to be continually wandering, 
hovering about the residence of Miss Erin, 
and putting yourself in the way of meet- 
ing her ?" 

" But how can I help it ?" asked Dona- 
ghue, in a fit of despair. " How can I 
resist the impulse that hurries, that forces 
me there, whether I will or not ?" 

" Faith, I dont know," said the doctor, 
musing; " and yet — no — let me think. 
You have read the works of Alfieri, and 
doubtless recollect the expedient he had 
recourse to, for freeing himself from a pas- 



TUADITtON OF THE CASTLE. 25 

sion doubtless as distressing as yours — This 
is what he says on the subject^* I de^ 
vised,' says he, ' the following expedient, 
to render me wise, by force — to detach 
me from this unfortunate fit of love: 
keeping from the sight of the object of it, 
I deemed of the greatest consequence; 
but how was that to be done? my pas- 
sion was urging me every moment to seek 
her society. Whenever the paroxysms 
were on me, I got my servant to bind 
me to an arm-chair ; the cords were con- 
cealed under a large mantle, in which I 
was enveloped, and only one hand remain- 
ed at liberty. Of all those who came to 
see me, not one suspected I was bound 
down in that manner. I remained in this 
situation for whole hours ; my servant 
was my gaoler, who was alone intrusted 
with the secret, and he liberated me when 
the rage of love was over; thus, in the 
course of a short time, I was completely 
cured, and thus rendered myself wise by 
force.' Now the only thing I see for it," 

VOL. III. C 



26 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

continued the doctor, " is to have recourse 
to a similar mode of cure for you. When- 
ever you find the love fit coming on you, 
urging you to fly off like another Cardenio, 
to the woods and wilds of sir William, 
only give me a hint; and as from this 
time forth I shall always take care to have 
a strong cord at hand — nay, you needn't 
laugh, for, upon my soul, I am serious ! — 
I will immediately bind you to one of 
these great chairs, till it is over, and thus, 
as the poet says, make you wise by force." 

" Thank you, my dear doctor; how- 
ever, I shall try if I cannot, by the exer- 
tion of resolution, save you from this 
trouble." 

" Well, if you don't like this method of 
cure, there's another, certainly preferable, 
from being pleasanter. Let sir William 
give the heiress to whom he pleases; and 
do you put it out of your power to think 
any more about her, by taking the widow." 

" How !" exclaimed Donaghue, in ex- 
treme surprise. 

" Tut! this is all folly. Do you think 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 27 

no one can see but yourself, Donaghue ? 
do you think I don't know you might 
have lady Jane Magennis by to-morrow, 
if you pleased? and a devilish fool you'll 
be if you don't take her ; for she's not only 
a fine creature, but what is still better, in 
my opinion, a funny creature; and has 
besides, that which, according to the vul- 
ger adage, * will make the mare trot, and 
the mill go,' a swinging fortune, left her 
by old Cent.-per-cent ; God knows how 
got — but that is not our consideration." 

" Never !" cried Donaghue, with vehe- 
mence — " Never !" 

" Never !" repeated the doctor, with in- 
dignation. 

But ere we proceed farther, it may be 
necessary to observe, that lady Jane had 
artfully managed so as to draw the doctor 
to her side ; she soon penetrated into his 
character, and ascertained his great regard 
for Donaghue, and was led, by the double 
discovery, to believe she could render him 
instrumental to her designs. Having laid 
e 2 



28 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE^ 

herself out, as much as she could, to es- 
tablish herself in his good graces, by hu- 
mouring his whims, laughing at his jests, 
and promoting his frohcs, she by degrees 
made him her confident, by disclosing 
what she called her own story ; she repre- 
sented the attachment that had, as she 
said, subsisted between her and Donaghue, 
her being compelled to marry another, in 
consequence of his loss of fortune, and her 
readiness to prove, as she had intimated 
to him, that this was owing to compul- 
sion, by bestowing on him the fortune she 
had obtained by this marriage ; and finally 
concluded by imploring Rosebud, as a 
mutual friend, to interfere between them, 
nor suffer him to let a wild pursuit after 
Miss Erin, entered into out of resent- 
ment, as she well knew, of her (lady Jane's) 
supposed inconstancy, to induce him to 
give up the good he might secure, since 
he might be convinced, that however libe- 
ral and generous sir William Erin might 
seem, or be reported to be, he might rely 
on it he was too worldly a man ever to be 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 29 

prevailed on to give his daughter, for 
whom he had a right to entertain such 
expectations, to a man in his circum- 
stances; and Rosebud, interested by iier 
detail, and firmly believing the truth of 
all she said, readily gave the promise she 
required, and had for some time been on 
the watch for an opportunity of beginning 
the operations it had decided him on, 
not without a strong sense of indignation 
against Donaghue for the folly, the obsti- 
nacy, that rendered any interference on 
the subject necessary. To have fortune 
absolutely wooing him, offering to restore 
to him all that he had lost, and yet per- 
versely to refuse profiting by the circum- 
stance — ^it was really bad enough to drive 
evena Job himself mad.—" Never!" he cried, 
repeating the emphatic " never" of Dona- 
ghue. " Is it, can it be possible, that you 
are in your senses, and yet reject this 
noble, this generous creature, ready to 
fling herself and her fine fortune into your 
arms ?" 

" Very," replied Donaghue. 



30 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" And pray may I ask what may be 
the reason ?" 

" Because I am not sufficiently attach- 
ed to her to requite the disinterestedness 
you ascribe to her." 

" Tut ! tut ! let me hear nothing of this 
romantic nonsense," said the doctor, im- 
patiently. " No, no, it is not owing to 
that, but because there is not sufficient 
difficulty in this affair to make it interest- 
ing to you. I will answer for it, that 
were lady Jane still under the control of 
a harsh arbitrary father, you would be quite 
as mad about her as you now seem cool 
and easy. Upon my soul, Donaghue, 
you almost remind me of the girl in the 
farce, who would only elope to her lover 
through the window, though the hall 
door was lying open !" 

" Well, if it amuses you to tliink so of 
me," said Donaghue, " you are perfectly 
welcome." 

" No, it does not amuse me ; quite the 
contrary — it sets me wild, to think that 
through your obstinacy in persisting in the 



TRAt>ITION OF THE CASTLE. 81 

pursuit of what may well be termed a sha- 
dow, you will probably lose the substance ; 
for, with your good sense, can you possibly 
persuade yourself that sir William Erin 
will ever be prevailed on to give his heir- 
ess to — to — a " 

" I understand you," said Donaghue, 
flushing up to the temples, and in evident 
emotion turning to a window. — " There's 
no occasion my dear doctor," he resumed, 
after standing there a minute to recover 
himself, " to be more explicit. No, I am 
too well aware of the romantic folly sir 
William Erin would be accused of, were 
he to bestow his daughter on a man like 
me, to suppose him capable of harbouring 
an idea of the kind." 

" Nay, there would be no folly in the 
case," said the doctor ; " only these men 
of the world are so selfish — so— — But I 
see I have hurt you, Donaghue, and I 
could shoot myself at the thought. But 
will you not forgive me ?" pleadingly ex- 
tending his hand. " You know my re- 
gard for you, and must therefore, I think. 



32 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 

be convinced that whatever I have said 
has originated in my anxiety to see you 
restored to your proper enjoyments in life." 

" JNly dear doctor," as he warmly grasp- 
ed his hand, " after the many proofs of 
friendship I have experienced from you, 
how could I possibly entertain a doubt of 
that ? No, I must be stupid and ungrate- 
ful indeed, after what has occurred, if I 
could ascribe what you have said to any 
thing but the real motive — a sincere anx- 
iety about my welfare. But do not be 
offended at my asking you to let the pre- 
sent subject drop. From interested mo- 
tives I never will marry, and as, from the 
reverse of fortune I have met with, it 
w^ould not be prudent to marry from any 
other, I believe we may as well shake 
hands at once, as brother bachelors." 

" No, no, Donaghue, that must never 
be," cried the doctor ; " there is a wide 
difference between you and me. You, 
born and brought up in the very midst of 
domestic enjoyments, early acquired that 
taste and fondness for them that must 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 33 

ever prevent an unsettled and unconnect- 
ed state from being one of real pleasure to 
you ; whereas I, deprived of the shelter 
of a natural home ere I well knew what 
the comforts of one were, became, through 
the force of habit, so attached to a life that 
would allow of change of scene, whenever 
one pleased, without trammels of any 
kind to oppose, as to prefer it to any other. 
But though Benedict himself, before he 
fell into the snares of the lady Beatrice, 
never more strenuously stood up in the 
defence of bachelors than I do, yet no 
one can be better pleased than I am to 
see a friend resigning the title of one, pro- 
vided I be assured it is for his happiness 
to lose it." 

Here the entrance of the corporal, with 
a large packet from Teghadow, put an end 
to the conversation; and while the doc- 
tor, who was impatient about every thing, 
set about examining the contents of this, 
Donaghue, taking up his hat, strolled out to 
try if a quiet walk would enable him to get 
C 3 



34 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the better of the extreme perturbation of 
spirits under which he still laboured. 



CHAPTER II. 



*****■»* 



" Oh ! thou soft natural death (that art joint twin 
To sweetest slumb6r), no rough-becrested comet 
Stares on thy mild departure ; the dull owl 
Beats not against thy casement ; the hoarse wolf 
Scents not thy carrion : pity winds thy corse — 
While horror waits on princes." 

As he was sauntering on, lost in thought, 
the voice of a woman soliciting charity 
roused him from his abstraction. — " Ah ! 
then won't your honour be after giving 
something to a poor woman, towards bury- 
ing her husband ?" 

Donaghue put a few tenpennies into 
her hand, and was about trying to dis- 
cover whether she required further relief 
— there being something very shocking 
to his feelings, in the idea of a wife being 
obliged to quit the deathbed of a husband. 



THADITION OF THE CASTLE. 35 

to procure the means of interring him— 
when her attention was suddenly diverted 
from him by the approach of a funeral ; 
and — " Ah, then sure," she exclaimed, 
" if there isn't father Murphy himself! 
Well, I hope, any how, he won't be keep- 
ing me long ; for ould Barney was at the 
last gasp ; and he won't die continted with^ 
out seeing his reverence." 

" Barney ! Who is Barney ?" demand- 
ed Donaghue. 

" Sure, and plase your honour, it's my 
husband you gave me the money for." 

" Your husband ! why I thought you 
told me he was dead ?" 

" Och hone, jewel, it's all the same 
thing, so I am gitimg ready every thing 
in time, to have ould Barney ^mteelly 
waked ; and all that's wanting now is fa- 
ther Murphy, to give him his blessing be- 
fore he departs ; for I got the pot down 
before I came out to wash him; and I 
have got a Und of a white sheet, and be- 
spoke the pipes and the snuff, and the 
— *— But I'll run home^ and try to keep 



36 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Barney alive till the priest comes ; for I 
know he won't die happy without seeing 
him; and one would wish to make the 
crater as comfortable as they could, going 
to the other world. So a thousand thanks 
to your honour for your goodness, and 
when you die, may you be sure of a good 
wooden great-coat !" 

It had often struck Donaghue before, 
and from the conduct of this woman he 
was now confirmed in the observation, 
that he had never any where met with 
people so totally unconcerned about death 
as his own country people — that is, of the 
lower description — whether speaking of 
their own, or that of a friend, or relation's, 
speaking of it with the same coolness ; and 
as they certainly wanted not natural feel- 
ing, but were, on the contrary, extremely 
warm-hearted, and in general strongly at- 
tached to their kindred, he could only ac- 
count for their seeming indifference about 
it on every occasion to the wretchedness 
of their lives in general, and their being 
naturally led by this to think,, that thai 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 37 

which relieved them from further poverty 
and toil, was more to be welcomed than 
dreaded. 

The funeral just mentioned passed on- 
ward to the old burying-ground of a ruin- 
ed church ; a crowd attended, amongst 
w^hich were several old women close to the 
coffin, that kept howling as they followed 
it — " Ah, then, why did you die? it was 
himself that was good to the poor — ah, 
then, why did you die? that fed ould and 
young, no matter who came — ah, then, 
why did you die?" in this way detailing 
his praises, and still, at the end of each 
sentence, uniting in the chorus of " ah, 
then, why did you die ?" 

The ceremony of interment was soon 
over, simply consisting of lowering the 
coffin into the grave, and which was no 
sooner done, than friends, relatives, mourn- 
ers, all, in a moment, dispersed, as if by 
magic, leaving an old man, who acted as 
sexton, to quietly proceed, by himself, in 
his work of filling up the grave, when 
Donaghue, who had almost mechanically 



38 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

followed, and continued loitering about the 
churchyard, examining the inscriptions 
upon some of the old tombstones, was sur- 
prised by hearing the voice of the old 
woman who had solicited charity from 
him, concluding, from what she had told 
him of her husband, that she could not, 
or rather would not, have delayed return- 
ing to him. 

" Och hone ! oh ! but it's himself that 
had the iligint wake of it," she cried, ad* 
dressing herself to the old man who was 
shovelling the earth into the grave — " it's 
himself that ought to be satisfied and con- 
tinted, and, to be sure, so he is, for it's he 
that had every thing that was comfortable 
about him— but why not? he left her the 
means to give it him; and as his wife 
knew he liked the gmteel thing when he 
was living, so she might be sure he would 
when he was dead. But the widow Walsh 
is the ould thing for ever ! sorrow doubt of 
it, be couldn't have left his money to a bet- 
ter. There was the twelve priests there this 
morning, as well as last night, in the par- 



TRADITION OP THE CASTLE. 39 

lour next the one where the corpse was 
laid out so iligantly, eating and drinking 
the best of every thing. I looked through 
the window, and, och hone ! what a piece 
of beef I saw, and fowls, and a leg of mut- 
ton, and a could leg of pork, with twenty 
other things on the table before them ; be- 
sides the tay, and the coffee, and the wine, 
and the whiskey galore ; it's themselves, 
no shame to them, that were making good 
use of them all. And then there was the 
widow, sitting at the head of the corpse— 
and a handsome corpse, I will say that for 
you. Jack Walsh, though you can't hear 
a word of what I am saying now, you 
made of it — dressed all in her best ; arid 
'tis she that has the iligint gowns and caps 
to put on here, with the keeners all about 

her, and " 

" My good woman," here inteiTupted 
Donaghue, who had gradually approached 
her, and could no longer contain himself, 
from the terrible idea of what her wretch- 
ed husband might be suffering, through 
h«r idle curioaty and love of prating, " you 



40 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

seem to me, in talking of the widow 
Walsh's dead husband, to have quite for- 
got your own unfortunate living, or ra- 
ther dying one." 

" Och hone! no, your honour, I am 
just going to him, and sure I was just go- 
ing to him when I parted from your ho- 
nour, but that when I saw the funeral, I 
could not help turning back with it, not 
to draw ill-luck upon myself, nor more 
nor that, when I found it was Jack Walsh, 
stopping to see him put in the ground, 
becase I knew it's himself that would have 
done the same by me, only he went first 
But stop a bit ; sure there are two ber- 
rings coming — ah ! then what luck I was 
in, not to have gone home before !" 

Here a violent uproar drew the atten- 
tion of Donaghue from her, and, at a lit- 
tle distance, he actually beheld two fune- 
rals. They had suddenly met, and a scuf- 
fle was the result, to see which should get 
first to the churchyard. In the course of 
it, one of the coffins was thrown to the 
ground; two men instantly darted for- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 41 

ward, and whipping it up between them, 
ran forward with it as fast as possible to 
the place of interment, when popping it 
into the first grave they came to, they set 
up a shout of exultation, waving their hats 
on high, in token of triumph. 

" Good Heavens ! what is the meaning 
of all this?" inquired Donaghue of the 
old man. 

" Why, plase your honour, 'tis the cus- 
tom here, when one funeral takes place, 
always to keep watch in the churchyard 
till there is another, and so on; and so, 
when there are two at a time, there's always 
a struggle to see which shall get first to 
the burying-ground on that account. The 
country, as your honour, I dare say, knows, 
was once overrun with wolves, that used to 
come down — the Lord save us ! — before the 
body was well laid in the earth, to scratch 
it out of it ; and so, to hinder this, the 
people, at last, were forced to keep watch 
over the graves till the grass grew upon 
them, and the custom has been kept up 



42 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

The old woman seemed in an absolute 
ecstacy at the exploit that had just taken 
place. — " Well, success to yourselves, 
boys !" she said ; " you are the ones for 
doing the thing nately. It's yourselves 
that have given them the proper good-bye 
ginteelly." 

" My good woman," again said Dona- 
ghue, provoked, beyond expression, by her 
conduct, after what she had told him — " if 
you do not return home immediately, I 
shall certainly suspect you of being an im- 
postor, and act accordingly." 

This threat, or intimation, had the de- 
sired effect; she directly quitted the 
churchyard, and was followed by Dona- 
ghue, determined to ascertain the truth. 
He had not, however, advanced many 
yards into the road again, when he heard 
Rosebud calling to him from a field at some 
little distance. The doctor still fearing 
he was not entirely reconciled to him, had 
hastily shuffled up the papers he left him 
looking over, and learning which way he 
was gone, set out in pursuit of him. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 43 

Donaghue hastened to him, and thus 
the old woman effected her escape from 
him ; for, on turning to look for her, after 
joining the doctor, she was out of sight. 
He related what had just happened, to the 
no small amusement of Rosebud, who 
was particularly diverted by his account 
of the old woman, and the absolute hor- 
ror with which she had inspired him. 

They were near the beach, and now 
proceeded thither, to view some very sin- 
gular and romantic rocks and caverns ; 
they were a good while in viewing them, 
and examining the different species of 
plants and grass that tufted or bespread 
them, and in their way back, were over- 
taken by a heavy shower, that drove them 
into a cabin for shelter. Two three-legged 
stools were immediately dusted for them, 
by a poor little girl, and placed before the 
fire, over which an immense-sized iron pot 
was suspended. 

" Ah ha !" said Rosebud, regarding it, 
** there is something good going on here ; 



44 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

a christening, or a wedding, for this pot is 
too large for murphies alone." 

" Och hone! and sure your honour 
may well say that; the sorrow praty, or 
any thing else we have to put in it ! only 
just some water we are warming to wash 
ould Barney in," and Donaghue instantly 
recognised his recently-made acquaintance, 
the old woman, emerging from a kind of 
inner division of the hovel, as she spoke. 

" Why is your husband really dead at 
last?" he demanded. 

** Och ! it's all the same thing, your ho- 
nour ; he can't live, any how, now above a^ 
minute or two." 

" My God, what callousness !" exclaim* 
ed Donaghue ; " to be preparing for a 
man's death ere his last debt is paid !" 

" Oh, then ! sure his last debt was paid 
long enough ago- — for sorrow one would 
trust ould Barney for any thing ! so the 
sorrow debt at all, at all, he had to pay." 

" Directed by her looks, Donaghue ap- 
proached a dusky corner, where, on some 
straw, he saw a heap of heaving rags, for 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 45 

nothing else could he distinguish. Inex- 
pressibly shocked — " For Heaven's sake, 
my dear doctor, come here !" he cried, 
" and try whether any thing can be done 
for this miserable wretch." 

The doctor obeyed, and after feeling his 
pulse for a little while, pronounced him to 
have just recovered from a kind of fit, oc- 
casioned by mere w^eakness; and ordering 
some milk to be warmed and immediately 
given to him, said, he had not the slightest 
doubt, by proper care, he might be brought 
about again. 

No sooner had he swallowed the milk, 
than, recovering the pow er of speech, he 
raised himself a little on the straw, and 
began pouring down blessings on his two 
preservers^ as he justly called them, for, 
but for their coming in as they did, he 
should have been a corpse by that time, 
as his wife and her cronies would not 
have waited another moment to wash and 
stretch him, and which he could not have 
prevented, as he had lost his strength and 
his speech at the same time, though he per- 



46 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

fectly understood all they were doing and 
saying about him. 

" Oh, then, Barney, are you really alive?" 
asked the wife, on seeing him sitting 
up. " Oh, then it's yourself that is !" for 
on getting within arm's length of him, he 
gave her a proof of his recovered vigour. 
" Well, to see that now ! well, Nelly, jewel, 
it can't be helped ; so, any how, run home 
with Mrs. Sullivan's white sheet, and tell 
her she needn't come to the wake this 
night, as ould Barney has disappointed us 
all ; and be sure mind and tell Mrs. Mur- 
phy we shan't be wanting the whiskey, 
or snufF, or pipes, or tobacco, or candles, 
to-night, but we are in great expectation 
we shall in a day or two : and mind and 
till all the neighbours, going and coming, 
that the wake is put off. Run, run, jew- 
el, gra ! but stop, don't be forgetting to 
remimber to tell Nat Doyle not to be 
minding putting the boards together yet 
awhile for your daddy's coffin; and ah, 
then, why don't you run gra ! but wait, 
here's the black ribbon Mrs. Rooney lent 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 47 

me for my cap to-night. Ah, then ! 
what's keeping you, Nelly ?" 

During the time these orders had been 
issuing, a little girl, about ten years old, 
barefooted, and flying in tatters, kept run- 
ning backwards and forwards before the 
door, in the greatest seeming perplexity. 
The moment she at length found herself 
actually at liberty, she darted off, and was 
out of sight in a moment. 

" Now, in the devil's name, Biddy," 
cried old Barney, evidently in a rage he 
could hardly control, " where did you git 
the money for all the things you just min- 
tioned?" 

"Ah! then where should I git it, but 
snug enough under your head ?" 

" Oh, then, be hanged to you ! did you 
take the tin tinpennies I had in the stock- 
ing to pay the rint ?" 

*' Arrah ! be asy, Barney ; sure I tould 
their honurs, deed nor alive, no one would 
trust you ; and so to be sure I wint rummag- 
ing for the money, that I might let you have 
every thing snug and comfortable; * for/ 



48 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

says I to Mrs. Murphy, when I had got the 
purse, * 'twill be the last expinse, and poor 
Barney always liked the ginteel thing." 

" So, when you had taken all my mo- 
ney, you tould Mrs. Murphy I liked the 
ginteel thing, did you? Oh, then, you 
are in luk's way, that their honurs are 
here, for if it wasn't for them, I'd make 
you remember the ginteel thing the long- 
est day you had to live, you garron /" 

" Oh, Barney, my boy, don't let us be 
a hinderance to you," said Rosebud, highly 
amused by the scene ; " don't let us stop 
your hand." 

" Come, come, my friend," said Dona- 
ghue, interposing, on perceiving him about 
rising, " this should be a day of thanks- 
giving to you, not of anger and revenge. 
I have already given your wife some mo- 
ney, which I shall be much displeased if I 
find she does not lay out for your mutual 
comfort. As soon as I return to the castle, 
I will send a basket of provisions to you, 
and shall take care that, till your perfect 
recovery, you are attended to, when, if 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 4^ 

not regularly employed, and I can be of 
any service to you, let me know, and I 
will see what can be done for you." 

The miserable object of his benevolence 
looked wistfully at him for a minute, and 
then, without speaking, threw himself 
back, with a deep groan, on the bed. 

They all thought him dying ; but by a 
motion of his hand, he gave them to 
understand they were mistaken, and kept 
them away from him for a minute ; then 
a little recovering himself — " No, no, it 
wasn't sick I was," he said, " it was only — 
only a pain I just got in my heart at the 
moment." 

" A pain in your heart !" cried the wife ; 
" oh then, Barney, if that's the way with 
you " 

" Stop," said Donaghue, in a tone of se- 
verity, anticipating what she meant to say. 

" No," cried old Barney, '* it wasn't 
sick I was again ; but it was—it was — " 
and he gushed into tears, " that the 
young master should be so — so good to — 

VOL. IIL D 



50 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

to a But it's he that's of the right 

stock for that. There never yet was one 
of his race that wasn't good and gracious ; 
and the more shame, and bitter curses on 
those that would hurt him ! and I say, 
amen !" 

Donaghue now understanding what it 
was he meant, that it was gratitude that 
had overcome him, spoke still more kind- 
ly to him, repeating his promise of his 
being his friend, if he only found him de- 
serving of his being so. 

On his return to the castle, Donaghue 
inquired about him, and learned that he 
belonged to Altoir-na-Grenie, and had for 
a long time enjoyed the situation of under 
bailiff there, but from which, as well as 
every other employment about the castle, 
he had been at length dismissed, through 
improper and disorderly conduct, since 
when he had gradually got down in life, 
till he had at length sunk into the most 
deplorable state of wretchedness. 

What he heard to his disadvantage did 
not prevent Donaghue from keeping his 



TKADITION OF THE CASTLE. 51 

promise to him; he supplied him with 
whatever was needful, till he was entirely- 
restored to health and strength, and would 
then have seen what farther could be done 
for him, but that Barney, on being sent 
for to the castle, respectfully excused him- 
self, by saying he had received assistance, 
that rendered it unnecessary for him to 
trouble his honour for any farther kind- 
ness. 



D 21 



UBRART 



52 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 



CHAPTER HI. 



Spreading herbs, and flow'rets brighty. 
Glisten'd with the dew of night ; 
Nor herb, nor flow'ret glisten'd there, 
But was carv'd in the cloister arches so fair ; 
The moon on the east oriel shone, 
Through slender shafts of shapely stone, 

By foliag'd tracery combined ; 
Thou wouldst have thought some fairy hand 
Twixt poplars straight, the ozier wand. 

In many a freakish knot had twin'd. 
Then fram'd a spell, when the work was done,. 
And chang'd the willow wreaths to stone. 
The silver light, so pale and faint, 
Shew'd many a prophet, and many a saint. 

Lai/ of the last Minstrel. 

DoNAGHUE had now given up his haunts 
at the Vale; but though he forbore enter- 
ing the grounds, he still indulged himself 
with a view of them, by making the ruin- 
ed abbey, already mentioned in the des- 
cription of the Vale, his now almost con- 
stant resort. Though, from the judicious 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 53 

'disposition of the grounds, it appeared to 
belong to the Vale, it was distinct from it, 
a circumstance that, of course, precluded 
all apprehension of being considered either 
as a transgressor or intruder, by frequent- 
ing it, if indeed his doing so should be 
discovered, which he conceived very un- 
likely, from the lonely situation of the 
pile, and the superstitious awe with which 
it was regarded in the neighbourhood ; so 
that, except a chance visit of curiosity, it 
was never troubled with one. It stood in 
a narrow valley, full of wood, and through 
which a mountain stream took an irregu- 
lar course, over a bed of stones, and frag- 
ments of rock, shivered from the steep 
cliffs above. In the middle were these 
ruins, which were evidently those of an 
extensive abbey, consisting of massy walls, 
buttresses, lofty arches, columns, and win- 
dows, with a great deal of beautiful tra- 
cery ; trees and shrubs had started from 
amidst the rubbish, and spread their 
branches amidst the dilapidated towers 
and windows. The walls were in many 



54 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

places completely covered with ivy, and 
in others thickly tufted with long stream- 
ing grass and flowers. The ivy, here and 
there breaking away from the walls, hung 
in thick groups of foliage between the 
trees; and altogether, the place was pic- 
turesque, solemn, and affecting. Every 
thing around it was in character with it, 
consequently, well adapted to keep alive, 
if not heighten, the sensations it inspired. 

The surface of the Vale was covered 
with briars and thorns ; the stream that 
ran murmuring through it was just suffi- 
ciently impeded in its course to create a 
melancholy sound ; while the dark woods, 
that hung nearly inverted in some places, 
on the almost-perpendicular cliffs, threw 
a solemn gloom over the whole. 

In wandering tlirough the dilapidated 
walls, Donaghue had discovered part of a 
flight of stairs in one of the towers. He 
ascended it, and on gaining the second 
landing-place, found himself at the en- 
trance of a long narrow gallery, that had 
connected this tower with another, and off 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 55 

of which were several chambers, but now 
almost all in a state of irreparable ruin. 
Amongst them, however, he discovered 
one still habitable, and with a window 
looking down through the valley full upon 
Ashley Vale, and which, of course, pre- 
sented to him a view he thought enchant- 
ing; and hither, in consequence, finding 
the remains of a seat or two here, and 
some pieces of wood, that could be used 
as a table, he brought some books and 
materials for writing and drawing, and 
gradually made it his favourite retreat, 
delighted with the romantic situation of 
the place, his perfect freedom here, from 
all apprehension of either being intrud- 
ed on or intruding, the uninterrupted 
opportunity it allowed him for reflection, 
and above all, for gazing without suspi- 
cion on those enchanting shades, beneath 
which his imagination still pictured the 
form of her he loved. But not to its idle re- 
veries were his hours here all devoted ; he 
had furnished himself with means of pass- 
ing them more rationally. Here he read 



56 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

some of the best authors; here he com- 
mitted to paper the sentiments and reflec- 
tions they gave rise to ; and here he 
sketched several beautiful landscapes, both 
from memory, and the immediate scenery 
before him. But perhaps the hour that 
prevented his finding a resource in any of 
these occupations, was not the least plea- 
sing one to him for being at the ruins ", 
the silent hour of eve, what time the 
" glowworm 'gins to light his pale and 
ineffectual fire," or when " the moon, ap- 
parent queen of all, with more pleasing 
light, shadowy sets off the face of things." 
But how, it may be asked, did he manage 
to pass so much of his time here without 
the knowledge of the doctor ? but it should 
be remembered, the doctor was always on 
the wing for pleasure, and though, on 
finding that his leaving Donaghue to 
soHtude had not had the intended effect, he 
would gladly have declined all further en- 
gagements for his sake, yet Donaghue, 
without appearing to oppose this, managed 
matters so as to prevent it ; so that actual- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 57 

ly he was nearly as much master of his 
time as if he had not had a guest with 
him. 

He had loitered here one evening to alater 
hour than usual, so lost in thought as per- 
haps to be unconscious of the circumstance, 
till his attention was suddenly caught by 
the moon, rising in splendid majesty above 
the wood-clad cliffs, and gradually dissi- 
pating the deep gloom that had but a 
moment before pervaded the scene ; some 
parts still remained involved in masses of 
shade, but not so totally obscured that the 
eye could not penetrate to them, so as to 
be satisfied they consisted of separate and 
various parts, although their exact shapes 
and forms could not then be clearly de- 
fined. Donaghue contemplated the sha- 
dowy scene with feelings of indescribable 
admiration ; its solemn, its soothing effect 
upon them was heightened by the still 
loneliness of the place and hour, that lite- 
rally deepened the murmur in the woods, 
and the sound of the torrent in the vale ; 
d3 



58 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

while the drone of the beetle was heard 
in the cloisters, and the owl, ever and 
anon, rustling in his ivied bower, where 
he had long held his unmolested reign. 

How long Donaghue might have con- 
tinued lost in admiration of the scene be- 
fore him, we cannot pretend to say ; but 
he was suddenly roused from his contem- 
plative posture, by the trembling sounds 
of a harp floating through the building. 
He started, and listened, as if imagining 
himself under some illusion of the ima- 
gination ; but no, the sounds were distinct, 
though low and mournful ; and it seemed 
to him, as if some fair daughter of sorrow 
waked her own sad tale from every trem- 
bling string. But could it actually be with- 
in the building ? Yet, to hear the sound 
of such an instrument from any one of 
the buildings at the Vale, was utterly im- 
possible ; and the next question was, who 
the performer could possibly be. In other 
times, when there was hardly a mind that 
did not own the influence of superstition, 
this was a question that might probably 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 59 

have been easily resolved ; for Donaghue 
was not ignorarit of the general belief that 
was entertained of the place being haunt- 
ed, or the reports that prevailed of the 
sound of wailing and of music having 
been often heard within it. Some one 
from the Vale he felt persuaded it was, 
and from what he knew of the party 
there, he conceived there was not so great 
a probability of its being any one as Miss 
Erin herself But how could he admit 
such a thought — how imagine any thing 
so wild, so improbable, so romantic, as 
that, at such an hour, she would frequent 
such a place ? Romantic it certainly was, 
but neither so wild, nor so improbable as 
at first seemed to be the case, since, for an 
instant, he had not an idea that she came 
there by herself; and in short, the suppo- 
sition was so pleasing, so captivating to 
his imagination, that he could not, would 
not persuade himself to rehnquish it ; for, 
should he do so, how totally devoid of in- 
terest would the place be, that but a few mi- 
nutes before had been so delightful to him \ 



60 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Leaving his own immediate retreat, he 
softly advanced into the gallery, and was 
cautiously proceeding in the direction of 
the harp, when it suddenly ceased. After 
waiting some time, without hearing it 
again, he hastened back to the stairs by 
which he ascended, in order to watch be- 
low for those he expected to see quitting 
the building. The music appeared to 
have come from the chapel, about which 
were various cells and cloistered galleries, 
denominated the friars' walks, from being 
the places, it was supposed, in which, 
when the weather would not permit their 
ranging abroad, or at times of rigid disci- 
pline, they used to meditate. Though 
hastening to decay, like the rest of the 
pile, it was still sufficiently perfect to allow 
imagination to supply what was lost, and 
form a just idea of what it must have 
been in its pristine days, when pealing 
anthems swelled the notes of praise within 
its lofty aisles, and golden censers flung 
their fragrant clouds around the shrines of 
saints and martyrs. Hither Donaghue 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 61 

now bent his steps, convinced that it was 
by this those he expected to see must 
quit the building, and equally that they 
could not yet have done so, from the 
number of intricate passages they must 
have to traverse, according to the direc- 
tion in which he heard the harp ; but in 
vain, concealed in a dusky corner, he 
watched and waited, no one approached ; 
neither voices nor footsteps were heard; 
nothing save again the murmur of the 
woods, and the continuous flow of the 
water ; and at length, perplexed and im- 
patient, he was on the point of rushing 
forward, to try whether his ear, or rather 
his imagination, had not deceived him, 
when a sudden recollection of the lateness 
of the hour, and the consequent uneasi- 
ness or alarm his protracted absence might 
occasion at the castle, induced him to 
check himself, and reluctantly depart. 
But the next morning he resolved on 
satisfying himself; the harp must remain, 
if he had not indeed been in a dream or 
trance, and was accordingly all impatience 



62 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

for it ; but, as is often the case with us, 
poor short-sighted mortals, he was impa- 
tient for that which was to bring him dis- 
appointment; for the doctor not only 
chose to give him his company the whole 
of this morning, but to dine with him, 
beginning indeed to experience something 
of remorse for having left him so much to 
himself; and from this feeling, would have 
remained with him for the evening, though 
he acknowledged, with a deep sigh, there 
was to be a delightful party at the Vale, 
had not Donaghue forced him to keep his 
engagement there, pretending that he had 
some matters to attend to that would 
oblige him to leave him. 

The moment he was gone, Donaghue 
hastened from the elastic, as if fearful, i^ 
he delayed an instant, he would return to 
prevent his going out, and cut across the 
fields, as usual, towards the Vale, by w^hich 
he considerably shortened the distance to 
the abbey. It was late before the doctor 
kft him, so that the gloom that pervaded 
the ruins by the time he reached them. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 63 

certainly rendered the exploit of travers- 
ing them rather a hazardous one ; but 
what will not impatience, or a romantic 
imagination, lead us to do ! In spite of 
all risks, Donaghue resolutely made his 
way to the place from whence he con- 
ceived the sound of the harp had issued; 
but no harp was now to be found there, 
nor the slightest trace or vestige of any 
human being having been recently in the 
place. 

Donaghue for a moment was lost in 
perplexity, and inclined to believe that 
his ear had deceived him; but no, this 
was to admit that he had been in a trance 
or delirium ; and all that was to be sup- 
posed was, that the harp had been re- 
moved. Well, this put an end to the ex- 
pectation he had been indulging in all 
day, the soothing, the delightful expecta- 
tion of again listening to Eveleen, and, 
unsuspected by her, catching a glimpse of 
her by the pale moonlight, and a listless- 
ness, a feeling of disappointment came 
over him at the moment, that made him 



64 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

languidly retrace his way back to the 
chapel. Just as he reentered it, from the 
range of cells, or dormitories above, the 
moon had begun to partially dispel the 
darkness in which it was shrouded. There 
was something in the partial dispersion of 
this, the capricious manner in which the 
beams tinged the surrounding objects, 
fully revealing some, and to others giving 
a character and shape not belonging to 
them, that gave such scope to the fancy, 
as involuntarily detained Donaghue on 
the spot, and awakened him again to a 
feeling of admiration. While yet he 
gazed around him, he started, under the 
idea of again hearing the trembling strings 
of a harp. He listened with all the in- 
tensity of attention. The sound present- 
ly became more distinct, so much so in- 
deed, as to convince him it came from 
one of the upper cells, or cloisters, looking 
down upon, or rather into the chapel ; and 
after a short symphony, a voice of exquisite 
sweetness sung the following verses : — 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 65 

** When Nature form'd the human frame, 

And view'd perfection's mould, 
The eye its tend'rest care became 

T' express the mind untold. 

*' Her universal language dwells. 

Concise, correct, and pure; 
That in one glance more clearly tells, 

Than words could well ensure. 

^* Oh, precious orb, what equals thee, 

Thou index of the mind ? 
With rapture I my Delia see. 

And know that she is kind. 

" The eye, where sense appears enthron'd, 

Tells me she reads my heart; 
And what my tongue would not have own'd, 

Is thus made to impart. 

** Her looks I watch, and know full well, 

When joy or grief prevails ; 
Those beauteous orbs expressive tell 

The passion that assails. 

" Oh that the gods would soon decree, 

And Delia's heart incline. 
No mortal could so happy be, 

Than I, to call her mine." 



The voice ceased, and Donaghue be- 
came motionless, in expectation of hear 
ing some one speak, or descending ; but 



66 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

he was disappointed — he neither heard 
footsteps nor voice again ; but the instant 
after, the rush of garnaents, as of some one 
sweeping through the* cloisters above, and 
then all was stillness, or dead silence again ; 
and the solemn voice of waterfalls posses- 
sed the ear, and the moaning wind rust- 
ling through the long dark grass, and 
wild flowers, and ivy that begirt the place. 
Well, it was strange, but there must, of 
course, be some other way of quitting the 
chambers above, than he was aware of 
Yet it was odd that such silence should 
have followed the singing ; for that Miss 
Erin, or indeed any other female, should 
have come to such a place, at such an hour, 
by themselves, was an idea that was not 
admissible. But though persuaded no one 
remained, yet he continued to loiter, or 
rather could not prevail on himself to de- 
part, till again the cruelty of awakening 
apprehension in the minds of those inte- 
rested about him, induced him to leave 
the place. 

That it was Miss Erin he had heard, he 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 67 

could not allow himself to doubt, so much 
did the singing resemble hers; and yet, 
where or how had the harp been disposed 
of, that he had so vainly sought after? for 
he could not suppose that she had it car- 
ried backwards and forwards every mo- 
ment, just as she felt a sudden whim or 
inclination to visit the place. 

He could not refrain from endeavour- 
ing to learn something about her the next 
morning at breakfast from the doctor, as 
he had indeed done the preceding one. 
But the doctor could give him very little 
information. There had been a great deal 
of playing and singing amongst the young 
people, and he concluded of hers, and that 
was all he could tell him ; for he had been 
engaged at cards the whole evening. 

Donaghue resolved never to cease till 
he had discovered whether he was wrong 
or not, in his conjectures respecting her, 
and if not her, who it was he had heard ; 
but any further attempts or eflforts for the 
present were necessarily suspended, by 
the unexpected arrival of Melville. 



68 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 



CHAPTER V. 



Attun'd to happy unison of soul, 

To whose exalted eye a fairer world, 

Of which the vulgar never had a glimpse, 

Displays its charms ; whose minds are richly fraught 

With philosophic store — superior light, 

And in whose breast enthusiastic burns 

Virtue, the sons of interest deem romance." 

Nothing but his absence from the coun- 
try could have kept Melville so long from 
his friend ; his regard for him was truly 
fraternal, and he now joined him, under 
the hope of inducing him to quit his soli- 
tude, and take up his quarters with him 
the ensuing winter at his uncle's house in 
town, who united with him in feeling a 
very sincere interest about him, and much 
anger and indignation against his own 
uncle, general O'Donaghue, for not hav- 
ing before this done something essential 
for him. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 69 

Donaghue was more pleased than sur- 
prised by his appearance, being perfectly 
satisfied that the moment he was at liberty 
to come to him, he should see him. The 
first joy of meeting over, Melville could 
not suppress a sensation of melancholy at 
the alteration which he noticed in the 
looks of his friend. To a romantic eye, 
perhaps, it might have made him appear 
more interesting, but to a person rationally 
interested about him, it gave serious con- 
cern and uneasiness. When he heard 
however the manner in which he passed 
his time, the solitude to which he seemed 
to have devoted himself, he could not 
w^onder, however grieved he might be at 
w^hat he witnessed ; but a change should 
soon be effected, he determined : he avow- 
ed the determination, protesting he would 
never let him rest till he had made him 
return to his wonted habits, and resume 
his former intercourse with the world. — 
" For, at your period of life, to become a 
recluse, really the idea is not endurable !" 
and he spoke with something of indigna- 



70 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

tion. Yet, at the very moment he did so, 
his soul was melting within him, at the 
recollection of other days — days of pleasure 
and delight — days that could not be re- 
called, and he now much feared could 
never be equalled ; but exertions must be 
made ; if Donaghue pined, as he much 
suspected, under a secret passion, either 
the pride that opposed obstacles to his 
seeking the attainment of the object of it 
must be combated, or else his good sense 
must be called into action, to enable him 
to overcome it. A thousand times he re- 
gretted not having joined him sooner, 
fearing, from the length of time he had 
been allowed to continue in solitude, he 
should find it a more difficult matter than 
he had at first imagined ; but he would 
persevere, and the exertions of friendship 
must surely be crowned with success — 
sacred friendship, next to religion, the 
only real soother of our cares and sorrows 
here ; for who has the power of calming, 
of allaying the passions equal to a friend ? 
Our acquaintances, prompted by good-na- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 71 

ture and religion, may be kind, and even 
consoling to us, in the hour of bodily pain 
and sickness ; but when the mind is tor- 
tured with anxiety — when the soul is torn 
by the infliction of baseness and ingrati- 
tude — when the heart is loaded with sor- 
rows, that still it wishes to hide from 
the garish eye of day, where, but in the 
bosom of a friend, can we find relief? 

Rosebud was delighted at the arrival 
of Melville, of whom he had heard so 
much from Donaghue, that he was actu- 
ally well acquainted with him before he 
saw him, and now received him quite as 
an old friend ; and Melville was previous- 
ly made sufficiently acquainted with him, 
to be pleased at finding him at Altoir-na- 
Grenie, and more particularly so, when 
he found that in him he should have a 
ready auxiliary in his determination con- 
cerning Donaghue. 

" And so, Donaghue, you actually do 
not visit at the Vale ?" he cried, on their 
being left for a little while to themselves 
by the doctor. " I should have conceived 



72 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 

the family there the very kind of family 
to have allured you from your plan of se- 
clusion." 

Donaghue shook his head. 

" Ay, you shake your head, but, like 
our friend Burleigh, say nothing, and for 
a very good reason, because you have no- 
thing to say in vindication of your plan." 

" What," said Donaghue, with a smile, 
" when I have the arguments of poets, 
philosophers, and sages to support me in 
it ? I know what men of the world say 
against it — I know, that by adopting 
such a one, by withdrawing from society, 
they say, that, by degrees, we not only 
lose entirely our relish for it, but the ha- 
bits of polished life become troublesome 
to us, till at length they are cast off; so 
that should a period arrive for claiming us 
back into our former situations, we not 
only shrink from the thronging fancies of 
what we may have to encounter, but may, to 
our sorrow, not be able to recover our lost 
ground. But, in reply to these observa- 
tions, have we not to adduce the uninter- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 73 

rupted leisure and opportunity which se- 
clusion affords us for study — for acquiring 
a knowledge of ourselves, and preparing 
for that change, towards which we are all 
progressively advancing ?" 

" Yes," replied Melville, " no one can 
dispute that occasional retirement is ne- 
cessary—that to thoroughly understand the 
sense of what we read, to reap advantage 
from the studies we are pursuing, it is re- 
quisite we should, now and then, retreat 
into the calm shades of seclusion ; but re- 
tirement and solitude are widely different 
— the one only prepares and qualifies us 
for appearing to advantage in life, the 
other estranges us from it, destroys our 
social habits, and, finally, engenders mi- 
santhropy ; for those we shun, we gradual- 
ly, I may almost say naturally, begin to 
dislike and fear. In short, total solitude, 
or complete seclusion, is what I utterly 
abhor, as inimical to all the social charities 
of life, and what, I am convinced, no one 
ever adopted, without heartily repenting, 
hdwever pride may induce them to con- 

VOL. III. E 



74 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ceal this repentance ; for man is a social 
animal, and that love of our species that 
is implanted in us, and would voluntarily 
lead us to an intercourse with them, can- 
not be resisted or acted against, without 
the excitement of sensations that must be 
subversive of all contentment. Let any 
one only think what his feelings would 
be, if condemned to banishment from the 
world, and then ask why he should inflict 
on himself a punishment that w^ould be so 
intolerable from another." 

" Well, don't be alarmed," said Dona- 
ghue, again smiling; " whatever, in the 
first confusion of an unsettled mind, I 
might have half meditated, I am not yet 
going to renounce this wicked world. Se- 
clusion has been so far of benefit to me, as 
to afford me a proper opportunity for re- 
covering and collecting myself, and being 
thoroughly convinced, in consequence, 
that a life of supine indolence would, at 
my age, be indeed disgraceful and unsuit- 
able, even if it accorded with my temper 
or inclination, which it does not by any 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 75 

means. In a word, you shall find that I con- 
sider myself too green, yet awhile, to be 
cut down and made firewood of, as the 
moment my uncle arrives, I shall consult 
with him on the best plan for entering 
upon active service again." 

" But why devote yourself to retire- 
ment till his return," demanded Melville, 
" and thus lose the intervening opportu- 
nities that might occur for reversing the 
scene, without his assistance ? With your 
advantages of birth, of person, and educa- 
cation, there is no knowing, Donaghue, 
what, by this time, might have been the 
pleasing result of your having kept up 
your usual intercourse with the world : 
but there is nothing has exasperated me 
so much with you, as your declining to 
cultivate an intimacy at the Vale, where, 
from the sentiments, I am well aware, en- 
tertained of you by some of the family, I 
can hardly doubt but for your own fault 



6( 



I understand you," said Donaghue, 
E 2 



76 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

interrupting him with much emotion ; 
** but on that subject I must entreat your 
silence, my dear fellow. You are mista- 
ken, indeed, in what you think; and when 

I tell you " he stopped, checked the 

impulse that was hurrying him forward to 
detail what he knew, or rather had heard, 
and thought, in consequence, of sir Wil- 
liam, and prevailed on himself not to speak 
to the prejudice of Eveleen's father. 

" Well," replied Melville, " I will so far 
oblige you, as to say nothing on it, at least 
at present, only that I presume, out of 
complaisance to me, you will now and 
then honour the family at the Vale with 
your presence, as I must, occasionally, 
make my appearance there, which I will 
not however without you, except I wish 
to offend my uncle, w^iose oldest and most 
intimate friend, as I believe I have already 
told you, sir William Erin is." 

« Well, well, we will talk about that," 
siaid Donaghue; " let us now start ano- 
ther topic. I have a thousand questions 
to ask you about your travels. This uncle 



TRADITION QF THE CASTLE. 77 

of yours seems to have a strange rambling 
propensity." 

" He does," replied Melville ; " it could, 
however, be accounted for ; and I believe, 
by way of amusing some one of your so 
litary hours here, T will yet explain the 
cause; it may be as well to do so, and 
thus bespeak your sympathy in time." 

" Oh ! well," said Donaghue, laughing, 
" it will be always at your service ; and 
this will be quite the place for calling it 
into action, where we can so quietly tune 
our distresses, and record our woes." 

Melville wishing to devote a few days 
entirely to his friend, desired his arrival at 
Altoir-na-Grenie might not immediately 
be made known, and, in consequence, the 
doctor made up his mind to abstaining, for 
a little while, from going to the Vale. In 
consequence of the wish, therefore, that 
Melville had expressed, the party were a 
good deal disconcerted the next morning, 
by the sight of Foley crossing the court- 
yard, who was well known by them all, 
Melville as well as the others, owing to 



78 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

his having been once an attendant on his 
uncle, to be an incessant tattler, and one 
who made it his business to run about 
from house to house, with all the news he 
could respectively collect at them. 

"The coxcomb!" exclaimed Donaghue, 
extremely provoked, and who indeed had 
a particular cause of dislike to him, from 
conceiving, from the impertinent ques- 
tions he asked, and the curiosity he evin- 
ced, on every occasion, about his affairs, 
that he was a kind of spy of sir William 
Erin, " only he has had a glimpse of us, 
through the windows being open, I cer- 
tainly should have given orders to be de- 
nied to him ; we shall now not only be 
tormented with his impertinence for an 
hour or two, but, through his means, be 
immediately broken in upon, as, the in- 
stant he leaves this, he will run about 
every where, proclaiming your arrival, 
Melville." 

" Ah ha !" said Foley, entering at the 
moment, and who, ere his doing so, had 
learned who were in the parlour, " this is 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 79 

what I call being fortunate indeed, to 
pounce upon a whole covey — to catch a 
leash, as I may say, in this manner. Mr. 
O'Brien, it is quite a rare thing to have 
the present pleasure. ^ — Mr. Melville, I 
congratulate you, and myself, on your ar- 
rival here; and, doctor, I hope I see you 
so well, as to need neither an exertion of 
your own skill or mine. Oh dear! I 
really am quite rejoiced, and yet, as my 
friend Herodotus has it, I am happy and 
I am grieved; and were I asked why, I 
should give the same answer that king 
Xerxes did to Artabanes, on his observing 
that he wept, just as he had pronounced 
himself happy at seeing the Hellespont 
obscured with ships, and all the shores 
and the plains of the Abydenians crowded 
with men — ' It has just occurred to me, 
reflecting how short the entire of human 
life is, that not one will arrive at his hun- 
dredth year." 

"And yet, doctor," said Melville, "Ar- 
tabanes' answer shewed that, for the enjoy- 
ments we have in this life, it is quite suf- 



80 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ficiently long — * For,' says he, * no man 
has been made so happy by nature, to 
whom it did not often, and not once only 
occur, to wish rather to die than live; for 
the misfortunes befalling, and the dis- 
eases disturbing them, short as it is, make 
life appear to be long and tedious." 

" Ah [ very correct indeed," said Foley 
— " very correct ; and I am happy to think 
of the reflecting turn of mind you possess, 
to let such observations make such an im- 
pression on you; for a reflective turn of 
mind indicates a philosophical one, and a 
philosophical one is absolutely requisite, 
when we are about hearing any thing un- 
pleasant." 

" Unpleasant I" repeated IMelville, with 
something of emotion — " why I hope that 
is not the case with me, doctor !" 

" My dear sir, I am sorry to say the re- 
verse ; but your worthy uncle " 

"My uncle ! why what of him, pray?'* 

" Is not long for this world." 

" Not long for this world!" 

" No ; if he was, he never would have 



T]^4^ITION OF THE C4STLE. 81 

been ordered about as he has been ; wlien 
I heard of the voyage to Lisbon, I guess- 
ed how it was ; and since he has lingered 
long enough to return from it, rely on it 
h)B will soon be ordered on another ; for, I 
ani sorry to say it, there are a set of nien 
amongst us, that for the sake of their re- 
putation, as they call it — that is, in order 
not to let a man die under their hands, as 
they say, will have the inhumanity to put 
an unfortunate patient to the torture of 
going to a considerable distance to breathe 
his last sigh. Now this is a custom I al- 
ways abhorred ; when once I get hold of 
a patient, I never, by any chance, loosen 
or release him from it, till I either see him 
completely on his legs again, or beyond 
the power of ever using them more." 

Rosiebud coughed slightly — " That is, I 
suppose you mean, doctor," he said, " pa- 
tients of a certain description." 

" Why, to be sure, my good friend, I 

won'it deny that the lives of some men 

must be more highly estimated than those 

of others ; pr, in other words, that it is a 

e3 



82 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

peculiar duty to exert all our skill for the 
preservation of a man, whose fortune gives 
him the power of being a benefactor to 
society." 

Rosebud gave another hem—" And only 
on that account ! How nobly and abstract- 
edly disinterested we sometimes are !" he 
said. 

" But, my dear sir," resumed Melville, 
" there is some mistake here; my uncle's 
voyage to Lisbon was rather more for 
pleasure than health." 

" Ay, so, I make no doubt, he was per- 
suaded to think ; but I, who had the ho- 
nour of attending him for some time, and 
during that time made it my business to 
study his constitution, I knew the re- 
verse : but don't let me affect you too much, 
Mr. Melville, by what I have said ; reflect 
how many like you are doomed to lose 
their dearest friends — that, in short, there 
are none of us exempt from cares and 
troubles ; even kings, as my friend Lucian 
has it, if you would more accurately con- 
template them, you would find they were 
not, in any degree, happier than others, what 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 83 

through the insincerity and ambiguity of 
fortune, to say nothing of the disturbance, 
hatred, snares, and flattery, attached to 
their situation ; besides, there is no occa- 
sion, as yet, for utter despair. Could your 
uncle be prevailed on to seek a man who 
really understood his constitution, and 
who would esteem it an equal duty and a 
pleasure to devote himself to him, I think 
there might be a chance." 

" But where, my dear doctor," inter- 
rupted Melville, wdth affected eagerness, 
who now began to see into his drift, and 
was not a little amused by him, " where 
is such a man to be found ? or who is he ?" 

Foley made no reply, but he rested his 
chin on his gold-headed cane, slowly tra- 
ced on the hearthstone, near which he was 
sitting, and which happened, at the mo- 
ment, to be covered with dust blown in at 
the windows, " Doctor James Foley is 
the man." 

" Well done, Foley !" cried Rosebud, 
slapping him on the back, as he read these 
words over his shoulder ; ** who,, after this. 



84 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

will pretend to say you are not a modest 
man? — Mr. Melville, after the high re- 
commendation this gentleman has received 
from himself, I hope you will not fail 
mentioning him to your uncle." 

" Oh ! as to that, my good friend," said 
Foley, conceitedly, *' I need not depend 
upon that recommendation, if I did not 
choose it; but I — perceive, clearly per- 
ceive, from what has now occurred, that 
envy, more or less, is always excited by 
rising talents — that '' 

" Envy !" exclaimed Rosebud, fired by 
the insinuation ; " why, you insignificant 



Here Donaghue, well acquainted with 
the temper of his friend, hastily inter- 
posed, by asking Foley when he had been 
at the Vale? 

" At the Vaie, my good sir \ there is 
hardly a day in which I do not do EoyseHf 
the happiness of looking in there; not, I 
am proud tx) say, in my medical capacity, 
but merely as a friend; and I nev^r call 
there that I am not interrogated cooeem- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 85 

ing you, so great is the regret and surprise 
which your never yet having been prevail- 
ed on to make your appearance there has 
excited, as well as, indeed, your general 
seclusion; and, I must confess, I am 
amongst those who feel astonishment at 
it — astonishment, that a young gentler- 
man, so every way calculated to adorn so- 
ciety, should so pertinaciously persist in 
keeping himself apart from it : it is one of 
those things " 

Here Donaghue, in extreme disgust, 
gravely rose from his chair, and taking up 
a book, left the room. 

" He cannot bear any allusion, J see, 
yet to his particular sorrows," said Foley, 
as if utterly unconscious of the rebuke 
this was meant to convey. 

" Cannot bear any impertinenoe, you 
should say," cried Rosebud, vehemently, 
" Upon my word, Mr. Foley, you would 
do well if you were to content yourself 
with trying to dive into people's disorders, 
without trying, at the same time, to dive 
into their private concerns; but> to be 



86 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

sure, you might want practice, or, at least, 
patients, perhaps, if you did, for a budget 
of news every morning is a great recom- 
mendation to old dowagers and antiqua- 
ted maids." 

" He ! he !" tittered Foley, " you speak 
from experience, doctor," he said, pertly. 

Rosebud again cast a look of fierceness 
on him, then suddenly checking himself— 
*^ As you are fond of quotations, I will 
give you one," he said — * The lips of talk- 
ers will be telling such things as apertain 
not unto them, but the words of such as 
have understanding are weighed in the 
balance ;' and now that we are on the sub- 
ject of quotations, I wonder you are not 
ashamed to be dragging in every moment, 
by the head and shoulders, no matter how 
inapplicable, those scraps of learning you 
have got, like a parrot, by rote." 

" Ha ! ha ! that is very well of you ! 
but not exactly so either ; for though my 
very great and extensive practice has pre- 
vented my devoting all the time I could 
wish to the study of literature, I have yet 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 8T 

been able to give up some hours to the 
lamp, and have ever considered the sub- 
lime, when properly introduced, after the 
manner of a thunderbolt, that shelters all 
things." 

" If you were to attend more to the 
meaning of your friends, as you call them, 
than to their words, you might derive 
some advantage from their sayings, but as 
it is, you just derive as much benefit from 
them as a parrot." 

" Ah ! very well ! but you have read 

« 

" Yes, I believe I have," interrupted 
Rosebud; " but if I had not to more ac- 
count than you seem to have done, I 
should have had prudence and discretion 
enough to have held my tongue." 

" Or if you couldn't, you might have had 
recourse to the same method of avoiding be- 
tray ing yourself that th e geese in Cilicia had. 
The geese in Cilicia, dreading the eagles, 
when they cross Mount Taurus, take a 
large stone in their mouths, that, by put- 



88 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ting a temporary stop to their garrulity and 
babbling, they may pass over in silence." 

Rosebud's indignation now exceeding 
all bounds, he again started up. 

" Come, come, gentlemen," said Mel- 
ville, interfering, " 1 can't permit profes- 
sional men " 

" What, Rosy," cried Foley, taking 
special care to get behind Melville, " are 
you driven to the argumentum haculu 
num ? You must be devilish hard run 
indeed, when that's the case !" 

" Such a pert gabbling blockhead merits 
chastisement !" 

" My friend Xenophon says — ' When 
beasts were able to speak, a sheep said to 
her master — " Ya, ya, ya !" 

But here Foley, who had been retreat- 
ing all the time, effected his escape, favour- 
ed by Melville, who, placing his back 
against the door, continued to guard the 
pass, until he saw him fairly out of sight. 

The doctor, having given up going to 
the Vale for a day or two, thought this 
would be a good opportunity for paying 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 89 

a visit to his friend Mr. Medlicott; ac- 
cordingly, the morning after Melville's 
arrival, he set off for this gentleman's 
house, distant about nine or ten miles from 
Altoir-na-Grenie, leaving the friends com- 
pletely to themselves, and relieved from 
any immediate apprehension of intrusion, 
through Foley's having met an express, 
just as he was quitting the court-yard, re- 
quiring his instant attendance on a lady, 
residing at a considerable distance. 

The doctor was hardly gone, ere an in- 
vitation was received from a Mr. Felim 
O'Connor, a rich miller in the neighbour- 
hood, requesting the company of Dona- 
ghue and any friends he might have with 
him, to a christening at his house the fol- 
lowing evening. 

Wishing to oblige, which he knew his 
acceptance of the invitation would do, 
Donaghue was on the point of sending 
such an answer as was wished for, when 
he learned that Miss Erin, who was to be 
one of the godmothers, was to be there, 
with a large party from the Vale, an inti^ 



90 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

mation that instantly decided him against 
going. 

Melville, who had anticipated a good 
deal of amusement from such a scene, was 
a little vexed. Donaghue, however, could 
not be prevailed on to change his resolu- 
tion; but at the same time he tried to 
persuade Melville himself to go, and this 
from a twofold motive — his seeing that be 
had an inclination to be present, and his 
wishing for the opportunity his absence 
w^ould afford him to pay another visit to 
the ruin, where, if he did not this evening 
hear the music, he should, of course, con- 
clude, or rather be confirmed in his con- 
jecture, of its being Miss Erin he had 
heard. His anxiety to be out of doubt or 
suspense about this was so great, as to 
render him really urgent with Melville to 
honour Mr. O'Connor with his company. 

Melville, however, appeared undecided 
for some time. At length, he thought he 
would go, provided he could do so with- 
out letting himself be known, conceiving 
he should have infinitely more amusement 



TRADITION OP THE CASTLE. 91 

at such a place, by appearing in a feigned 
character, than in his own. This was not 
the first time he had enjoyed a masque- 
rade frolic, and he was now so bent on 
one, that he set about consulting the cor- 
poral on the subject. 

The corporal, having hearkened to him 
attentively, suddenly left the room, with- 
out any reply ; but almost as suddenly re- 
turned to it, with pleasure in his looks, 
and a bundle under his arm, which de- 
positing on the table — " Ah then, plase 
your honour, sure then I think," he cried, 
" I can rig you out in great style, so as to 
make you appear as nice a young farmer 
as any of them that will be at Felim 
O'Connor's this evening ; and you needn't 
have any objection to putting these things 
on," opening the bundle as he spoke, " for 
the devil a back they were ever on, since 
they came out of the tailor's hands, but 
are a bran new shute of clothes, which my 
late master, the Lord be good to his soul ! 
made me a present of, just a little before 
his death, and which, through one thing 



92 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

and another, the troubles that came on us 
after, and our going to the wars, have ever 
since, as a body may say, been lying up 
in lavender; and little did he who gave 
them think, when he was giving them, 
what would prevent their been worn, or 
that his only son would have been driven 
to fight and spill so much of his precious 
blood; but there's no use in talking of 
past grievances — they wouldn't signify 
now, if we could but get his honour to have 
a little of your fun in him, iVIr. INlelville ; 
but the sorrow bit of that now, though I 
remember the time when he had enough 
of it. But by saint Patrick, INIr. Melville, 
but you'll be making me proud of my 
clothes r for JNIelville, while he was talk^ 
ing, had been employing himself in trying 
them on; " for you quite cut a dash in 
them ; and it's myself that fears you'll be 
doing mischief in them ! for JNliss Biddy 
O'Shaughnessey, to whom I am to intro- 
duce you, you know, as a young farmer 
come dowp to the neighbourhood about 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 93 

cattle, is a great belle hereabouts, and 
admirer of beauty." 

" Upon my word you are quite com- 
plimentary, corporal," said Melville; " how- 
ever, I will hope that Miss Biddy's tran- 
quillity will not suffer any injury through 
my wonderful attractions." 

The frolic was carried into effect, with- 
out Donaghue, at present, knowing any 
thing about it, through his quitting the 
castle at an early hour for the abbey ; and 
shortly afterwards Melville, equipped as a 
young farmer, with his eyebrows a little 
darkened, to give a shade of disguise to 
his features, in case the party from the 
Vale cast their eyes upon him, set out for 
the habitation of Mrs. O'Shaughnessey, ac- 
companied by the corporal, and where 
they found the lady of the mansion, and 
her fair daughter, most impatiently wait- 
ing his arrival. 

The corporal having introduced him, as 
agreed upon, the party forthwith set off 
for Mr. O'Connor's, Melville in the mid- 
dle, and Mrs. O'Shaughnessey, a stout 



94 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

large-made woman, decked out in all her 
Sunday finery, leaning on one arm, and 
the daughter, a strapping wench of nine- 
teen, fat, red, and blowzy, attired in as 
many overalls as Betsy Blossom, and with 
as many streamers as a ship of war dress- 
ed in the colours of all nations, on the other. 

The day had been uncommonly sultry, 
and still there was an overcoming close- 
ness in the air, and the ladies in conse- 
quence soon becoming fatigued, began 
leaning all their weight upon Melville, in 
such a manner as plainly indicated their 
considering his offered support as by no 
means a mere complimentary thing ; what 
he felt therefore, long before their coming 
to Mr. O'Connor's, may well be imagined. 
He bore it however without any indica- 
tion of impatience, considering, since he 
had entered upon a frolic, he should good- 
humouredly endure whatever it subjected 
him to. 

Primrose Farm, the scene of the enter- 
tainment, was a long, low, thatched build- 
ing, constructed something in the form of a 



TEADITION OF THE CASTLE. 95 

St. Patrick's cross, with doors opening 
from the points, or passages that met in 
the centre of it. This mode of building 
rendered the rooms extremely cool and 
pleasant in warm weather, but very much 
the reverse in winter, as, let the wind 
blow from wdiat quarter it listed, it was 
sure, from having an inlet at every point, 
to gain admission litre. Adjoining it were 
the ruins of a Franciscan abbey, once of 
considerable extent and magnificence, as 
the remains indicated, particularly one of 
the windows, two of the aisles, and some 
of the octagon pillars, that still retained 
the outlines of ancient grandeur and ele- 
gance. On the other side of the house 
was an old round tower of rude workman- 
ship, and on the north an exceeding large 
cross, with a curious Oghem inscription on 
it. The chapel belonging to the abbey 
w^as turned into a ball-alley, so that where 
priests preached, and people prayed, idle 
fellows now loitered and wrangled, ren- 
dering the habitation of Mr. Felim O'Con- 
nor disagreeable in some respects, while. 



96 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

in others, the vestiges of antiquity sur- 
rounding it rendered it interesting. 

A dwelling to which the builder had 
given so peculiar a form could not be seen 
without curiosity ; why it was built in so 
strange a manner occasioned a good deal 
of inquiry, and not less conjecture; some 
were of one opinion, some another; but it 
w^as the general one, considering the holy 
spot on which it was erected, that there 
must have been some very sufficient rea- 
son for giving it the shape it had ; and the 
prevailing one, or rather, report about it 
was, that it had been built at the cost of 
a Mr. Michael Delany, an old gentleman 
who had made a fortune abroad, no one 
knew how, and who, through some cir- 
cumstances connected with this fortune, 
being apprehensive of a visit from a being 
that shall be nameless, had decided on 
giving a form to his habitation that might 
operate as a spell in keeping him out, or if 
not, at least in procuring his own escape ; 
hence its numerous doors to the adjoining 
chapel, where he might defy him. Be 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 97 

that as it may, his successor, Mr. Felim 
O'Connor had, often reason to regret the 
whim, from the disturbance it was the oc- 
casion of to him, as, to say nothing of the 
dismal howlings of the wind through the 
building, it was hardly possible for any 
one to pass through the passages in winter 
without their light being extinguished — a 
circumstance that was always sure of cre- 
ating an alarm, when it happened to any 
of the female part of the family, insomuch 
as often to excite a belief that captain 
Rock, w4th some of his men, had gained 
admission, when it was only a harmless 
ghost or two, whisking back to the church- 
yard. As far, however, as good furniture 
and good cheer could render it comfort- 
able, it was rendered so — Mr. Felim 
O'Connor being rich and hospitable, and 
his wife well inclined to make a display 
of his money. 

Ere the arrival of Melville and his com- 
panions,all the guests, with the exception of 
the party from the Vale, who were not ex- 

VOL. III. F 



98 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

pected till a late hour, were assembled; 
tea and coffee were handing about, with a 
profusion of cakes of all descriptions, and 
all seemed to be enjoying themselves, and 
perfectly inclined to do justice to the en- 
tertainment provided for them. Mrs. 
O'Shaughnessey and her daughter had not 
been seated, when — " Ah, then, Tim Car- 
thy !" cried JNIrs. O'Connor, addressing 
herself to a great gaunt-looking fellow, who 
was officiating as attendant, " is this the 
way, and be hanged to you, you are mind- 
ing what you are about, not to have been 
after handing the tay yet to Mrs. O'Shaugh- 
nessey and Miss Bridget, or their friend ? 
— Ah, then, Mrs. O'Shaughnessey, honey ! 
what's the name of the gentleman you 
have brought along wid you ?" 

Mrs. O'Shaughnessey and her daughter 
stared at one another at this question, ut- 
terly unable to reply to it, the corporal 
havirig merely introduced Melville by the 
appellation of a young farmer. — " Why 
then, upon my faith," said the former. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 99 

" that's more than I can tell you — can 
you, Biddy ?" 

"No," replied Miss Bridget, "but I soon 
will ;" and tapping Melville on the shoul- 
der, whom she had contrived to make oc- 
cupy a chair beside her, but whose atten- 
tion happened at the instant to be diverted 
from her, " pray what's your name, sir?" 
she asked. 

" My name, ma'am !" repeated Melville, 
embarrassed by the suddenness of the 
question — " my name !" 

" Yes, sir ; but not the name your god- 
fathers and godmother gave you, but your 
father." 

" I — I believe — Dennis Scanlen, ma'am," 
he said, suddenly recovering himself, and 
fixing on the first name that came into 
his head. 

" Dennis Scanlen !" cried Mrs. O'Con- 
nor, almost with a scream — " why, then, 
have I the pleasure of seeing one of the 
Scanlens under my roof? I mean, if you 
are of the Ballinafod family, whose great 
F 2t 



100 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

grandfather, they have it recorded amongst 
them, had the honour of being made trum- 
peter to one of king William's ginirahr 

" The same, ma'am." 

" Ah, then, why didn't I know this 
sooner, that I might have given you a 
proper welcome at once? far don't you 
know that we are relations?" 

Melville bowed. 

" Nothing less than fifth cousins. Your 
grandmother, and my great grandfather 

But, Mr. O'Connor, dear," calling to 

her husband, who was making himself 
agreeable at the other end of the room to 
some ladies, " is this the way you are 
welcoming my relation to your house?" 

" Where?" demanded the obedient 
husband, turning round with quickness. 

" There he is, Dennis Scanlen ; and I'll 
be bound, when you look at him, you'll 
be saying you'd have known him any 
where for one of them." 

" Why then you may say that, 'tis his 
father's son I'd have known him to be 
any day, by his black eyebrows. — Well» 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 101 

i5ir, now that we have got you amongst 
us, you'll be letting us keep you a bit ?" 

" Ah, then, to be sure he will," said his 
wife ; " I'd take it very unkind — I'd take 
it indeed very unkind, if the child of his 
father wouldn't be stopping a bit with us." 

" You are very good," said Melville, " ex- 
tremely kind ; but, at present, I am " 

He was prevented proceeding in his 
excuse, by half a score old women, it seem- 
ed to him, starting forward to claim rela- 
tionship or acquaintance with him, through 
his supposed parents, and whose extrava- 
gant demonstrations of joy at seeing him, 
or rather the way they took to evince 
their pleasure at the circumstance, had 
very near been too much for his good-hu- 
mour and complaisance, more especially 
from the amusement he saw it occasioned 
in a quarter of the room where he did not 
like at all the idea of being laughed at. 
But more of this anon. He at length ex- 
tricated himself from the old ladies, and 
order being in some degree restored — 
'* Tim Carthy," cried Mrs. O'Connor, 



102 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

again addressing herself to the attendant, 
** I have been watching you all this time, 
and the devil a thing you have been doing 
but standing staring at my cousin Denny 
there, as if you had never seen a gentle- 
man before !" 

" Faith ! and Mrs. O'Connor," replied 
Tim, " it's no wonder if I do stare !" with 
his eyes still fixed upon Melville. 

" Ah, then, is this your manners, Tim, 
to be talking to your mistress before the 
company ? Be handing the tay about to 
the company — let them sugar themselves, 
and I'll milk them all round." 

" One eyebrow almost gone !" muttered 
Tim, as if unconsciously, on again hand- 
ing the tea-tray to Melville; and Melville 
immediately became sensible of what had 
occasioned his astonishment, and the re- 
buke of his mistress — namely, the brushing 
away of the black off of one of his eye- 
brows, through the caps of the old ladies, as 
they were saluting him, coming in contact 
with it. Before he came he might have 
laughed at the idea of such a mischance, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 103 

but now he did not like it, from the ridi- 
cule it might expose him to; so, by the 
aid of a looking-glass pretty near him, he 
slyly contrived to render both nearly alike 
again. 

" Ah then, Dennis, jewel," asked Mrs. 
O'Connor, as she continued to pour out 
the tea, " is there any chance of that 
match, that has been so long talked of, 
ever taking place between O'Dempsey 
and your cousin ?" 

" I really can't say, ma'am." 

" But you know whether it's off or 
not?" 

« No, really." 

" Well to be sure, that's odd ! but some 
people are very close. But any how, tell 
me, have you met, by any chance, with 
old Nell Rooney, since you came to the 
neighbourhood ?" 

" Not to my knowledge, ma'am." 

" Oh, then it's herself, poor soul ! that'll 
be taking on, if she doesn't see you be- 
fore you quit it ; for she's a kind of a re- 
lation, and was a great crony of your fa- 



104 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ther and mother's, when they lived here, 
a good many years ago ; more especially 
as the poor soul will be thinking your not 
seeking her out was owing to her being 
gone down in the world. Poor Nelly 
has been very unfortunate ; but indeed I 
think, Mrs. O'Shaughnessey, things seem- 
ed to take a turn with her ever since the 
trouble she caused to squire Riley's fami- 
ly about her pig, and no wonder — it was 
a bad thing to affront, or make inimies of 
people of their quality." 

*' Why, yes, to be sure," assented Mrs. 
O'Shaughnessey ; " but then if people are 
wronged " 

" Wronged!" exclaimed Mrs. O'Con- 
nor, with a stare of astonishment. " Why 
sure you don't imagine " 

" Oh, no matter," said the other. " I 
say nothing; for ' the least said the soonest 
mended." 

" Well," cried Miss Bridget, throwing 
herself back in her chair, and kicking up 
her feet, in rather a hoydening manner, 
♦* this is the way my mother always goes 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 105 

on, letting people think she knows more 
than she likes to tell !" 

" Why then I am sure you are very 
polite for saying so, Miss Biddy ! — But as 
you were observing, ma'am," to Mrs. 
O'Connor, drawing her chair closer to her 
as she spoke, but in doing which she un- 
fortunately set it upon Miss Biddy's foot, 
to her, no doubt, inexpressible pain, as 
the roar she gave intimated. 

" Good Heavens, girl! what is the 
matter ?" demanded the alarmed mother. 

" The matter !" repeated the daughter, 
as she kicked off her shoe, and began rub- 
bing her foot, " I think the devil's the 
matter with you sometimes, that you 
can't speak without fidgetting about so! 
and I wish he had had Mrs. Rooney, her 
pig, squire Riley, who had him stolen, 
and the whole set of them, before I had 
my great toe hurt as it is !" 

" Biddy ! Biddy ! I blush for you, to 
speak in such a way, before such ginteel 
company, and act so improper as you do, 
by shewing your bare foot I" 
F 3 



106 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" It's not bare," said Miss Biddy ; " for 
isn't the stocking on it still ?" 

But at this instant the sound of coach 
wheels, rolling towards the house, caused 
a general bustle ; an immediate arrange- 
ment took place — the chairs were disposed 
in better order, and Mr. and Mrs. O'Con- 
nor went out to receive their distinguish- 
ed guests from the Vale ; but a terrible 
disappointment awaited them — a sudden 
indisposition prevented Miss Erin from 
coming, so that the party merely consist- 
ed of lady Jane Morley, who, out of com- 
pliment to her family, had been asked to 
be one of the godmothers, Miss Bond, de- 
puted to stand in place of Miss P>in, Mr. 
Lawless, a dangler on lady Jane, for she 
could not exist without having some beaus 
at her absolute command, and sir Edward 
Surrey, one of the godfathers. 

Leaning on the arm of Mr. Lawless, 
lady Jane entered the room, and taking 
possession of the seat at the upper end of 
it, to which she was obsequiously ushered 
by her host and hostess, looked round her 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 107 

with a vacant stare, as if not perfectly 
comprehending that she saw any one in 
it. So far Miss Bond followed her ex- 
ample, in leaning also on her beau ; but 
as to seeming not to perceive there was 
any one else in the apartment, that was 
out of the question — so great was her anx- 
iety to ascertain what notice or admira- 
tion she, or at least her dress, excited, hav- 
ing on this evening attired herself in all 
the extravagance of the Parisian mode, as 
it prevailed on her quitting Paris ; so that 
from the quantity of furbelows and flow- 
ers, to say nothing of other ornaments 
with which she was decorated, she very 
much resembled a dancing puppet, and, 
in consequence, was very near meeting 
with a serious mischance; for Tim, who, 
throughout the evening, was evidently 
more intent on making remarks on the 
company than minding what he was him- 
self about, was so struck by her appear- 
ance, resembling nothing that he had ever 
seen before, that, on approaching her with 
the tea-tray — for though it had been sig- 



108 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

nified that the party from the Vale were 
not to be expected to tea, Mrs. O'Connor 
would insist on its being offered to them, 
ere any thing else took place, after their 
arrival — he became so entirely engrossed 
by looking at her, as not to perceive he 
was holding it unevenly, till it became com- 
pletely overturned, in such a direction as 
must have thrown all its contents into her 
lap, but for her own adroitness in push- 
ing it aside at the instant, in such a way 
as transferred them to her next neighbour, 
sir Edward's ; for, perceiving the careless- 
ness of the attendant, she was prepared to 
be on her guard against any ill conse- 
quences that might result from it. 

Not a little was the confusion winch 
the accident occasioned ; but as it was 
quickly ascertained that the tea had not 
been sufficiently hot to scald sir Edward, 
notwithstanding his exclamation to that 
effect in the first instance, and as every 
thing that could be done was done to 
prevent his suffering any serious incon- 
venience from it, order was quickly re- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 109 

stored; but not without the baronet's ob- 
serving to Miss Bond, that, upon his ho- 
nour, she had done the thing neatly, for 
he had never seen a more complete slight 
of hand trick played than hers. 

The ceremony of the christening at 
length commenced ; but here again was a 
little confusion, for, on the infant, as 
usual, being offered to one or other of the 
godmothers to hold, both refused taking 
it. At length it was absolutely forced 
upon Miss Bond, who, extremely indig- 
nant at a greater liberty being taken with 
her than with her ladyship, was determin- 
ed not to put up with it quietly ; accord- 
ingly, by degrees sidling towards her 
ladyship, she made a sudden attempt to 
put it into her arms, but which the other 
preventing, by starting back, the unfortu- 
nate infant would have fallen to the ground, 
had not sir Edward Surrey started forward 
just in time to save it. 

" Good Heavens !" exclaimed lady Jane, 
darting a glance of contempt at Miss 



110 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Bond; " the awkward thing! does she 
mean to be the death of the child ?" 

" The awkward thing !" repeated Miss 
Bond, in a tone of high exasperation. 
" Well, really," with a toss of her head, 
" this is what I never met with be- 
fore ! When I was at Paris, I was con- 
sidered " 

" Pray let the ceremony proceed," said 
lady Jane. — " And do, sir Edward, I be- 
seech you," to the unfortunate baronet, 
who looked round in vain for some one 
to relieve him from his squalling burden, 
" try if you can't, by dandling it a little, 
stop the roaring of that miserable little 
thing!" 

" Oh, don't mind it, my lady," cried 
Mrs. O'Connor — " 'tis a lucky sign for an 
infant to roar when it's christening." 

At length the ceremony was over, and 
lady Jane instantly prepared to depart; 
in vain she was implored and entreated to 
stay and partake of a collation, which, at 
no small expence and trouble, had been 
prepared for her, and the party to which 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. Ill 

she belonged; go she would, to the no 
snnall pleasure of Melville, who felt that 
her remaining would impose a very irk- 
some restraint upon him, as he could not, 
from a fear of recognition, have then acted 
as he washed. The risk of this he had 
been careless about ere his reaching Mr. 
O'Connor's, but hardly had he got there, 
ere he felt he should like to remain un- 
known for the remainder of the evening, 
from the greater liberty it would allow 
him to devote himself to one object. In 
short, he had scarcely entered the room, 
ere his eyes were attracted, and his fancy 
captivated, by one of the prettiest crea- 
tures he thought he had ever seen. She 
appeared to be about nineteen, and had 
for a companion a girl who seemed to be 
about her own age, and was also exces- 
sively pretty ; but there was this diffe- 
rence between them — Melville's charmer 
looked all life and animation, the other 
pale and languid, as if some cankerworm 
had fed upon her damask cheek, and 
stolen away its bloom and dimples. There 



112 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

was an air about them indicative of their 
not exactly belonging to the society in 
which they were met ; and Melville found 
the conjecture it gave rise to was not er- 
roneous, on eagerly inquiring who they 
were, being informed that one was the 
daughter, and the one he so particularly 
admired, Miss Audley, the relation, it 
was supposed, of a Mr. and Mrs. Wheat- 
ley, people of small but independent for- 
tune, and retired habits, who had lately 
taken a pretty cottage, called Rosehill, in 
the neighbourhood. 

One of the barns had been fitted up for 
dancing, and as soon as the party from 
the Vale had departed, the guests began 
to repair to this. Melville no sooner un- 
derstood that dancing was about com- 
mencing, than he flew, regardless of the 
looks and evident expectation of Miss 
O'Shaughnessey, to solicit the honour of 
Miss Audley's hand for the dance. 

It was granted, but with an air that 
plainly indicated a consciousness of its 
being a condescension its being so. Yet 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. US 

certainly it was impossible for the young 
lady to deny his being more deserving of 
it than any other person then present. 
Her friend declined following her ex- 
ample, though earnestly importuned to do 
so ; but though she would not dance, she 
attended her to the rustic ball-room, where, 
if there was not as much elegance as might 
have been pleasing to some of the party, 
there was at least as much mirth and en- 
joyment. 

Melville could not help continuing to 
be amused by the air of condescension 
with which his pretty partner continued 
to regard him. Yet that she did think 
him worthy of some regard was evident, 
from his still finding, whenever his eyes 
were for a moment diverted from her, on 
reverting to her, hers intently fastened 
on him. Sometimes she appeared a little 
confused at this; sometimes only laugh- 
ed, as if it really were of no kind of con- 
sequence what a person like him thought 
on the subject, whom, of course, if requi- 
site, she could check by a glance ; and her 



114 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

friend, keeping close to her elbow, though 
her wandering eye confessed her conversa- 
tion intended for him, she still addressed 
it to her, as if it could not possibly be ex- 
pected she could have entered into one 
with him. Well, Melville only admired 
her the more for these pretty little airs of 
supposed superiority, more especially as 
he thought he saw a little kind of strug- 
gle in her feelings about him. 

For the sake of amusement, he endea- 
voured to support the character he had 
assumed; but he was so every moment 
slipping into his usual style of speaking, 
that there is hardly a doubt but that, in 
some measure, he must have betrayed 
himself ere long, had not his fair partner 
been hurried away. Before the first dance 
was well over, the servant from Rosehill 
was announced, with a message that there 
must be no delay in the return of the 
young ladies ; and indeed, Mrs. O'Connor 
whispered Melville, it had been a great in- 
dulgence their being allowed to come at all. 

The moment they were gone there-was 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 115 

an end of any farther interest or amuse- 
ment in the scene to Melville, and no- 
thing but politeness detained him after 
them ; but as he considered Mrs. O'Shaugh- 
nessey and her daughter under his care, 
he could not bring himself to depart with- 
out them. As if to try his patience, they 
staid till almost the very last moment, and 
he was absolutely dragging them along, 
when, to his great joy, they encountered 
the corporal, who, suspecting what would 
be the case, had come out to prevent his 
having the trouble of seeing them home, 
and to whom he immediately made them 
over, to the extreme indignation of Miss 
Bridget, who protested, after their civility 
to him, the least thing, she thought, he 
could have done, would have been to have 
seen them all the way himself, even though 
he had been a gentleman, instead of one 
of the Scanlens, who, God knows, every 
one knew to be no great things. 

While JNIelville was thus amusing him- 
self at the christening, Donaghue was wan- 
dering in a melancholy manner about. By 



116 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the time he reached the abbey, the sha- 
dows of evening were beginning to fall 
around it, and the air to hold that solemn 
stillness that was so calculated to add to 
the effect produced by the impressive 
loneliness of the place. Eagerly penetra- 
ting to the interior of the building, he 
searched and examined as before, but 
without being able to discover the trace 
of any human being. Yet so it was on 
the evening he had heard the singing, and 
this reflection involuntarily detained him 
in the chapel, on descending to it. He 
was lingering in it, almost against his con- 
viction of hearing any one that night, 
when, as he was watching the cold grey 
hue of twilight, gradually stealing over 
the glow of the western sky, he suddenly 
fancied he distinguished the sound of a 
harp, and at the very same moment that 
of approaching steps behind him. He 
eagerly turned to see who it was that was 
entering, or whether his ear had deceived 
him, and, to his unutterable astonishment, 
so entirely had he given way to the belief 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 117 

of its being her he heard on the harp, be- 
held Miss Erin, with one of her young 
cousins, the daughter of her uncle Erin. 
His surprise at seeing her entering, at the 
very instant he had imagined her above 
in the cloisters, from having again distin- 
guished the harp, was so great, as for a 
moment to deprive him of the power of 
doing more than staring at her with a be- 
wildered look, as if incredulous of its being 
her he really saw. At length, trying to 
collect himself, he was on the point of ad- 
dressing her, but with his eyes wander- 
ing towards the cloisters— for since it was 
not her he heard, who then could the 
being be who so mysteriously haunted 
the pile, rendering herself visible and in- 
visible, just as she pleased, it seemed? 
when the rush of female garments was 
heard, and the next instant a female figure, 
in white, was seen gliding through the 
gallery. 

Miss Erin started, and drew back ; and 
— " Good gracious!" cried her cousin, 
clinging to her, " who can that be ? Dear 



118 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

me, Mr. O'Brien, how frightened we should 
now be only you are here !" 

Donaghue made no reply ; he had not 
the power at the moment, so intense was 
his anxiety and expectation. 

Descending footsteps were heard — the 
little arched door that shut in the narrow 
winding stairs, conducting to the upper 
cloisters, was pushed open, and a tall figure 
stepped forward into the chapel. She 
suddenly stopped, threw back the long 
flowing veil, that gave a shadowy appear- 
ance to her form, and lady Jane Morley 
stood confessed to view. 

" Lady Jane Morley ! is it possible ?" 
was the general exclamation. 

" Is it possible !" she repeated ; and then, 
with a laugh to Donaghue — " Well, really, 

O'Brien, this is " " Good acting," it 

was evident she would have said, had she 
finished the sentence. — " And you to ap- 
pear so surprised too," she said, again turn- 
ing to Miss Erin, " as if you really thought 
no one had a love for sohtude but yourself!" 

" I never had the affectation to pretend 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 119 

a love for it," said Miss Erin, with a se- 
verity of tone not by any means usual 
with her. 

" No !" cried lady Jane, with the utmost 
unconcern — " I thought the very reverse 
then indeed, from your passion for shady 
groves and purling streams." 

" I can't see how a love for rural scenery, 
or even the occasional enjoyment of its 
quietude, can be construed into a passion 
for solitude," replied Miss Erin. " How- 
ever, whether it could or no, is of very little 
consequence ; nor is this a place or hour 
for the argument of tlie point. — It gets 
late, Millicent," addressing herself to her 
cousin, " and we must not, therefore, de- 
lay any longer here." 

" But you will not think of returning 
by yourselves ?" said Donaghue, eagerly, 
now only beginning to recover froui the 
agitating effect of the incident upon him ; 
for, from all that had occurred, it was plain 
to him Miss Erin conceived there had 
been an appointment between him and 
lady Jane, and he could not instantly 



120 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

suppress the feeling of anger and vexation 
which the conviction gave him. 

" Why not?" demanded Miss Erin, 
with quickness. " If we had been appre- 
hensive of any danger from doing so, we 
should not have depended on chance for 
an escort." 

Donaghue bowed, as if answered ; but 
on seeing her turn away, he involuntarily 
darted after her, and catching her hand — 
" At least allow me," he said, " to assist 
you through these passages; you know 
not how dangerous they are at such an 
hour as this." 

" You are mistaken," she replied, wrest- 
ing her hand from him ; " but whether I 
was or not, there is another lady that re- 
quires your services quite as much as I 
could possibly do." 

" Thank you, my dear," said lady Jane, 
catching him by the arm as she spoke, 
" for turning the gentleman over to me; 
for really I am a terrible hand in making 
my way through these horrible places*" 

" Then only to think of your coming 



f RADITION OF THE CASTLE. 121 

to them, lady Janej" said Millicent; " and 
then to go up by yourself, and glide about 
through those frightful dark galleries, 
making believe you were a castle spectre !" 

*' Very terrific indeed, and very amu- 
sing ! now was it not so, Millicent ? did 
not I please you very much ?" 

" Why a little, I believe," replied Mil- 
licent ; " any thing wonderful is so plea- 
sant !" 

Had Donaghue been a lover that dared 
aspire, how gratified — how more than gra- 
tified — how delighted would he have been 
— how enraptured at the inference it was 
fair to draw, from the suddenly altered 
manner of Miss Erin towards him ! for 
why, if careless about his sentiments — if 
indifferent whether the ardent passion he 
had once avowed for her were transferred 
to another or not — why that appearance 
of discomposure — that indication of re- 
sentment and anger, at the supposition of a 
meeting between him and lady Jane ? but 
as it was, what pleasure could he derive 

VOL. III. G 



122 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE 

from it, since, to give way to a farther 
hope concerning him, was out of the ques- 
tion ? But was not his vanity misleading 
him? could it be, that she who had so 
peremptorily rejected him — who had cast 
him from her, as it were, as a being un- 
worthy of her regard, entertained a fa- 
vourable sentiment for him, or rather such 
a degree of interest about him, as could 
occasion her to care who he thought of, 
or what he did ? Yet no ; he was too 
well acquainted with all the symptoms of 
the passion he now more than suspected 
her gentle bosom of harbouring, to allow 
himself to think he was mistaken in the 
construction he put on her recent con- 
duct — a construction, that, argue as he 
might with himself on the subject, it was 
not in the nature of a youthful lover not 
to experience, at least transient rapture 
from. When she had rejected him, then 
it was from a sense of offended pride and 
delicacy, and the offence he had given 
her forgiven, atoned for by repentance; 
had circumstances allowed the renewal of 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 123 

his addresses, he might, even now, at this 
very moment, have been blessed in her pos- 
session. Oh, the bitter pang of that 
thought ! — a thought, that had it been 
possible for a heart like his, the seat of fi- 
lial piety, and love, and reverence, to have 
uttered a reproach against the memory of 
a parent, must have urged him to do so 
at the instant; and to a suspicion perhaps 
of this, her not altogether regarding him 
with unfavourable sentiments, was ow- 
ing the conduct that had so hurt him 
in her father; the idea struck cold upon 
his heart, as if it were only now he 
had become sensible of any obstacles to his 
hopes of her. But since such obstacles 
did exist — since fortune had placed insur- 
mountable barriers between them, v/as it 
generous to rejoice at what had just oc- 
curred? could it afford him pleasure to 
think she suffered such anguish as he was 
suffering — that the sympathy of wretch- 
edness existed between them? no; and 
he would therefore more sedulously than 
G 2 



124 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ever shun her, command every look, and si- 
lence every sigh, in her presence; and 
even — even permit her to continue in the 
mistake under which she at present la- 
boured. 

Of his wishing, or meaning, to do this, 
however, the almost sullen silence he con- 
tinued to preserve towards lady Jane was 
no proof. In vain, in an under tone, she 
half rallied, half reproached him ; his 
wdiole soul w^as abstracted at the moment ; 
and even if this had not been the case, a 
strong feeling of indignation at the con- 
duct she had been guilty of — the artifice 
and deception that, in some way or other, 
she had recourse to, would have prevent- 
ed her succeeding in having any effect 
upon him. 

Miss Erin, however, walking before 
them, without ever casting a glance be- 
hind her, was not sensible of this ; to her, 
indeed, it might have appeared, from only 
hearing the voice of lady Jane in whis- 
pers, as if they were carrying on a very 
agreeable conversation ; but whatever she 



tUADlTION OF THE CASTLE. 125 

thought, or whatever she felt, by the time 
she reached the house she had perfectly 
collected herself, and pausing on the steps, 
awaited there their coming up to her, to 
invite Donaghue in. 

This was an invitation, however, it 
may readily be believed, in the present 
state of his mind, Donaghue had no hesi- 
tation in refusing. Perplexed, bewildered, 
agitated, to a degree that robbed him of 
all self-possession, by what had occurred, 
he was impatient to be alone, and accord- 
ingly making his bow, hastily retreated. 

On repairing to the drawing-room, the 
party found only lady Erin and Miss 
Bond there, waiting tea for them. — " My 
dear child," said lady Erin, on seeing the 
languid manner in which Miss Erin threw 
herself on a seat, " how pale you look !" 

" The — the excessive closeness of the 
air has, I believe, overcome me a little," 
replied Miss Erin, leaning back her head 
as she spoke against the arm of the sofa, 
whilst, in spite of all her efforts to prevent 
it, a tear strayed down her cheek. 



126 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" It has indeed, I fear," said her lady- 
ship; " and languid as you appear, how- 
will you ever be able to endure the noise 
and bustle of the scene to which you are 
going?" 

" Oh dear ! it will be of service to her," 
said lady Jane, in a tone of the greatest 
unconcern, delighted to perceive that the 
poison she had taken such pains to instill 
was beginning to operate. 

" I cannot agree with you," replied lady 
Erin, " and I therefore very much wish 
Eveleen could decline going : this could 
be done," she anxiously added, " if she 
could get any one to go in her place." 

" What a ridiculous fuss about her!" 
lady Jane could with difficulty prevent 
herself from saying, but checking herself— 
" oh, that w^ould be a very easy matter, I 
should conceive," she said ; " here is Mil- 
licent, or Miss Bond, at least, would an- 
swer, I should conceive." 

** Oh yes ! certainly. Miss Bond," cried 
lady Erin, eagerly catching at the sug- 
gestion, " if she had no objection," 



TllADITION OF THE CASTLE. 127 

" Oh dear ! none in the world," replied 
Miss Bond—" that is, if I have time to 
change my dress." 

" Why, sure, my dear," said lady Erin, 
" there is no occasion for your changing 
the dress you put on for dinner." 

" Oh dear, yes !" cried the young lady ; 
" when I was in Paris, I got the custom 
of changing my dress for every fresh party 
I went to, and so " 

" Well, my dear, do as you like," said 
lady Erin, " only remember that you are 
now going to a mere party of rustics." 

Rustics had eyes, however, as well as 
other people, and as to be stared at was 
the very height of poor little Miss Bond's 
ambition, away she flew to dress herself in 
the manner that has been already descri- 
bed. 

It was not long before lady Erin began 
to fear that it was something more than 
the mere languor of fatigue that oppressed 
her daughter ; yet what could it be ? she 
knew not how to hint the suspicion, and 
yet she felt it must continue till she 



128 THADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

knew whether she was mistaken. But 
she was not long allowed to torment her- 
self with conjectures. The impression 
made upon the imagination of Millicent, 
by the appearance of lady Jane in the ab- 
bey, induced her to mention it, and her 
relation of what had occurred there quick- 
ly accounted to her aunt for what had 
perplexed and alarmed her. The result 
of her reflections on the subject, was a de- 
termination to endeavour to bring matters 
to a speedy issue between her daughter 
and Donaghue, by trying to ascertain 
whether indeed there was any attachment 
between him and lady Jane, as appear- 
ances, which however she knew were 
often deceitful, now seemed to indicate. 
But for the purpose of enabling this to be 
done, she saw no other method than by 
inducing Donaghue to become a visitor 
at the Vale ; she accordingly decided on 
remonstrating with sir AVilliam on the 
subject, and urging him to take more ef- 
fectual measures for accomplishing this 
than he had yet done, by representing to 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 129 

him, that surely, after all, the most likely 
and eJBfectual methods for obtaining that 
knowledge of, or insight into the young 
man's disposition and sentiments, would 
be by procuring opportunities for familiar 
converse with him, instead of pursuing 
vague inquiries about him; and that he 
might, besides, have other motives than 
were surmised, for hitherto declining any 
overtures towards an acquaintance there, 
and this indeed lady Erin knew, or rather 
was persuaded, was the case, being almost 
convinced, like her daughter, that it was 
owing to the embarrassing recollection of 
what had occurred between them, that 
these overtures were disregarded. This, 
however, was a surmise she would not 
venture to disclose to sir William, lest, 
from the light in which she knew he re- 
garded his daughter, and his certainly 
having a little tendency in his nature to- 
wards haughtiness, the presumption which 
Donaghue had, assuredly, been guilty of 
towards her, might be an offence not par- 
g3 



130 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

donable in his eyes ; and such were the 
fears of Miss Erin, else would she have 
revealed what she thought to her father, 
and thus probably have vindicated Dona- 
ghue from the suspicion of having any un- 
worthy motive for not visiting publicly at 
the Vale. 

But it now remains to explain lady 
Jane's motives for acting as she had done : 
of what avail, she considered, would it be 
to have Donaghue prevented from resort- 
ing to the Vale, if still a belief of a mu- 
tual attachment between him and Miss 
Erin were allowed to exist ? for destroy- 
ing this, at least on the lady's side, she 
saw no other method than that of indu- 
cing one of his being attached to another ; 
and the idea had no sooner occurred, than 
she quickly decided on exerting herself 
to make it appear that she herself was the 
object of his secret visits to the Vale, or, 
in short, that a secret intercourse subsist- 
ed between them, for which, she made no 
doubt, she should be able to assign some 
sufficient reason. Much, however, as she 



TRADITION OP THE CASTLE. 131 

relied on her skill in plotting and plan- 
ning, she saw she must, in the present in- 
stance, proceed with the greatest caution 
and address, if she hoped to succeed in 
what she had undertaken, from pot having 
common minds to deal with, such as im- 
mediately gave way to appearances, and 
in a moment believed any thing that 
others chose to impose upon them : instead, 
therefore, of positively asserting any thing 
at first, she merely began to act in such 
a manner as was calculated to awaken 
suspicion, and gradually insinuate the be- 
lief she wished to inspire. She suddenly 
began to assume an appearance of restless- 
ness and abstraction, and to be continually 
out by herself, without explaining where : 
but this was not all ; she had several hillet- 
douoo of Donaghue's laying by her, the 
productions of other and very different 
days, and these she re-sealed, and contri- 
ved, from time to time, to have delivered 
to her before Miss Erin, as if just then 
sent, and who, she was aware, was perfect- 
ly acquainted with his handwriting. Still* 



1$2 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

however, she was not satisfied: there 
might be billets, without love in them ; 
and except she could make it appear that 
she and Donaghue had private meetings, 
she much feared, notwithstanding all the 
trouble she had been at, that she might 
ultimately fail in the accomplishment of 
what she wished. To effect this it was 
requisite to ascertain whether he had now 
any particular haunt; this she was soon 
enabled to do, through the spies she had 
set upon him ; and no sooner did she dis- 
cover that the abbey was the place he 
now frequented, than she decided on the 
scheme of exciting his curiosity, in such a 
manner as should prevent his forsaking it 
till the discovery of their both frequent- 
ing it had taken place, which, in one way 
or the other, she determined to have made. 
Through her emissaries she had a harp 
conveyed there, and a place of conceal- 
ment discovered for it, that none but a 
person perfectly acquainted with the build- 
ing could possibly have detected. She 
was in great hopes, from Miss Erin's ad- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 133 

miration of this old pile, and the pleasure 
she took in straying about, that she would 
have made the discovery she was anxious 
for of her own accord ; but, latterly. Miss 
Erin had not indulged herself as much as 
she was wont to do in this propensity ; 
she was afraid of meeting Donaghue, after 
what had passed at their last accidental 
encounter, and, if the truth must be told^ 
she was also afraid of meeting him with 
lady Jane, therefore avoided, more than 
she had ever done before, rambling about 
the grounds ; for the artifices of her lady- 
ship had not altogether failed of the in- 
tended effect ; suspicions w^ere awakened 
by what she saw — by what she remarked, 
for the notes were not lost upon her, and 
a kind of dread of having those suspicions 
confirmed, induced her to keep a constant 
watch over her footsteps ; for, let us talk 
as we may, of suspense — of incertitude, 
w^e involuntarily shrink from the confir- 
mation of any painful apprehension. 

Lady Jane finding this, had again re- 
course to artifice. On the evening of the 



134 TRADITION OF THE CASTLEr 

christening, her woman, encountering 
Miss Erin in one of the galleries, with 
much seeming anxiety inquired if she 
knew where her lady was ? 

No, Miss Erin replied, she did not; 
adding, she thought she had been in her 
dressing-room. 

"Oh dear, no, ma'am !" replied the well- 
instructed abigail, who was an English 
demoiselle, and had been some time in the 
service of her ladyship ; " and I want her 
so bad, having a message to give her ; but 
I suppose, since she is no where to be 
found in the house, she has taken herself 
off to that old ruination place." 

" What place ?" demanded Miss Erin, 
suddenly stopping as she was passing her. 

" Oh dear, mem ! the Aabby, they call 
it, in the ^ale yonder. I'm sure 'tis to 
me the ^oddest toagary in the world the 
one she has lately taken to be wisiting it, 
when there's such a number of nice, new, 
pretty buildings about the grounds here, 
where one would be in no danger of meet- 
ing ghostesses, or any rubbish of that 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 135 

kind. I shouldn't, however, have known 
nothinA: about it but for an ^accident, so 
I hopes, mem, you'll tell her nothink of 
what I am telling you, for she makes 
quite a mystery of going there, as one 
may say. She comes to me last Monday, 
yes, it was last Monday — and — ' Oh, Fea- 
therston !' says she, all in a flusteration, 
* as sure as any thing, I have lost my dia- 
mond bracelet, and you must go look for 
it.' — * I go look for it, mem,' says I, laugh- 
ing, 'is it without knowing where?' — 
' Pooh, no, you fool !' says she ; ' do you 
think I want to send you of a wildgoose- 
chace? I'm certain sure I dropt it in the 
old habbey, and there you must go look 
for it.' — * Is it to that ruination place, 
mem ?' says I, with a scream, ' to be sca- 
red out of my seven senses by seeing a 
ghost, or a hobgoblin ? no, my lady, you 
must excuse me,' says I ; ' these wild jH'i- 
rish are bad enough, God he knows, in 
their own shapes, without running the 
risk of meeting them in any that's not na- 
tural.' — * Tut, you fool !' says she, * don't 



136 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

you know that ghosts never walk by 
daylight? so go you must, fori wouldn't, 
for all the world, that any body but your- 
self knew of my frequenting the old Aab- 
bey ; and if you find my bracelet, you 
shall have the fine crimson tabinet, that 
you told me you were so longing for the 
other day, when you went to the haber- 
dasher's for me.' 

" Well, mem, there was no resisting 
this," said Mrs. Featherston — " that is, 
mem, I mean her coaxing words — and so 
off I goes to the ruins, and there to be 
sure, sure enough, after kea^piormg, as 
she calls it, I don't know how many dark 
passages, I finds the bracelet." 

" Well, well," said Miss Erin, " since 
your lady has intimated that she does not 
like to have her visits there known, you 
must be silent on the subject;" quitting 
the gallery as she spoke, but almost lost in 
thought : she had lately once or twice heard, 
through the contrivance indeed of lady 
Jane, that Donaghue had been seen about 
the abbey, and from what was now men- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 137 

tioned, she drew a conclusion from the 
circumstance, that certainly made her fair 
bosom experience a momentary pang. 
Yet why — at liberty as they both were to 
act as they please — why give this appear- 
ance of mystery to any attachment be- 
tween them, if one really did exist ? but 
might not this be accounted for by the 
supposition of Donaghue's having an in- 
superable objection to visiting at the 
house? yet still there was a something, 
she knew not what, except it was the agi- 
tated manner of Donaghue, whenever 
they had lately met, that opposed her giv- 
ing absolute credit to what she was indu- 
ced to believe. 

Endeavouring, at length, to compose 
herself, she proceeded to join her cousin 
Millicent, almost all the rest of the party 
at the Vale being dispersed this day, with 
whom she had been going to take a short 
stroll before tea, at the very moment of 
encountering Mrs. Featherston; for, as 
already mentioned, it was not her inten- 
tion to go to Mr. O'Connor's, till the bus- 



138 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

tie attendant on their receiving the guests 
there was over. 

In which direction she now walked, so it 
was not in that of the abbey, she cared not : 
determined against this, it certainly there- 
fore appeared rather extraordinary that 
still this should be the very direction that 
was taken, as she discovered to be the 
case, on suddenly raising her eyes from 
the ground, when within a few yards of 
the building, not before, we must con- 
clude from the agitation indicative of 
surprise she evinced at the moment. — 
" Good Heavens !" she exclaimed, abrupt- 
ly stopping, " how is it, Millicent, that 
we took this direction ?" 

" I am sure I don't know," said Milli- 
cent ; " but are you frightened at being 
at the abbey ? to be sure it is a dismal- 
looking place — but it is not late enough 
yet, I think, to make one sorry for having 
come to it; do let us just take a peep into 
the old chapel — I do so love these old 
places." 

" No, no ! by no means ! not now, my 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 139 

dear girl !" repeated her cousin, in a tone 
of resistance. Millicent, iiowever, held 
her firnaly by the arm, and so, in spite of 
herself, we must suppose, she was drawn 
onward, notwithstanding the tone in which 
she had spoken, till she found herself 
within the chapel, where what followed 
has been already described. Well, after 
this — after what occurred there, any lon- 
ger to have doubted the reality of what had 
been previously insinuated, and she would 
have been led to consider herself one of 
those obstinate kind of beings, who will 
never allow themselves to be convinced of 
any thing they dislike to believe. The 
extreme confusion and emotion of the gen- 
tleman, originating, no doubt, in feelings 
of delicacy for the lady, were proof posi- 
tive of his being there by appointment, 
and, of course, that in putting that con- 
struction on his manner to herself which 
she had done, she had led herself into an 
error. However this was known only to 
herself, and there was something soothing 
in that reflection : yet again, to counter- 



140 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

balance this, there was bitterness in the 
thought that, but for her secret derision 
of lady Jane's repeated hints of what was 
now actually proved to be the case, what 
she now felt might have been spared her : 
and how could she have persisted in her 
incredulity, with regard to these hints, was 
now the question, considering the gene- 
rally acknowledged attractions of lady 
Jane, or be so romantic as to suppose, that 
after her positive rejection of him, and the 
mortifying terms in which that rejection 
was couched, Donaghue could possibly per- 
sist in cherishing a passion for her ; altoge- 
ther she stood self-convicted of a degree of 
weakness, that induced a belief of her 
really having a greater degree of self-love 
in her composition than she had previous- 
ly been aware of: but nothing so terribly 
hurt her feelings as the idea of her con- 
duct to Donaghue in the abbey, the sense 
of injury it certainly seemed to imply — 
what must he infer from it, but that 
which she now shrunk from the idea of 
his imagining ? and this was the command 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 141 

she had over herself! ah, how premature 
is all praise, till we are put to the test ! but 
she could not help thinking the feelings 
incidental to any sudden surprise or shock 
excusable ; and that, of course, it was only 
their indulgence that was justly reprehen- 
sible — condemnation for this she determin- 
ed not to incur. All things considered, 
she almost felt she ought rather to rejoice 
than regret at what had occurred, uncertain 
as she was of what her father's final senti- 
ments might be with regard to an attach- 
ment between her and Donaghue; at 
least, it was by ingenious arguments of 
this description with herself on the sub- 
ject, she tried to compose her spirits, and 
regain her wonted appearance of tranquil- 
lity. 

Lady Jane saw with delight what she 
had achieved, from the belief with which 
she had so artfully been inspired; she had 
not the slightest doubt that, even uncon- 
sciously to herself, such an alteration would 
take place in Miss Erin's manner towards 
Donaghue, as could not fail of destroying 



142 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

any hopes that might have continued lin- 
gering in his heart about her ; and those de- 
stroyed, what was to hinder the final accom- 
plishment of her own aims ? at all events, 
if she failed in it, she would have the gra- 
tification of thinking, that a rival, whom 
she hated for the pangs, no matter how in- 
nocently or unintentionally, she had occa- 
sioned her, would not triumph over her. 

She took care to revert to what had occur- 
red at the abbey the next morning, fearful, if 
she left any thing to doubt or conjecture, of 
the failure of her scheme after all. Pur- 
posely seeking out Miss Erin, after break- 
fast, in the garden — " You were no doubt 
surprised," she said, " last evening," affect- 
ing something of an air of confusion, " at 
discovering that I sometimes met O'Brien ; 
but you'll acquit me, I hope, of any very 
great imprudence, when I inform you, 
that I certainly should not have done so, 
could I have prevailed on him to visit 
here, but which I found it impossible to 
do ; I am sure I don't know why ; and it 
was requisite we should sometimes see. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 143 

each other, in order to make arrangements; 
for the fact is — but I must entreat your 
positive silence on the subject, for the pre- 
sent — Mr. Morley's will is constructed in 
such a manner, that it is necessary I should 
come to some understanding with his 
heirs, ere I attempt to alter my condition." 

Miss Erin, perhaps unconsciously, stop- 
ping to admire some flowers, assured her, 
as she stooped over them, she might rely on 
her attending to what she said, though, at 
the same time, she could not help observ- 
ing, she thought she might have been sa- 
tisfied without this injunction to silence — 
it was what she would have observed. 

Between JNIelville's uncle and sir Wil- 
liam Erin a long and intimate friendship, 
as Melville mentioned to Donaghue, had 
subsisted ; and out of respect and regard 
to the uncle, sir William was now anx- 
ious to pay every possible attention to the 
nephew; but to hope for his company 
without his friend, he was perfectly aware 
W'Ould be useless ; and as the accomplish- 
ment of an object in which his friend, sir 



144 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

James, was particularly, or rather deeply 
interested, depended, probably, on Mel- 
ville's being induced to frequent the Vale, 
lady Erin's arguments, or representations, 
were not requisite to have decided him on 
altering his conduct so far to Donaghue, 
as to lay himself out more than he had yet 
done to overcome his evident unwilling- 
ness to visiting there; and this also, through 
at length beginning to think there was no 
other way of being enabled to form any 
decided opinion about him, without which 
he felt he could hardly bring himself to 
come to any other decision, than by en- 
deavouring to cultivate an intimacy with 
him. Donaghue, however, satisfied that 
Melville would not visit either at the 
Vale, or elsewhere, without him, and be- 
ginning, by this time, to be sensible that 
he could not persevere in the reserve and 
distance he had hitherto maintained in 
the neighbourhood, without incurring the 
imputation of an oddity, rendered, by the 
consequent determination he came to, any 
very extraordinary exertions for this un- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 145. 

necessary, as sir William found, on re- 
newing his invitation to the Vale ; and 
since he found himself compelled to go 
there, Donaghue knew not how to regret 
what had occurred at the abbey, since, to 
a certainty, the belief it could not but 
create, must, he conceived, acquit him in 
the eyes of the cold and wary father of 
those designs his conduct implied him 
fearful of his entertaining, and which, 
without indignation, he could not think 
of being suspected of harbouring. 



VOJL. III. 



1^6 TKADITION OF THE CASTLE. 



CHAPTER V. 



<»^*^-*^.»^*:* .^^.^^■^^^■^■^^ 



" I pray, sir, tell n»e, is it possible 
That love should of a sudden take such hold ? 
Oh, Francis ! till I found it to be true, I never thought 
It possible, or likely. But see ! while idle I stood 
Looking on, I found the effect in idleness ; and 
. Now in plainness do confess to thee, thou art to 
Me as sacred and as dear as Anna to the queen 
Of Carthage was. Francis, I burn, I pine, I perish. 
If I achieve not this young modest girl !" 

Late as was JNIr. O'Connor's party, Mel- 
ville rose earlier than usual the next morn- 
ing, and pursuing a path altogether new 
to him, found himself, at the end of a walk 
of three miles, before a neat white cottage, 
which so particularly struck him, as to oc- 
casion him to slacken his pace the moment 
he came within sight of it; woodbine, 
roses, and jasmine, wantoned in profu- 
sion over the front, while a still greater 
variety of shrubs, plants, and flowers, em- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 147 

balming the breath of morn, embelHshed 
the little lawn before it. Sloping down 
to a clear purling rivulet, over which a 
rustic bridge was thrown, leading to a 
gate of a similar description, a green lane 
ran at the side of the house, along which 
extended, to some distance, a beautiful 
quickset hedge, dividing a well-cultivated 
and delicious garden in the rear from it, 
while the views all around were pleasing 
and picturesque, without any of that sa- 
vage wildness that distinguished some of 
the others in the neighbourhood. 

How long Melville might have conti- 
nued admiring the simple elegance and 
rural beauty of the place we know not, 
had not the sound of voices from the gar- 
den behind the cottage suddenly reached 
his ear, and made him hastily turn up the 
lane at the side of it, where he had not 
advanced many yards ere he espied two 
young lasses, sitting in an arbour in the 
garden, the one reading, the other work- 
ing, and in whom, at the first glance, he 
H 2 



148 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

recognised his new acquaintances of the 
preceding night. Lavinia Audley and 
Rosetta Wheatley, indeed, seldom knew 
what it was to indulge in luxurious indo- 
lence ; the cool, the silent, and the fragrant 
hour, was to them a delightful one indeed, 
and the rising sun a spectacle of grandeur 
they conceived well worth the relinquish- 
ment of an hour's sleep to behold. 

Melville had hardly taken his station at 
the hedge, when a little dog, that was ly- 
ing at their feet, disturbed or displeased 
by the sight of a stranger, flew out to 
bark at him. Miss W heatley, who was the 
one that was reading, interrupted by his 
noise, looked up to call him back, and in 
so doing, perceived Melville. Touching 
the elbow of her companion — " I protest, 
Lavinia," she cried, as she drew back her 
head, " if I don't believe there's your part- 
ner of last night !" 

"Where?" exclaimed Lavinia, raising 
her eyes from her work. " I declare so it 
is," glancing out from the arbour. " What 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 149 

fan have brought him here I wonder? 
does he know 'tis here we live ?" 

" 'Tis likely he may, for if he asked 
Mrs. O'Connor, no doubt she told him." 

" But then what use his coming, for he 
can never think of our considering him as 
an acquaintance?" 

" I can't say what he may think, but if 
you want to know what I think, I con- 
ceive it not improbable he may, as I con- 
ceive he has quite sufficient self-compla- 
cency to induce such an idea." 

'' Yes, quite sufficient of that indeed," 
assented Lavinia ; " I noticed that seve- 
ral times last night, insomuch as more 
than once to have almost repented of con- 
senting to dance with him." 

" Why% he surely wasn't presumptuous ?" 

" Why no, not a — what you may call 
downright presumptuous ; not indeed 
what could be called or considered so in a 
person in one's own rank — but then in his ! 
I really could not help staring at him se- 
veral times, from the dictatorial manner 
in which he spoke, as if it could be sup- 



150 TllADITION OF THE CASTLE, 

posed lie knew any thing, or had entirely 
forgot who he was." 

" Yes, I thought he appeared confident 
and conceited, but I suppose he has been 
cried up for his looks, and so it is that that 
has rendered him so ; he is rather, to be 
sure, what you may call a well-looking 
young man." 

" Yes, indeed, or rather what we might 
call handsomish, if he was in another rank 
of life." 

'' At all events," observed Rosetta, " he 
was the only decent person for you to 
dance with last night, the rest were all 
such a terrible set of jiggers." 

" Is he gone yet?" asked Lavinia — 
" but no, I declare not," peeping herself 
through the side of the arbour, " there he 
is, as stationary as a maypole ; I protest it 
will be a very awkward thing if he should 
lay himself out for any recognition from 
us, for, strangers as we are in the neigh- 
bourhood, we cannot be too particular in 
the acquaintance we form, lest, appearing 
to know people of one description should 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 151 

prevent our being noticed by those of ano- 
ther." 

" Oh ! he does not belong, you know, to 
this part of the country," said her friend ; 
" and should we meet him while he re- 
mains, we must only shew, by our manner, 
that we are decided on not allowing him 
to consider himself an acquaintance." 

" Yes, that will be the only plan for us 
to pursue ; however, I must confess I can- 
not help being sorry now that we went to 
Mrs. O'Connor's ; but it was all my fault, 
never resting till I contrived to have an 
invitation procured for us, from my wild 
curiosity to witness a real Irish entertain^ 
ment; — but do silence that noisy little 
wretch, her barking is not endurable." 

" Impossible," said Miss Wheatley ; "I 
could not raise my voice without betray- 
ing where we are, which, at present, it 
might be as well to avoid." 

" Well, I declare, let the consequence 
of doing so be what it may, I can no 
longer bear the noise; and so — 'Mabel! 



15^ TKADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Mabel!" she exclaimed, starting up and 
running towards her, " be silent 1 say P 

" I hope I see you well, ma'am, after 
your dancing ?" said Melville, raising his 
hat to salute her. 

" Oh dear, Mr. a " affecting an air 

of pretty surprise. " Yes, very well, I 
thank you, sir; but dancing is an amuse- 
ment that agrees extremely well with me.** 

" But the question was unnecessary," 
said Melville, as he leant over the hedge, 
" to a person with cheeks like roses." 

" Cheeks like roses," and Lavinia put 
up her pretty lip a little contemptuously ; 
but what else but a common compliment 
could be expected from such a person, the 
cousin of the elegant Mrs. O'Connor, and 
of the disconsolate Nelly Rooney, to say 
nothing of his being a descendant of the 
trumpeter of one of king William's gini- 
rals ! 

Melville noticed the turn of her pretty 
lip. — " You seem to ridicule my compli- 
ment, ma'am," said he ; " but it is not be- 
cause a thing is commonplace it should 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 153 

be derided ; flowers at all times have fur- 
nished metaphors, and allusions, and simi- 
lies, and I don't think any thing can be 
more apposite than the comparison be- 
tween a blooming cheek and a rose, and I 
only wish," plucking, as he spoke, one of 
the roses that was flaunting over the 
hedge, " that I had a looking-glass here 
at this moment to convince you of it ; but 
I have been admiring, for this some time, 
this sweet little paradise of yours — really 
worthy of the fair deities that have made 
it their abode; and, by-the-bye, how is 
your charming friend, ma'am ? I thought 
I had a glimpse of her in the arbour." 

" Perhaps you might," said Lavinia, 
half-laughing, not w^ell knowing whether 
to be most amused or displeased by this 
assumption of a manner she conceived fo- 
reign to his rank. 

" What a sweet retreat to pass the sul- 
try hours of noon in ! but I presume you 
do not confine yourself entirely to it — you 
doubtless walk a good deal ?" 
H 3 



154 TRADITION OF THE CASTI.E. 

** Yes, sometimes." 

" I wish I knew when and where?" 

" Why so, pray ?" 

" Why because I should try to profit 
by the circumstance." 

" You !" said Lavinia ; but any fur- 
ther comment on the declaration was pre- 
vented by a summons to breakfast at the 
moment; and with something very much 
resembling a derisive smile she turned off, 
and darting towards the arbour to meet 
Rosetta, proceeded with her to the house. 

" Pray who is that young man ?" asked 
Mr. Wheatley, addressing himself to La- 
vinia as they sat at breakfast, " who was 
conversing so familiarly with you this 
morning over the hedge ?" 

Lavinia coloured, and hesitated. 

" The young man she danced with last 
night at Mrs. O'Connor's," said Rosetta, 
replying for her; and she proceeded to 
mention all they had heard about him. 

" He seemed to be very much at his 
ease I think," rejoined Mr. Wheatley. 

" Oh yes, very much indeed," said La- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 155 

vinia, recovering from her transient em- 
barrassment — an embarrassment she knew 
not how to account for ; " he is quite an 
Irishman in that respect." 

" What brought him here?" demanded 
Mr. Wlieatley. 

Rosetta laughed. — " Indeed I do not 
know, except, as I shrewdly suspect, that 
Lavinia has made a conquest of him." 

" That would be a bad affair for the 
young man," said Mr. Wheatley, gravely, 
*' for Lavinia has no heart to dispose of." 

Lavinia, colouring like crimson, start- 
ed, and looking earnestly at him — " No 
heart to dispose of!" she repeated. 

" No, not of your own free will. How 
often have I told you that you must never 
think of disposing of it without the per- 
mission of your friend or guardian !" 

The conversation was changed. Mr 
Wheatley, not at liberty to gratify the 
anxious curiosity which the mention of 
this unknown guardian always excited, 
never made any allusion to him, except 
when he deemed it absolutely necessary;. 



156 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

but immediately after breakfast, Lavinia, 
finding herself alone with Rosetta — 
" Well, I wonder," she said, waking, as if 
from a kind of trance or reverie, " will 
the mystery of this guardian of mine be 
ever explained ? it is really high time I 
think it now should, that I may know in 
what light to consider or regard him ; for 
while ignorant of the claim he has upon 
my gratitude, my sentiments towards 
him must certainly continue dubious." 

" Well, really," said Rosetta, " from 
the care that has been taken of you, and 
the education you have received, I should 
conceive you could not be at any possible 
loss to know what claim he had upon your 
gratitude." 

" Ay, so it may appear," said Lavinia, 
" but for me to allow him fully entitled to 
it, I feel it necessary to ascertain whether 
w^hat he has done for me has been through 
a sense of duty, or from the mere dictates 
of benevolence ; for if nearly connected to 
hira, you must acknowledge my right to 
all that has been done : in short, I am ex- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 157 

cessively discontented at not yet being 
informed who he is, or any thing about 
him, since the means of still keeping me 
in ignorance concerning myself; and real- 
ly 'tis extremely embarrassing, and very 
awkward, not to know who I am, or what 
I am, whether I have tumbled from the 
clouds, or sprung out of the earth, uncon- 
nected with any one." 

" Well," cried Rosetta, " I conceive it 
hardly possible for you to doubt, from the 
pains, as I have already observed, that 
have been taken with you in every in- 
stance, that the deepest interest is enter- 
tained about you." 

" True," replied Lavinia, " but then I 
want to know in what that interest origi- 
nates ; in short, a thousand frightful fan- 
cies have suggested themselves to me ; we 
have more than once heard and read of 
old men having young girls educated for 
their wives." 

" Well, I think," said Rosetta, " you 
might be satisfied that my father would 



158 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

not lend himself to any thing that was un- 
just or tyrannical." 

" Ah ! but such a thing might not strike 
him as either. You see how, on every 
occasion, he tries to impress me with a 
conviction of his having a positive autho- 
rity over me; telling me, indeed, that I 
must not presume to like any one without 
his permission ! Were these fairy times, 
the only w^ay to guard against any danger 
of that kind would be to take out my 
heart and lodge it in a mountain of ice, as 
we have read of in those delightful nurse- 
ry tales, till the proper person appeared, 
according to his idea, for bestowing it on." 

" Whoever that may be, I am convin- 
ced," said Rosetta, " it will be some one 
in an elevated rank of life ; for, from the 
manner in which you have been taught 
to estimate yourself, 'tis evident to me he 
entertains high expectations for you." 

Some, time after this conversation, as 
they were sitting at work with Mrs. 
Wheatley in the parlour — " Dear, what a 
dehghtful morning," said Lavinia, sudden- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 159 

ly, " and how I should like to take a 
walk!" 

" A delightful morning !" repeated Mrs. 
Wheatley ; " it was fine, but I certainly 
think it very much changed now — it ap- 
pears to me as if there would be rain." 

" Oh dear, no, ma'am," said Lavinia; 
" what you take for threatening clouds 
are merely a few light vapours blown 
from the sea." 

" Well, I must differ from you; so if 
really anxious for a walk, I advise you to 
confine yourself to the garden." 

" Oh no," replied Lavinia, " that does 
very well for sauntering about in, but 
when one really wishes for a walk, nothing 
can be more tiresome than its eternal 
turnings and windings." 

" The fact is, you are in a restless hu- 
mour this morning, Lavinia, and must 
therefore, I suppose, be indulged in your 
humour." 

" Well, I believe I am," said Lavinia; 
so jumping up, and throwing aside her 
work — " Will you come, Rosetta?" 



160 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" What, to take a walk ? Ah, I sup- 
pose I may as well say yes at once, for if 
not, I dare say you would not cease teaz- 
ing me." 

In a few minutes both were equipped 
for going out. On Lavinia's returning to 
the parlour — " Why you are not going 
out such a threatening morning as this in 
your new bonnet, Lavinia?" said Mrs, 
Wheatley. 

"Oh dear, yes, ma'am, the other is such 
a fright." 

" A fright ! And who do you expect 
to meet, pray ?" 

" To meet ! to meet !" cried Lavinia, 
blushing, and half laughing — " who do we 
expect to meet ? I am sure I do not know; 
do you, Rosetta?" 

Without waiting to hear what answer 
her daughter would make — " Well, since 
you will risk yourself and your bonnet," 
said Mrs. Wheatley, " be advised by me, 
and take an umbrella with you." 

" An umbrella !" and Lavinia regarded 
her with almost a look of horror. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. l6l 

" Let Owen then attend you to carry 
it for you, since 'tis a thing you have such 
an objection to do yourself, or let Rosetta." 

" Owen !" Really this was almost as 
bad; to have a great lubberly footman 
following them, imposing quite a restraint 
upon their movements. So they set off, 
without taking an umbrella with them, or 
allowing Owen, that is, Lavinia, to follow 
with one. They had not got above half- 
a-mile, however, when Miss Lavinia, who 
had a very great regard for her new bon- 
net, from being assured by every one, as 
w^ell as her glass, that it became her ex- 
ceedingly, began to regret her inattention 
to the advice of Mrs. Wheatley, in conse- 
quence of some heavy drops beginning to 
fall, the evident precursors of a heavy 
shower.—" Dear! what shall we do?" she 
said ; " these parasols v^ill hardly be of any 
use to us from the rain that is coming on.'* 

" Hardly indeed ! " replied Rosetta. 
" And now you see, Lavinia, wliat the 
consequence of being conceited and obsti- 
nate is." 



162! TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" I protest," said Lavinia, half with- 
drawing her arm from lier, ** if you attempt 
to give me a lecture now, when I am in 
such distress, I will positively run away, 
and leave you to bide the pelting of the 
pitiless storm by yourself; and there is 
comfort for you, we are just near our fa- 
vourite beech tree, under which we may 
safely shelter ourselves, as I think there is 
no danger of any lightning." 

They quickened their steps to get to it, 
but suddenly stopped within a few paces 
of it, on perceiving a person already under 
its shelter. — " That abominable nephew 
of Mrs. O'Connor, I protest !" said Lavinia. 

" Really !" cried Rosetta. "I am afraid 
he will soon be as bad as a ghost, haunting 
our steps wherever we go." 

Ere Lavinia could reply, Melville, step- 
ping forward — " Ladies," said he, " you 
will drive me from the shelter which this 
friendly tree affords, if you allow me to 
think I am the means of preventing you 
also profiting by it." 

'* Oh ! certainly no," said Lavinia, but 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. l6S 

drawing back on his attempting to take 
her hand to lead her forward to it. 

Rosetta, though of the two the most 
displeased at meeting him, was the most 
gracious, condescending to answer him, 
and thank him for the pains he took in 
placing them so as to be out of the reach 
of the rain ; while Lavinia still turned to 
her companion whenever he spoke to her, 
as if to laugh with her at him. At length, 
beginning to get uneasy at the idea of 
Rosetta's exposure to the damp, who had 
for some time been rather in a delicate 
state of health—" Oh dear !" she said, " if 
we had but a messenger to send to Mr. 
Malone's (a farmhouse at a little distance)* 
I dare say we should be able to get their 
jaunting-car." 

"In this instance, ma'am," said Melville, 
"'tis only to wish and have ; in me behold 
a humble servitor, who will be as happy to 
do your bidding as ever the attendant 
sprite of Prospero was to do his ; let me 
know where Mrs. Malone's is?" 

Lavinia unhesitatingly gave him the re- 



1 64 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

quired direction, and as be flew off, Lavi- 
nia observed, that tboiigb certainly awk- 
ward and enabarrassing their having en- 
countered hinn, yet, in the present instance, 
it was well their having done so, from his 
proving so serviceable. 

He quickly returned with the car, cram- 
med with cloaks and umbrellas. Having 
assisted the ladies in muffling themselves 
up, and handed them into the ear — " Well, 
ladies," he said, still keeping the door of 
the vehicle open in his hand, "am I to bid 
you good-bye now?" 

Lavinia was now on the point, for the 
first time, of eagerly answering him, but 
checking herself, she looked at Rosetta. 

" Oh no, assuredly not," said Rosetta ; 
" that is," hesitating, " if you are coming 
our way." 

" Thank you, my dear ma'am," cried 
Melville, and without further ceremony 
he sprung into the car, and shutting the 
door, took the umbrella, which he had ex- 
panded over the head of Lavinia, out of 
her hand, to hold it over her himself. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 165 

The servant belonging to the car drove 
with such rapidity, that a few minutes 
brought them back to Rosehill. Owen 
came running out to open the gate for 
them, and from him they learned, that, 
shortly after their leaving home, Mrs. 
Wheatley had also gone out to pay a visit 
at a house in the neighbourhood, where 
she still was, so that Lavinia was saved 
the embarrassment of meeting her imme- 
diately. 

On the mufflings being thrown aside, it 
was ascertained that their clothes had not 
got a drop of rain ; of course, this called for 
a renewal of acknowledgments to Melville, 
to whom they were entirely indebted for 
the circumstance; and conscious of this, 
after a little hesitation — '' Perhaps you 
would Tike to step in, and take some re- 
freshment, sir?" said Rosetta. 

" I should certainly like to step in, but 
not to take refreshment," replied Melville; 
and motioning them to precede him, he 
followed them into the parlour. 

Here, seated at a table, over which some 



166 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

books and papers were scattered, they 
found Mr. Wheatley. Looking up as they 
entered, his surprise at seeing by whom 
they were accompanied checked what he 
had been on the point of saying. He in- 
stantly recognised Melville to be the 
young man whom he had seen conversing 
with Lavinia in the morning; and cer- 
tainly much displeased at now seeing him, 
after regarding him for a moment, with a 
look indicative of surprise, he turned his 
looks inquiringly on the young ladies. 

Lavinia, perfectly comprehending, and 
extremely disconcerted by them — "The — 
the young —the gentleman we met last 
night at Mrs. O'Connor's, sir," she said ; 
" he was so — so good " and she pro- 
ceeded to mention how they had encoun- 
tered him now, and the service he had 
been of to them. 

Mr. Wheatley stiffly bowed — " You 
must be obliged to the gentleman," he 
gravely said, " for taking so much trouble ; 
after his doing so, I should think it not 
amiss your offering him some refreshment." 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 167 

" The young ladies have had the good- 
ness to do that ah*eady, sir," said Melville, 
highly diverted by this scene, and, in or- 
der to heighten it, taking a chair, without 
further ceremony, and beginning to chat 
and look about him, in a manner perfectly 
calculated to excite surprise, to say nothing 
of any other feeling, from the mistake un- 
der which the party were about him. 

After conversing for some time, if that 
could be called conversation which he had 
almost entirely to himself, casting his eyes 
upon a grand pianoforte — " I need not ask 
which of you ladies play on this delightful 
instrument, as I conclude you both do," he 
said ; " but may I ask which of you will 
oblige me with a tune on it ?" 

Rosetta and Lavinia looked at each 
other, without answering him. 

" You don't know how you will oblige 
me," he resumed, "if it is only for five 
minutes you allow me to hear you." 

" Well, really," said Lavinia, rising 
with an air of careless indifference, and ap- 
proaching the instrument, " I don't think 



168 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

there is any music here will please you ; 
nothing but some of Handel's, and Haydn's, 
and Where is that old book of coun- 
try-dances, Rosetta?" she asked, turning 
to her; " but no matter, I think I recol- 
lect some of them ;" and sitting down, she 
played Patrick's Day in the Morning, and 
one or two other things in the same style, 
and then rising — " There, now, you are 
satisfied?" she said. 

" No, by no means," replied Melville; 
" if, indeed, you were to play me one of 
those fine compositions you mentioned." 

" Really I don't see any use there 
would be in that, for to be able to derive 
pleasure from them, a knowledge of music 

is -but since you so wish to hear one 

of them," and turning again, with careless- 
ness, to the instrument, she went through 
one of Haydn's beautiful lessons, but in so 
slovenly a manner, as either intimated 
that she cared not how she played, or 
thought, that had she played in any other 
manner, her condescension for having done 
so at all, in the present instance, would 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 169 

have been too great ; but instead of the 
humble thanks she expected for this con- 
descension — " What a pity," said Melville, 
wli^n she had concluded, " that a person, 
who can play, as I clearly perceive you 
can, should play that fine lesson in the 
manner you did ! When I was a little 
boy, almost the first maxim that was im- 
pressed upon my memory was, to do what- 
ever I attempted to do in the best man- 
ner I possibly could, as habits of inatten- 
tion and carelessness are much sooner ac- 
quired than lost." 

Lavinia coloured, and stared at him — 
" Why, do you understand any thing of 
music ?" she asked. 

" Sufficient, at least," replied Melville, 
laughing at her look, " to find fault." 

The pride of Lavinia was now piqued, 
and without further questioning, she re- 
sumed her seat, and dashed through one of 
Handel's compositions in the most brilliant 
style. — " W^ell, now !" she said, in an ex- 
ulting tone, as she rose from the instru- 
ment. 

VOL. III. I 



170 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" Ay, now, indeed," said Melville, " you 
did justice to yourself and this fine instru- 
ment ; and now you shall also find," laugh- 
ing, " that I understand music sufficiently 
to praise." 

Mr. Wheatley could no longer com- 
mand himself — could no longer endure 
this assumption of equality, and the pre- 
sumption it led to. Pulling out his watch, 
and looking at it — " Miss Audley," he 
gravely, perhaps a little sternly, said, " I 
thought I understood you had a letter to 
write by this day's post." 

** Y-e-s, sir," replied Lavinia, in a hesi- 
tating tone, extremely disconcerted by his 
manner. 

" Then why forget? you have hardly 
time enough to write it." 

" Pray, pray, use no ceremony with me, 
my dear ma'am," said Melville, in a tone 
of nonchalance that had the effect of al- 
most transporting Mr. Wheatley into a 
rage ; " and now that it is called to my re- 
collection, I rather think I have a letter to 
write myself; so adieu! adieu!" to her 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 171 

dnd Rosetta — " adieu, sir !" turning to 
Mr. Wheatley. 

" That young man must never, on any 
pretence whatever, obtain admission here 
again," said Mr. Wheatley, the moment 
he had departed ; *' and should you, by 
any chance, encounter him again, v^hich I 
think not unlikely, from his extreme ef- 
frontery, I must insist on no notice being 
taken of him. A pretty dangler, truly, 
the cousin of Mrs. O'Connor! but this is 
the consequence of having given way to 
your whim, Miss Audley, of going to such 
a place, or rather of your own imprudence, 
in suffering yourself to be induced to 
dance wdth any one there. I did imagine 
your pride would have prevented any 
thing of the kind : however, I see the gid- 
diness of girls renders it impossible for any 
dependance to be placed on them. If you 
wish to avoid the risk of doing yourself 
an injury, you will follow my advice about 
this young man ; for I must now inform 
you, that through the kind interference of 
i2 



172 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

your guardian, you are on the very eve of 
being admitted to the acquaintance of the 
family at Ashley Vale, for the purpose of 
being introduced, by them, into life; and 
I need not say how awkward and embar- 
rassing it would be, to have such a person 
as this Mr. Scanlen addressing and follow- 
ing you as an acquaintance, or admirer, in 
their society, or how completely such a 
circumstance might be the means of frus- 
trating your guardian's intentions, in get- 
ting you noticed by them." 

"Upon my word and honour," said La- 
vinia, on finding herself again alone, soon 
after this lecture, with Rosetta, " this 
guardian of mine is really making quite a 
bashaw of this father of yours; he insists, 
and " 

" Yet I think you can hardly wonder 
at his language being so peremptory, when 
you consider that he must feel himself an- 
swerable for you, from your having been 
intrusted to his care," said Rosetta. 

"Ay, true," replied the other; "but 
then I don't think it was necessary to 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 173 

Speak, altogether, in so dictatorial a man- 
ner: one may be just barely civil to a per- 
son, without being blamed or scolded, I 
think. However, to let the subject drop, 
let us now speak of Ashley Vale. Are not 
you absolutely enraptured at the thoughts 
of visiting there?" 

" I !" cried Rosetta, 

" Yes, you," fondly kissing her cheek; 
" do you think I will visit there without 
you ?" 

" No, no," replied Rosetta, " that is out 
of the question my ever even going there. 
In the first place, my father, as you well 
know, has always objected to my being 
introduced into society beyond what I had 
a right, uniformly, to expect to mix in ; and 
in the next but can you — can you for- 
get ?" and involuntarily covering her face 
w^th her hands, she burst into tears. 

" How could I be so careless?" cried 
Lavinia, evidently greatly distressed — 
*' no, no, I do not forget." 

" Then how could you imagine," a lit- 
tle reproachfully, " that I could take plea- 



174 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

sure in the idea of visiting there, or, in- 
deed, be induced, by any circumstance, to 
go there ? for do you not know the pain, 
the fear, the reluctance, with which I 
thought of coming into this neighbour- 
hood, on lord Altidore's account — how al- 
most entirely, from a dread of meeting 
him, I have avoided going into society 
since I came here?" 

" Yes, I know all that," said Lavinia, 
" perfectly ; but if you could conquer 
your dread of meeting him again, do you 
not think " 

" No, no," interrupted Rosetta, impa^ 
tiently — "no, I know what you would 
say ; but you are mistaken ; and not for 
worlds would I meet lord Altidore again, 
lest he should conceive I threw myself in 
his way, from such a hope as you have insi- 
nuated — a hope, which a moment's re- 
flection on what you have heard, of his 
being a suitor for the hand of Miss Erin, 
must tell you would be ridiculous to in- 
dulge in." 

« Well, well," said Lavinia, " I will ne- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 175 

ver touch on the subject again ; but, in- 
deed, half the pleasure I anticipated from 
going to the Vale will be lost from your 
not accompanying me to it." 

" Oh ! but consider," said Rosetta, re- 
covering from the agitation she had been 
thrown into, and wiping away her tears, 
" you will have the gratification of talking 
over with me, almost immediately, every 
thing you see or meet with there, and that 
will be almost the same thing as if I went 
y>^ith you." 

Mrs. Wheatley had been to pay a visit 
to a Mrs. Brabazon, where there were a 
good many young people, and she brought 
a message to the two girls, inviting them 
to a little dance there that evening. 

Rosetta, whose spirits had been a good 
deal discomposed, at once declined going ; 
and Lavinia, on her account, did the same. 
This was so evident to Rosetta, and who, 
besides, was more inclined to musing than 
conversing that evening, that she made it 
an absolute point her going. 

On its being mentioned at dinner — 



176 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" And pray who are to be at Mrs. Bra- 
bazon's?" demanded Mr. Wheatley, ab- 
ruptly. 

" Oh ! merely a few young people be- 
longing to the neighbourhood," replied his 
wife. 

" Are you sure ?" 

** Yes, certain." 

" And you really wish to go?" he said, 
turning to Lavinia; "I should have thought 
your dance last night might have sufficed 
for three or four nights." 

" Lord, my dear ! you forget when you 
were young yourself," said his wife. " I 
only wish Rosetta resembled Lavinia a 
little more than she does, in her natural 
love of gaiety." 

** I am quite as well satisfied as it is," 
replied Mr. Wheatley drily ; " however. 
Miss Audley, since you must go, I desire 
Owen may attend you, since T cannot do 
it myself, from being obliged to go out 
immediately after dinner; and remember 
I charge you, when he is sent for you at 
night, he is not sent back without you. 



TBADITTOK OF THE CASTLE. 177 

under the pretext of there being some one 
else to see you home." 

Lavinia bowed assentingly; but the 
moment he was gone — " I declare it is 
quite preposterous," she said, " the parade 
of having Owen striding after one wher- 
ever they go." 

" Why, to be sure, the distance is so 
very short a one to Mrs. Brabazon's," said 
Mrs. Wheatley ; " and I certainly did 
want him very much this evening, for it 
is quite time the currants should be pick- 
ed for the wine; and if once he gets out, 
he is such a loiterer." 

" Then, for goodness sake, keep him at 
home, my dear ma'am," said Lavinia, and 
away she ran to get her bonnet, and in 
another minute, she was on the way to 
Mrs. Brabazon's. 

She had just turned up a rural lane, 
leading to the house, when — " How do 
you do this fine evening, ma'am, after 
your misadventure of the morning?" ex- 
claimed a voice from behind a hawthorn 
i3 



1Y8 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

hedge at one side of it, and the next mo- 
ment Melville sprang over a gate, and was 
at her side. 

Lavinia started back, and — " Really this 

is very " extraordinary, she was on the 

point of adding. 

" What !" said Melville, as if he under- 
stood what she had been near saying — " is 
it my enjoying this delightful evening, as 
well as yourself?" 

" No, sir, a very different one ; I am go- 
ing to drink tea at a lady's just by." 

'* Indeed ! really I am glad of it, for I 
was just wishing for tea, and you will in- 
troduce me as your friend." 

" Me!" repeated Lavinia — "no, indeed, 
you must excuse me ; that is a liberty I 
should hardly think of taking — introdu- 
cing a person I hardly know myself, and 
whom I must now beg leave to inform 

n 

'* Nay," cried Melville, interrupting her, 
" you don't know how you will grieve me, 
if you persist in regarding me in the light 
of a person you hardly know." 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 179 

" Then whether it does, or not, I must 
say " 

" Nothing ill-natured — but don't dis- 
compose yourself; if you won't introduce 
me, I will introduce myself." 

" No, I should hope you would not at- 
tempt any thing of the kind," said Lavi- 
nia, in an alarmed tone — " that really 
would be too — too presuming." 

" Oh, by no means ; the Irish are very 
accessible good kind of people, and I dare 
say your friend won't consider it so ;'* and 
so, without further ceremony, he walked 
up with her to Mrs. Brabazon's gate, and 
followed her into the parlour, to which 
there was a glass door from the lawn. 

Lavinia felt very angry ; however, if 
she did not introduce him, she conceived 
she could not possibly get into any scrape 
about him, and not to do so she therefore 
positively determined. This, however, 
was of very little consequence in the pre- 
sent instance : Mrs. Brabazon, a careless, 
good-humoured woman, required nothing 
more than his having come with her, to 



ISO TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

give him a most gracious reception ; and 
Lavinia could not help being surprised at 
seeing him, in a minute, as much at his 
ease in this party of strangers, as he had 
been the preceding night at his cousin 
O'Connor's, laughing with, and compli- 
menting the ladies, and assisting the gen- 
tlemen in doing the honours of the tea- 
table. 

Well, really she did not know what to 
do ; she saw he was making acquaintances 
as fast as he could, and what might not be 
the consequence, when it came to be 
known who he really was ! and so, after a 
good deal of consultation with herself, she 
thought her best plan would be to explain, 
satisfied, that having once done so, she 
could not be justly condemned, or blamed, 
for any thing that might occur from his 
having appeared to be her acquaintance. 

" Well, really," exclaimed Mrs. Braba- 
zon, in reply to her whispered explanation, 
" who would ever have thought such a 
thing! that nice, genteel young man the 
cousin of O'Connor's wife ! But don't vex 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 181 

yourself, my dear, at his having made his 
way in here along with you — there was a 
great deal of assurance, to be sure, in it; 
and — but really he looks so pleasant, I 
don't think I could find in my heart to 
say any thing ill-natured to him ; but we 
must just tell the girls who he is, that 
none of them should dance with him." 

The young ladies were accordingly 
beckoned to her, and in the course of ano- 
ther minute, there was an end of any fur- 
ther smiles or glances to Melville. 

His amusement at the scene was inde- 
scribable — the distress of Lavinia, the ex- 
planation it led to, and the instantaneous 
effect this explanation had upon the party. 
Affecting, however, not to know that any 
alteration was affected towards him, as 
soon as they began to prepare for dancing, 
he severally addressed himself to every 
young lady whom he saw, at the moment, 
disengaged, in the room, to solicit her hand, 
but was, of course, or as he expected, re- 
ceived with a titter by some, as if diverted 
by his effrontery in asking it, and a vacant 



1821 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

stare in others, as if they could not ima- 
gine he was serious. Pretending great 
mortification, he retreated to a corner, 
where, for some time, he sat, apparently 
in utter disconsolation. 

The dance the party engaged in was a 
quadrille, but, with the exception of La- 
vinia, there was hardly any one of them 
knew any thing about it ; the consequence 
was, that there was nothing but confusion 
and apologizing. 

Melville, at length starting up from his 
seat — " Come, come," said he, " this will 
do no longer; I must take upon myself 
to be paster of the ceremonies here ;" and 
interrupting the dancers, he began in- 
structing them in the figure they had been 
trying to blunder through ; then suddenly 
turning to Lavinia — " Come," said he, "you 
and I will shew them what I mean ;" and 
without further ceremony, he took her from 
her partner, and calling to the music to 
begin again, the dancing was renewed. 

Lavinia again knew not whether to be 
pleased or displeased, or rather which to 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 183 

appear to be, for, in reality, she could not 
feel displeased at being released from a 
partner, who had utterly exhausted her 
patience by his ignorance and stupidity ; 
but then not to seem to resent the free- 
dom that had been taken, so unbecoming 
in the person that had taken it, but to 
counterfeit what she did not feel, was, in 
this instance, impossible. Melville danced 
incomparably — she saw every one admi- 
ring him — and the frown she had tried to 
assume, gave way to the delight she felt 
at having such a partner. But where 
could he have acquired this knowledge of 
dancing? where the one he evidently had 
of music? the air of even striking fashion 
that distinguished him from every other 
person in the room ? it really was strange, 
extraordinary — and could it have been for- 
got that he was Denny Scanlen, the cou- 
sin of a common miller's wife, she would 
have been obliged to acknowledge that he 
was a person whom no one need be asha- 
med, or unwilling, to own as an acquaint- 
ance. But this was a recollection that 



184 TRADITION OF THE CASTLC. 

haunted and disquieted her; and more 
than once she involuntarily wished, with 
a sigh, that it had been otherwise than it 
was — that, in short, he had been in a rank 
in which one might have taken that no- 
tice of him she was now beginning to 
think he merited, for every moment he 
gained upon her — what had, at first, appear- 
ed presumptuous confidence, being now 
evidently nothing more than the ease of a 
well-informed, collected mind, conscious of 
a claim to distinction from innately-felt 
superiority. — " What a character for the 
patronage of a person in power!" she 
thought — " what a gratification to any one 
of feeling, to think of being the means of 
elevating such a being above the sordid 
condition in which his birth had placed 
him ! but it was very improbable that he 
should encounter any one with ability 
to be his patron, and she again sighed at 
the thought of the interest he inspired 
being of very little avail to him. She 
knew not how it was, the spirit with 
which she had commenced dancing gra- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 185 

dually forsook her, and more than once 
she went wrong, through downright in- 
attention to what she was about, to the 
no small amusement of those at whose 
blunders she had previously been laughing. 

Matters were now completely reversed; 
Melville, from having been utterly ne- 
glected and scorned, was now absolutely 
hung upon and caressed, for the sake of 
the instruction he had the power of giving, 
every one suddenly agreeing that he really 
was so good-humoured obliging a crea- 
ture, it would be a thousand pities not to 
be, in some degree, civil to him. 

In the riiidst of his triumph, Owen was 
announced; and Lavinia knowing Mr. 
Wheatley would be displeased if she de- 
layed a moment after being sent for, im- 
mediately prepared to depart. 

There had been again some rain, and in 
consequence the car was sent for her. A 
young lady, living in her direction, hear- 
ing this, said she would avail herself of 
the circumstance, to be dropped at home. 



186 TRADITION OF THE CAStLE. 

rather than, by waiting a little longer, be 
obliged to walk through the wet roads. 

Lavinia saw that JSIelville, though en- 
gaged in making up a set for a new qua- 
drille, had still his eye upon her, and fear- 
ful of his attempting to see her home, gave 
a hint to Mrs. Brabazon of her wish to be 
allowed to steal away, and which, through 
her assistance, she accordingly contrived 
to do. 

A long dusky avenue led up from the 
road, through a kind of wilderness, to the 
habitation of her companion, who express- 
ing a dread of going up it at such a time 
by herself, Lavinia desired Owen to alight 
and see her to the house, not being afraid 
of being left for a few minutes by herself, 
from there being a few cabins at the other 
side of the road, in which the people wer^ 
still up. 

But hardly was she left to herself, ere 
she was thrown into the greatest confu- 
sion, by seeing Melville approaching; 
unwilling, from the revolution her senti- 
ments had undergone respecting him, to 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 187 

hurt his feelings, by any intimation of 
what he might expect from Mr. Wheat- 
ley, should he attempt to accompany her 
home, yet at a loss to know how she should 
couch her refusal to permit him, if he 
made the request, in terms sufficiently 
strong to prevent him, without wound- 
ing them herself. 

** So you stole away ?" said Melville, 
coming up to the car; " but slyly as you 
managed it, I soon discovered the loss we 
had sustained, and instantly made my 
parting bow ; for there was then no longer 
any interest or attraction in the scene for 
me." 

" Oh, well, don't let me detain you 
now," said Lavinia, with a flurried voice ; 
" the ground is damp, and I expect the 
'servant back every moment." 

" But I am going your way, and an 
additional escort might not be amiss." 

" Oh, no, no !" exclaimed Lavinia, and 
she eagerly put out her hand to draw in 
the door, which Owen had neglected to 
close, upon the alighting of her com- 



188 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

panion. In doing so, she did not perceive 
that, as Melville's arm rested on the edge 
of the car, his hand lay carelessly dang- 
ling in the way of it; nor was he aware 
of what she was about, till, with a sudden 
jirk, he felt it jamming in his fingers. 

The excruciating agony occasioned by 
the accident caused an involuntary excla- 
mation to that effect to escape him. 

" Good God! what have 1 done?" cried 
Lavinia, in the wildest consternation — 
" Crushed your hand, I fear, to atoms l" 

" No, no," cried Melville ; " pray don't 
agitate yourself; the injury, I am sure, is 
of no consequence;" but as he spoke he 
grew deadly sick, and feeling himself stag- 
ger, caught at the car for support. 

Lavinia screamed, and the people front 
the adjacent cabins came running out. 
Melville took hold of the arm of a man, 
and went into one of them, where, throw- 
ing himself on a seat, he called for some 
water. 

Lavinia, springing from the car, follow- 
ed him — " And what have I done ? what 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 189 

have I done ?" she exclaimed, in the great- 
est distress. 

Again Melville besought her to com- 
pose herself, assuring her he was convinced 
the accident was of no serious consequence. 

" Oh ! how can you say so ?" cried La- 
vinia, taking up his hand, and uttering a 
loud shriek at the state in which she saw 
it, with the blood gushing from the ends 
of the fingers — " Oh ! how can you say 
so?" unconsciously pressing it to her lips, 
and beginning to bind it up with her own 
handkerchief " But I know what your 
reason is; but you cannot deceive me, 
nor can I ever forgive myself for my care- 
lessness; and then to think I can make 
no amends for it !" and she burst into 
tears ; for the least she thought she could 
have done, after what had happened, would 
have been to have sent him home in the 
car with Owen ; but this she durst not do, 
for fear of Mr. Wheatley, whom she trem- 
bled to think of even knowing they had 
met. 

" See," said Melville, rising, and appear-J 



190 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ing to shake off the faintness that had 
come over him ; " see," said he, taking 
one of the fair hands that had been so 
busily engaged about him, and pressing 
it, with a look, not merely of admiration, 
but of passionate fondness to his heart, 
" I am well already, and quite ashamed 
of having been overcome by so slight a 
matter." 

" Slight ! oh, I v»^ish I could be con- 
vinced of that ! But how will it be pos- 
sible I should ? How shall I be able to 
know whether you get better or worse? 

for I cannot ask you to call at that — 

that is, I — I mean I cannot give you the 
trouble of calHng at oNIr. Wheatley*s." 

Melville perfectly understood her mean- 
ing, for neither the looks or manner of 
Mr. Wheatley had been lost upon him ; 
and so — " Well," he said, perhaps a little 
artfully, " should I be able to come out 
to-morrow — which I am sure I shall," with 
quickness he added, on seeing her turn of 
a deadly paleness at the bare surmise that 
he would not, " I shall be in the lane at 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 191 

the side of your house in the morning 
about eight, and should I meet with any 
one that I think may be intrusted with a 
message to you, shall certainly send one 
to let you know how I am, since you 
have so kindly condescended to express 
such anxiety about me." 

" And you'll be sure not to forget ?" 
said Lavina, with earnestness. 

** Forget," cried Melville, " what is 
connected with your idea ! Memory 
must be lost, ere any thing associated 
with that can be effaced from my recol- 
lection." 

" Oh ! I see you are getting better," said 
Lavinia, brightly blushing, and with some- 
thing of her wonted archness of look; 
and — " There, I hear the servant's voice !" 
and drawing away her hand, she flew 
from the cabin without allowing him to 
say another word, and darting across the 
road, sprung into the car, and was instant- 
ly driven away, accounting to Owen, who 
had been quite frightened at missing her, 
by saying that a slight accident had oc- 



192 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

curred to a person on the road, which had 
occasioned her alighting to see if she could 
render any service. 

She had given Mrs. Brabazon a hint to 
say nothing of Melville's having accom- 
panied her to her house, lest it should 
excite the indignation of Mr. Wheatley 
against him ; and as she made sure there- 
fore of the secrecy of all there on the sub- 
ject, she thought she would say nothing 
herself about it. Yet so much had she 
been hitherto in the habit of communi- 
cating every thought as it rose to Kosetta, 
of making her a second self, that she could 
not now be silent to her respecting the 
incidents of the evening, without almost 
a feeling of reproach. But then she knew 
she should not like to listen to the stric- 
tures which she was convinced llosetta 
would make upon them ; in short, that 
she should not like to have Denny Scan- 
len any farther laughed at, or turned into 
ridicule, and still less to be prevented hav- 
ing any farther communication with him, 
as she was convinced she should be, if 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 193 

possible, by Rosetta, out of fear of her 
father, though only for the purpose of 
havirrg her anxiety quieted about the ac- 
cident she had been the means of occa- 
sioning him, and which once out of sus- 
pense about, she positively, of her own ac- 
cord, determined to shun him, though no 
longer considering him in the light of a 
person whose acquaintance would not be 
pleasant; but prejudices were arbitrary, 
and what but ridicule and contempt should 
she draw upon herself by attempting to 
represent him in the light in which she 
now regarded him— that of being entitled, 
from his manner and appearance, to mix 
in any society ? 

A restless night was the consequence of 
the agitation her nerves had undergone, 
and to this, we must suppose, was owing 
her rising even earlier than usual the next 
morning, and repairing to the garden, to 
try if the fresh air would be of service to 
her. Here, after being some time, it cer- 
tainly occurred to her the great uncertain- 

VOL. III. K 



194 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ty there was of Melville's meeting any one 
with whom he might intrust a message 
for her. She thought she would just ven- 
ture into the adjoining fields, feeling she 
would be quite miserable if she did not 
see or hear something about him that day, 
and keeping along the hedge that divided 
them from the lane, watch for him herself, 
but of course without letting him see her. 

In the mean time Melville, with both 
his head and his heart full of her idea, had 
returned to the castle, where he was pass- 
ing to his chamber, in order to get his own 
man to examine his hand, when he en- 
countered doctor Rosebud, just come back 
from his friend, Mr. Medlicott's. 

" Heyday ! w^hat's the matter ?" ex- 
claimed Rosebud, catching a glimpse of 
his bound-up hand. 

" Pooh j nothing, my dear sir," replied 
Melville, affecting a laugh, and attempt- 
ing to. pass him as he spoke. 

" I am not so sure of that," said the 
other, catching him by the arm ; and at 
this instant Donaghue, hearing their voices, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 195 

came out from the parlour ; and Melville, 
perceiving any further argument with 
Kosebud would be useless, proceeded 
thither to let him examine his hand. 

" Nothing !" cried the latter, as he un- 
bound it, " nothing do you call this? 
Well, all I shall say is, that, upon my 
soul, if your heart has got as bad a squeeze 
as your fingers, you are in a bad way, my 
good sir. But, upon my veracity, this 
has very much the appearance of some 
freak or frolic. I hope you are not turn- 
ing a Henry the Fourth upon our hands — 
making love to the handsome wife of some 
miller hereabouts." 

" What, you judge of others by your- 
self, Mr. Doctor," said Melville, " I sup- 
pose; but come, my good sir, a little of 
your opodeldoc, and all will be well again." 

" I am not so sure of that," cried the 
doctor ; " 'tis a very ugly accident." 

" For Heaven's sake, Sedley, how did 
you meet with it?" asked Donaghue. 

" Tut ! what signifies ?" replied Melville, 
K 2 



196 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

a little embarrassed by the question, but 
trying to bide his confusion under a laugh 
— " You really, my good friends, remind 
me of an old lady, who, whenever she got 
a cold, tormented herself and every body 
about her, by endeavouring to ascertain, 
not how she could cure it, but how she 
had got it." 

" Humph !" said the doctor. " I see 
we can all practise a little evasion, when 

'tis necessary; but " and he glanced 

at the handkerchief, which he saw, from 
the size, was a lady's, as he took it off. 

But Melville was too quick for him — 
snatching it up, he thrust it in his bosom. 

Donaghue looked suspiciously at him ; 
Melville could not help laughing at the 
look, though he certainly felt a little dis- 
concerted at any curiosity being excited, 
since he did not choose to explain, or be 
in any degree explicit. 

Let it not, however, for a moment be 
supposed it was owing to any feehng or 
design he could have blushed to acknow- 
ledge, but an unwillingness to excite 



'TRAIDITION OF THE CASTLE. 197 

laughter or remonstrance ; one or other of 
which he should subject himself to, he 
was convinced, if he confessed all to Dona- 
ghue. He would either laugh, he was 
sure, at his being, what he might term it, 
so easily caught, or else remonstrate with 
him on the danger that might accrue from 
cultivating any further acquaintance with 
the pretty creature that had so interested 
him, and he therefore determined to be 
altogether silent on the subject, more es- 
pecially as he had said nothing about it 
in the first instance ; for though he had 
fully determined to mention to Donaghue 
his frolic at O'Connor's, yet, when at 
night he joined him, on his return from 
it, he knew not how it was he felt a dis- 
inclination to speak of it ; but the fact 
was, he feared, if he did, any thing that 
might afterwards happen, his wishing to 
view Rosehill, and know something more 
of its inmates, might be imputed to some- 
thing serious. But that such a feeling, a 
downright serious passion for the fair 
Lavinia, was now beginning to pervade 



198 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

his bosom, he could no longer deny to 
himself, from the powerful interest she 
had awakened this evening — through the 
sensibility, the tenderness of disposition 
she had evinced — the growing interest 
for him, spite of the force of prejudice, and 
the disdain of pride. 

To triumph over these, and inspire her 
with an attachment, in spite of their 
opposition, was indeed too gratifying a 
thought not to be dwelt on without rap- 
ture. In vain Prudence suggested the 
embarrassment in which yielding to the 
feelings it inspired might ultimately be 
the means of placing him. To be the ob- 
ject of a disinterested attachment to one 
so exquisitely lovely, was an idea too grati- 
fying, too delightful to self-love, not to 
overcome almost every other considera- 
tion, and determine him to risk something, 
for the sake of the happiness it might be 
the means of affording. In short, he was 
so completely captivated, as wilfully to 
shut his eyes against all that might result 
from his giving way to the passion with 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 199 

which he had been so suddenly inspired. 
Never had he seen any one possessed of 
more exquisite loveliness, more bewitch- 
ing ndiveU, than his fair enslaver — never 
any one to be compared with her, in his 
estimation, except one, that one whom 
honour and friendship had rendered sa- 
cred in his eyes ; and to resist her attrac- 
tions, therefore, he believed to be impos- 
sible, from the pleasure he took in yielding 
to them. Yet, as he was utterly incapable 
of harbouring a thought injurious to inno- 
cence and virtue, had her situation in life 
been such as to have precluded the idea 
of a positive engagement with her, he 
certainly would have resolutely decided at 
once against acting as he did ; but from 
the respectability, not to say elegance 
surrounding her, the education she had 
evidently received, and the watchful care, 
so indicative of her being of real conse- 
quence, with which she was guarded, he 
was convinced there could be no degrada- 
tion in an alliance with her ; and finally 
determined on following up the adven- 



200 TRADITION OF THE CASTLH. 

ture, but with caution and circumspec- 
tion ; since resolved on not disclosing him- 
self till fully satisfied that she was all he 
now imagined her, that in case of any dis- 
appointment to his wishes, and fancied 
and high-raised expectations, he might 
not needlessly have perhaps incurred the 
resentment of his uncle. 

His hand being dressed, the doctor ad- 
vised his keeping it in a sling for a day 
or two. The advice was not neglected, 
for he knew it was not calculated to pro- 
duce an uninteresting effect ; and the 
next morning, at the hour he had men- 
tioned, he was in the lane, reconnoitring 
for the fair being whom, a little artfully 
perhaps, as before observed, he had drawn 
in to make an indirect appointment with 
him ; for, from the anxiety she had evinced 
about him, he was almost convinced he 
should find her there watching for him. 
He had hardly cast his eyes about, when a 
glimpse of a white dress, through the hedge 
that extended from the garden to a common 
at the end of the lane, assured him he was 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 201 

not mistaken in his expectation. He in- 
stantly stopped and coughed, but no one 
spoke; but in the course of a minute or 
two, he saw some one evidently trying 
to steal away. — " And so this is the way," 
he cried, immediately springing over a 
stile, a little way farther down, into the 
field, and hastening to the blushing La- 
vinia, " you are asking me how I am, after 
all the concern you flattered me by evin- 
cing last night !" 

" I am sure I need not say that that con- 
cern was not feigned," replied Lavina; ** but 

as I saw you But, good Heavens ! your 

arm in a sling ! Then the accident is, 
after all, more serious than you would 
have had me imagine last night ?" 

^' No, no," cried Melville, delighted 
with her emotion, yet at the same time 
anxious to sooth her anxiety ; " and were 
it even so, would not your regret be a 
sufficient compensation for it?" 

Lavinia tried to withdraw the hand, 
with which, unconsciously perhaps, she 
K 3 



202 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

had met his extended one as he approach- 
ed ; but he gently detained it — " No, no," 
he said, " 'tis not your breakfast hour yet, 
and where can there be a more delicious 
spot for enjoying the freshness of the morn- 
ing air than this — where, from his grassy 
bed, we see the lark soaring up to hea- 
ven's high gate ?" and by speaking in this 
way he led her to almost imperceptibly 
betray her favourite walks, and many 
other matters with which he wished to be 
acquainted. 

Of the knowledge he thus obtained, he 
failed not to avail himself, by being on 
the watch to meet her whenever she was 
unaccompanied by Rosetta, and the con- 
sequence of these apparently chance meet- 
ings, was the gradual deepening of the 
interest they had mutually inspired. 

But how impossible to describe the con- 
fusion and perplexity that now began to 
pervade the mind of Lavinia ! Deserving 
of condemnation, as she conceived herself, 
for having been betrayed into any farther 
acquaintance with Melville, and yet, un- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 203 

able as she was to force herself to abrupt- 
ly terminate it, she shrunk from the 
thought of what her pride would make 
her blush to acknowledge, and felt shock- 
ed at the idea of having acted in any way 
that could occasion a rebuke. Yet, not- 
withstanding this, the high estimation in 
which she had been taught to hold herself, 
the natural candour and ingenuousness of 
her mind, rendering hateful to her any 
thing that needed deception or conceal- 
ment, she still could not bring herself to 
turn aside when she met him, or to re- 
member any thing to his prejudice. It 
was only when she was not actually listen- 
ing to him, that the revolting idea of his 
being Denny Scanlen recurred to her re- 
collection ; whilst conversing with him, 
his name, his condition, were forgotten ; 
or if remembered, it was with a sigh, that 
they were such as would not entitle him 
to that society he seemed so qualified to 
adorn. How she could have viewed him 
in the light she at first did, now filled her 
with surprise; but such is the effect of 



204 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

prejudice to blind our judgment, and ren- 
der us insensible to real merit. Yet that 
she had continued to regard him in the 
same light, or rather had not met him 
again, which was pretty much the same 
thing, she could hardly help wishing, from 
the disquietude her farther knowledge of 
him had occasioned her. But there would 
soon be an end of this — she should shortly 
be introduced into scenes, and mix in so- 
ciety, it would be impossible for him to 
enter, and her mind would, consequently, 
be diverted from his idea, and every other 
feeling of regret, than what must still be 
continued to be experienced, for ever hav- 
ing been betrayed into any thing of mys- 
tery or concealment towards her dear Ro- 
setta, who reposed her entire heart in her 
bosom, and confidently believed she did 
the same in return. And why had she 
not? Because she dreaded her animad- 
versions, or from the awkwardness that 
would have attended the discovery of her 
having had concealment in one instance, 
was led to practise it in another ; so true 



TRADITION OP THE CASTLE. 205 

is it that one error almost invariably leads 
to another, and that the slightest devia- 
tion from the road we should pursue, fre- 
quently plunges us into a labyrinth from 
which we know not how to extricate our- 
selves. 

Fortunately for Lavinia, Melville was 
really what he appeared to be, not what 
she imagined, else might her implied en- 
couragement of him have led to the dis- 
astrous consequences of drawing her into 
a connexion that she never would have 
been forgiven for forming. 



CHAPTER VI. 



" Fancies and notions -we pursue 

Which ne'er had being, but in thought; 

And like the doting artist, woo 

The image he himself had wrought." 

Much as Melville esteemed the characters 
of sir William and lady Erin, highly as 



206 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

he admired Miss Erin, so much so indeed 
as to have occasioned quite a struggle be- 
tween honour, and friendship, and inclina- 
tion, to prevent a growing attachment for 
her, he was not now quite so anxious, 
on his own account, to become a visitor 
at the Vale, as he had been on his first ar- 
rival at Altoir-na-Grenie, conceiving his 
visits there must necessarily interrupt his 
meetings with the fair inmate of Rosehill ; 
not but that he consoled himself for this, 
by the reflection, that these occasional in- 
terruptions to them would probably be 
the means of enabling him to ascertain 
her real feelings for him. But however 
he might now have desired to keep out of 
the way of being constantly engaged, 
neither respect for the wishes of his uncle, 
nor anxiety about his friend, could pre- 
vent his delaying beyond a few days an- 
nouncing his arrival in the neighbour- 
hood, by calling at the Vale. Sir James 
had assured him he could not gratify him 
more than by cultivating an intimacy 
there ; and from what he already knew. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 207 

or at least suspected of Miss Erin's senti- 
ments, and the light in which he was aware 
Donaghue was regarded, from being the 
son of her mother's dearest friend, he was 
not without hopes, that, by also inducing 
his doing the same, he might be the means 
of putting him in the way of fortune again. 
Still ignorant of what had actually occur- 
red between him and Miss Erin, and equal- 
ly so of the opinion which the artful mis- 
representations of lady Jane had caused 
him to entertain of sir William, he knew 
of no other reluctance he could have to 
visiting there, than what originated in an 
unwillingness to expose himself to the 
farther attractions of a person whom his 
pride would no longer permit him to think 
of addressing, from no longer having the 
power of laying an adequate fortune at 
her feet, and which, as already stated, he 
determined on not resting till he had com- 
bated him out of, from deeming it ex- 
tremely ridiculous. Had he known the 
truth, he perhaps might not have been 
able to exert himself so much on the sub- 



S08 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ject ; but though a hundred times it ho- 
vered on the lips of Donaghue, when as- 
sailed by his arguments or raillery, still, 
as often they closed without the power of 
revealing it, so overwhelmed was he with 
shame and confusion, whenever the idea 
of what his conduct had been to Miss 
Erin suggested itself to his tortured ima- 
gination. 

In imagining that he himself should 
be the first to announce his arrival in the 
neighbourhood at the Vale, Melville was 
mistaken — Foley, after an absence of a 
few days, having called there just a short 
time before him, and mentioned it to 
Miss Erin, the only person who was in 
the way to receive him, and who, in con- 
sequence, was infinitely more pleased than 
surprised by seeing Melville in the course 
of the morning entering the drawing- 
room, where she was still sitting alone. — 
'' My dear Mr. Melville," she cried, with 
one of her most enchanting smiles, rising 
to meet him, with an extended hand, 
" how very glad I am to see you, and " 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 209 

Here the unexpected vision of Dona- 
ghue behind him actually struck her dumb, 
for so entirely had she now relinquished 
all idea of ever seeing him as a visitor, 
that had she been ignorant of his being in 
the neighbourhood, she could hardly have 
been more surprised than she now was at 
beholding him ; but not to surprise alone 
was owing her emotion at the instant — 
she had not seen him since the encounter 
in the abbey, and all that had occurred in 
that meeting now recurring to her recol- 
lection, she got confused, and almost with- 
out being conscious of what she was about, 
hastily rang the bell, and ordered a ser- 
vant to let lady Jane know that Mr. 
O'Brien was there. 

Melville stared. — " Lady Jane !'' he re- 
peated to himself; " and why to lady Jane 
send this intimation in preference to any 
other person ? Surely I have not been in 
an error all this time, and fancied Dona- 
ghue pining away for one object, when 
actually he had made a transfer of his 
heart to another ! Yet no, for what emo- 



210 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

tion has he ever manifested at the men- 
tion of lady Jane, while the slightest allu- 
sion to Miss Erin is sure to throw him 
into an agitation ; but then, if he has cho- 
sen to permit such a mistake to prevail, in 
order to free him from the suspicion of 
still harbouring a passion for Miss Erin, 
may not every hope or expectation rela- 
tive to him be frustrated? Well, I shall 
certainly watch him closely, and if I find 
he has been guilty of such romantic folly, 
shall assuredly take him severely to task 
for it ; for how ridiculous, because he has 
not a fortune equal to hers, to suppose he 
must be accused of interestedness for still 
thinking of the being I am convinced he 
alone admires !"' 

Lady Jane, who was loitering about her 
dressing-room, waited not a minute after 
receiving Miss Erin's message to hasten 
to the drawing-room. — " So, you two dear 
enchanting creatures," she cried, extend- 
ing a hand to each of the gentlemen as 
she entered, " this is really quite an agree- 
able surprise." 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 211 

" To me, at least," said Melville, laugh- 
ing, " since, till this moment, I never had 
the presumption to think lady Jane thought 
me enchanting." 

" Oh, pooh !" she cried; " don't you 
know one naturally considers every one 
so, that is elegant, and handsome, and 
agreeable ?" 

" What an intoxicating inference!" 
bowing, with a sigh of affected sensibility ; 
" but really lady Jane flatters with such 
delicacy." 

" Nonsense ! if you felt my flattery, as 
you call it, you would not be able to speak 
of it in this manner, for its effect then 
would be too agitating for utterance." 

" Then we may deem silence, in some 
cases, suspicious," said Melville; and in- 
voluntarily, as he spoke, he glanced at 
Donaghue, who had hitherto continued 
without speaking. 

Donaghue coloured like scarlet at the 
look, and was involuntarily turning to a 
window, when suddenly recollecting how 
deeply he was interested in not letting 



212 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the mistake about lady Jane be detected, 
he checked himself, and replying to it by 
an affected laugh, followed her ladyship 
to the other end of the room. 

Melville fancied he heard, at the in- 
stant, a soft sigh stealing from Miss Erin ; 
if, however, there was any renewal of 
emotion at the moment, she had sufficient 
command over herself to conceal it ; yet 
still, as her conversation with Melville 
was renewed, her eyes wandered, and 
once or twice, for an instant, so appeared 
to do her thoughts. 

Sir William and lady Erin were both 
out, but now shortly expected back — one 
taking his usual morning's ride, the other 
paying some visits, from which her daugh- 
ter had got herself excused. Her lady- 
ship was the first who returned; on hear- 
ing who were in the drawing-room, she 
hastened thither, and was most deeply af- 
fected by the sight of Donaghue. After 
expressing her delight at seeing him — 
" And yet this exquisite pleasure to deny 
nie so long !" she said. " Good Heavens ! 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 213 

when I think of our having been so long 
in the same neighbourhood, as we have 
now been, without before meeting, I al- 
most feel the circumstance as a reproach 
to myself." 

" No, no, my dearest madam," exclaim- 
ed Donaghue, eagerly, " you are not to 
blame for it ; you " 

" Then why," said lady Erin, interrupt- 
ing him, " be guilty of the unkindness 
you were, in denying me this pleasure?" 

Donaghue blushed, hesitated, and while 
vainly considering what excuse to make, 
sir William Erin, to his great relief, made 
his appearance; he seemed much pleased 
at seeing the two friends, and gave them 
an invitation to stop the day, which was 
accepted. 

Hardly had they consented to stay, ere 
Rosebud, who had set out on a scamper- 
ing ride, as they were quitting Altoir-na- 
Grenie, and had promised to join them at 
the Vale, for the purpose of returning 
with them to the castle, was announced, 
and evinced no little pleasure at finding 



214 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

they were all to remain where they were. 
Other visitors dropped in, and the differ- 
ent guests belonging to the house, and 
the conversation became general. But in 
this Donaghue was not allowed to bear 
any particular share, through the contri- 
vance of lady Jane : she saw they were 
closely watched, and aware of the sus- 
picion that occasioned their being so, de- 
termined to do all in her power to con- 
firm it ; accordingly, making a pretext to 
get him to occupy a seat beside her, she 
did every thing she couid to engross his 
attention to herself, giving to her conver- 
sation with him, though, in reality, about 
nothing of any consequence, every appear- 
ance of its being so, from the manner in 
w^hich she carried it on with him. 

Donaghue could not be insensible to 
the belief of what all this was calculated 
to create, and to the conviction of it was 
owing his not making any effort to dis- 
engage himself from her ; so anxious was 
he to be exonerated, in the eyes of sir 
William, of the suspicions he was led, by 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 215 

her artifices, to imagine he entertained of 
his harbouring interested designs on his 
daughter, and so aware was he, of course, 
that nothing could so fully clear him of 
this, as allowing it to be supposed he had 
an attachment to another. 

Artifice or deception of any Icind was 
certainly hateful to him ; but so revolting 
was the suspicion just alluded to, that he 
preferred almost any thing to passively re- 
maining under it. Yet, when his thoughts 
glanced at what he had, from recent cir- 
cumstances, reason to imagine the senti- 
ments of Eveleen herself, how difiBcult 
did he find dissimulation in this instance ! 
but surely, if possessed of real generosity, 
the very knowledge of these sentiments 
should only operate as an additional sti- 
mulus to it, since what but misery must 
result from their being confirmed ? per- 
suaded as he was, from lady Jane's artful 
representations of her father, that, to hope 
for his consenting to his daughter's union 
with any man of unequal fortune, was to 
hope for what was utterly impossible. 



216 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Both interested in observing him, sir 
William and lady Erin, without being 
perhaps exactly conscious of it themselves, 
seemed to make him the object of their 
particular scrutiny. It was not lost, how- 
ever, upon Donaghue, and imputing the 
manner in which they regarded him en- 
tirely to anxiety to ascertain whether the 
suspicion they had entertained of him was 
groundless, he became, apparently, every 
moment more engaged with lady Jane. 

Lady Erin began to think she had been 
wrong in denying her belief till now, not- 
withstanding the grounds there were for 
it, to his feeling a preference for her lady- 
ship ; and yet, though she almost thought 
so, she knew not how it was, she could 
not bring herself, even now, to resign her- 
self implicitly to one of the kind. She 
w^atched Donaghue narrowly, and spite 
of the particularity that seemed to sub-, 
sist between him and lady Jane, there 
was a something in his look, in his man- 
ner, at moments, that precluded the be- 
lief it was calculated to inspire. Yet it 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. SIT 

might only be because she did not like 
to give way to it that she thought so. 
She had so long cherished a hope and wish 
of seeing a union effected between him 
and her daughter, that she knew not how 
to bring herself to entirely resign them. 
But the pain she was aware would attend 
their resignation must not prevent this, 
if she had any reason to apprehend her 
trying to avoid it was only trying to 
avoid a pain that must yet be experienced ; 
but she should soon, she was convinced, 
be out of suspense on the subject ; and the 
conviction that nothing would so soon 
put an end to this as obtaining opportuni- 
ties for judging for herself, had certainly 
tended to heighten her anxiety for seeing 
Donaghue at the Vale. 

In the course of conversation, some of 
those places which Donaghue had seen 
abroad were mentioned; and lady Erin, 
opening a portfolio that was lying on tlie 
table before her, called to him to come and 
look at some sketches of them which Miss 

VOL. III. L 



218 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Erin had made, they, it seems, having 
been included in the tour which she had 
made on the Continent with her parents. 
They were exquisitely done; and had 
Donaghue given utterance to the admira- 
tion they excited, his language w ould liave 
been glowing indeed ; but a dread of now 
giving utterance to what she in any way 
inspired, lest of confirming the suspicions 
he imputed to sir William, made him now 
constrain himself, and regard them with 
the sober calmness of a person by no means 
interested about them. > tuit -oi mioo 03k 

Findhig him silent, lady Erin uplifted 
her eyes to his, and a shade of vexation 
certainly overspread her countenance at 
his manner at the moment 

" They are pretty," said lady Jane, 
" are they not?" following him to the 
table, and looking over his shoulder at 
them ; " but don't, don't, I desire you/* 
she cried, " look at that," attempting, as 
she spoke, to put her hand over one that 
had fallen out from amidst them. 



TltADlTION OF THE CASTI.E. 219 

U' ^* And why not?" said Donaghue, taking 
it up. 

" Why, because — because it is one of 
my doing.'" 

" Yours !" repeated Donaghue, in utter 
amazement at her having thrust such a 
hideous daub amongst things so exquisite- 
ly finished ; and through absolute surprise 
he continued gazing at it with an earnest- 
ness so different from the forced coldness 
with which he had regarded the other 
drawings, as to make Miss Erin, who had 
also come to the table, involuntarily close 
the book, on lady Erin's attempting to 
produce more of them, with a conviction 
that, after this, there could not possibly 
be any farther proof wanted of what the 
real nature of his sentiments for lady Jane 
were. 

Donaghue felt to his heart the inference 
that must be drawn from his conduct, and, 
hardly conscious of what he w^as about, 
hastily turned away to hide the emotion 
excited by the thought. 
L 2 



220 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Lady Erin now began to resign her 
doubts; and even sir William, without 
having been previously apprized of any 
thing concerning lady Jane, was inclined 
to think, from what he now witnessed, 
that he need never have suspected Dona- 
ghue of haunting the shades of Ashley 
Vale on account of his daughter. 

IMelville, however, was not deceived ; 
he knew more of the heart, he better 
understood the feelings of his friend, than 
they did ; he had had opportunities of ma~ 
king observations which they had not ; and 
tJie result of all was, even* of what he now 
witnessed, those variations of countenance, 
those wandering looks, and momentary 
abstractions, that Donaghue could not 
help, a conviction that he was now acting 
a part, and from a too sensitive pride, 
voluntarily leading those astray, with re- 
gard to his sentiments, who were really 
interested in their developement. 
. He was incensed at the thought ; in 
proportion to his solicitude for his happi- 
ness, was his exasperation at conduct so 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 221 

^culated to destroy all chance of it ; for 
he was well aware of what he would suf. 
fer, if he saw Miss Erin another's, and yet 
]Hyas he not now doing every thing in his 
power to deprive himself of her? for with 
all their liberality of sentiment (and from 
the knowledge he had, through a variety 
of circumstances, obtained of them, he 
gave them credit for as much as is perhaps 
generally possessed by most people), it 
was not to be supposed, if once induced 
to believe him indifferent about her, that 
sir William or lady Erin would think of 
wooing him for their daughter, or that 
she herself, persuaded of the same, would 
not quickly set about conquering any 
preference entertained for him ; and in 
her effort to do which, aided as it would 
be by pride, by female delicacy, the at- 
tentions of others, and the ardent anxiety 
of her parents to see her happily esta- 
bUshed in life, there could be but little 
doubt of her shortly succeeding, leaving 
Donaghue, too late, to bewail those chi- 



222 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

merical notions to which he had sacrificed 
her. 

A short time before dinner, and just as 
the party, after a scattered ramble in the 
grounds, were collected again in the draw- 
ing-room, previous to it, lord Altidore 
was announced, and having paid his com- 
pliments to lady Erin, and the company 
in general, he took a seat by Miss Erin, 
and seemed immediately to devote him- 
self entirely to her. 

The young lady received him with 
smiles; and, to judge from appearances, 
a very interesting conversation took place 
between them ; and had JNIelville been till 
then in doubt as to the nature of Dona- 
ghue's sentiments for JMiss Erin, he could 
have been so no longer, from the agitation 
he now betrayed. There was indeed suf- 
ficient in her inanner now to alarm an 
apprehensive lover— not, however, through 
any coquetry — not that she was perhaps 
altogether sorry that Donaghue was ob- 
serving her, but through the positive in- 



TRA.DITION OF THE CASTLE. 223 

terest she took in the subject on which 
she was conversing with lord Altidore. 

One day that she and lady Erin, with 
ajlparty from the Vale, had been to his 
lordship's, as he was shewing them the 
improvements, a poor woman was found 
in an almost dying state, through down- 
right poverty, near the house ; and, in 
consequence of her being found on his 
grounds, his lordship, insisting on doing 
whatever was requisite for her, had made 
his wishing to consult Miss Erin on the 
subject of the best plan to be pursued for 
her future comfort, a pretext for occasion- 
ally seeking to withdraw her attention 
from others. 

" Yet how weak," cried Donaghue, 
striving to struggle with the agony of soul 
he experienced, at the apparent encou- 
ragement given by Miss Erin to lord Al- 
tidore, " to feel what I am now enduring, 
since the pain of seeing her devoted to 
another is a pain I must have looked for- 
ward to experience, from the moment I 
saw the insuperable barriers placed by for- 



224 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE", 

tune between us! and what I anticipated, 
I should certainly have been better pre- 
pared to support ; but I now perceive that 
there is a wide difference between the for- 
titude requisite to contemplate an afflic- 
tion, and the fortitude required to bear it." 
Yet to think that but for himself, perhaps, 
it was an anguish that might have been 
spared him ! But then how was it to be 
avoided ? how but by probably endanger- 
ing the tranquillity of Eveleen herself, and 
subjecting himself to the imputation of 
the most degrading selfishness ? and rather 
than this — rather than allow the cold and 
wary sir William, as he still persevered in 
believing him, imagine he had not beea 
too cold or cautious in his conduct to- 
wards him, what was there he felt he 
would not prefer suffering ? In short, 
cost him what it would, he decided on 
persevering in his present conduct. 

Sir William, who had not been of the 
walking-party, did not make his reappear- 
ance in the drawing-room till just a few 
minutes before the announcement of din- 



T'HADITION OF THE CASTLE, 225 

trer. Looking anxiously about him as he 
■entered it — ** Our httle Hebe not come 
yet ?" he said. 

" Nor shall we have the pleasure of 
seeing her this day, sir," said Miss Erin; 
** I have just received a note from her, 
begging to be excused, on account of the 
indisposition of her friend." 

" Well, though I admire her for not 
eoming, I still feel her not doing so a dis- 
appointment. However, I hope we shall 
not be much longer denied the gratifica- 
tion of seeing her here." 

" Hebe!" repeated lady Jane, a little 
^neeringly ; " and pray, my dear sir Wil- 
iiam, who may the young lady be, to 
whom you have given this appellation ?" 

" Oh ! a sweet little creature, I assure 
you." 

" Oh, that we must infer, from the 
name you have given her. But I pre- 
4sume she is known by some other ? Does 
she belong to this quarter of the world ?" 

*' Not exactly ; she is a young person 
l3 



226 TRADITION OF THE CASTUE. 

for whom a most particular friend of mine 
is deeply interested, insomuch as to have 
requested lady Erin's immediate introduc- 
tion for her into life, and on whose ac- 
count we shall make it a point of render- 
ing her every attention in our power." Xt 
" And in obliging him, we shall cer- 
tainly oblige ourselves," said lady Erin ; 
" for I never saw a young creature more 
calculated to win esteem and affection; 
she is at once so innocent, yet intelligent ; 
so artless, yet polished; so much the child 
of nature, yet the accomplished girl." 

" Quite a rara avis, upon my w^ord??' 
said lady Jane, with something of a shrug. 
" Really, lady Erin, you and sir William 
have quite excited one's curiosity. Pray 
when may we expect to beheld your para- 
gon ?"^ .Vf t^ o 

" Very soon, I hope." -^ 

*' And till then are we to know nothing 
more of her ?" 

" Nothing more." 

" Upon my word, this is adding some- 
thing of mysterious importance to her ' 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 227 

However, I am not one of those who 
should feel any ardent curiosity or impa- 
tience about her; on the contrary, we 
belles should rather dread such a blazing 
star coming amongst us, test of a total 
eclipse ; but the beaus indeed— I should 
not wonder if they assailed your ladyship." 
" Then I give them due notice not to 
waste their eloquence on me," said lady 
Erin, smiling, " since I am determined 
that, in the present instance, neither flat- 
tery or coaxing shall prevail; our little 
Hebe must not be known till she is intro- 
duced here." 

^f From this day Donaghue became, with 
his friend Melville, a constant participatoi 
in the gaieties and pleasures of the Vale ; 
but he took not with him that Hghtness 
of spirit that was requisite for their enjoy- 
ment. Every day, every hour, rendered 
still more painful the struggle he was en- 
during, as every day, every hour, some 
new cause for esteem and admiration was 
discovered in her whom he adored; but 
the more arduous it became, the more 



2218 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 

his pride seemed stimulated to persevere 
in it. Could he give a greater proof of 
love, love indeed worthy of the name, 
than by concealing it from her whom it 
would injure ? and was he not, by suffer- 
ing what he did, vindicating himself from 
any injurious thought that might have 
been entertained of him ? for must not sir 
William now be convinced, that if he had 
indeed suspected him of any sordid or un- 
worthy designs, he had done him in- 
J4istice ? and in the exultation of the re- 
flection, there was almost sufficient, at 
times, to console him for what he was en- 
during. In a word, he so steadily perse- 
vered in the course he had decided on 
pursuing, so carefully guarded against 
being betrayed into any thing that could 
lead to the detection of the mistake the 
artifices of lady Jane had occasioned, that 
every one soon became completely de- 
ceived with regard to his real sentiments, 
but lady Jane herself and Melville; for 
though he sought not for the furtherance 
of his own design, to avoid an appearance 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 229 

of particularity to her, not a word, or a 
look ever passed that could possibly be 
interpreted by her into any indication of 
passion ; while Melville, in that anguish 
he could not conceal from him, read the 
truth. But vain were his remonstrances, 
on what he styled the positive absurdity 
of his conduct ; w^hat love could not effect, 
raillery could not accomplish. The happi- 
ness which he could not aim at, without 
the sacrifice of pride, he resolutely deter- 
mined on relinquishing. 

It has already been explained, that it was 
not from not having been prepossessed by 
his appearance and manner that sir William 
Erin did not lay himself out more par- 
ticularly, in the first instance, for an inti- 
macy with him than he had done. An 
intimacy at length effected, it was not 
long ere it confirmed the prepossession 
previously excited, insomuch, that had sir 
William been called upon to give his 
sanction to his addresses to his daughter, 
there is very little reason to imagine he 
would have withheld it. That this, how- 



230 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ever, would ever be required from him, 
now appeared most unlikely, so much so, 
that he could not help imagining what he 
had heard of a mutual prepossession be- 
tween the young people to be chimerical. 

Without trying to ascertain whether 
he was better pleased to find it as it now 
seemed, or as had been represented, we 
shall merely say, that conceiving there 
was now nothing to hinder the addresses 
of another suitor, he decided on seriously 
speaking to his daughter on the subject 
of lord Altidore, of whose ardent wish to 
be permitted to pay them he was not ig- 
norant, and who, by this time, he knew 
sufficiently to deem deserving of her^i:\ j4c 

Lady Erin felt an equal degree of es- 
teem for his lordship ; but still she had so 
long cherished the idea of another union 
for her daughter, that it was not without 
a feeling of secret reluctance she could re- 
linquish it, more especially deepened and 
confirmed as was the interest previously 
experienced for Donaghue, by the know- 
ledge now acquired of him; but there 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 231 

was a captivating s\^eetness in his man- 
ner, that, exclusive of every thing else, 
his high accomplishments, his mental and 
personal advantages, that was resistless in 
its endearing effect on the mind ; but she 
tried to reconcile herself to the disappoint- 
ment of her wish respecting him, by the 
reflection, that finite as our views are, we 
know not what will ultimately be most 
for our happiness or comfort; that, in 
short, we must not choose for ourselves ; 
and it is well we must not, as we should 
very often make a bad choice ; and since 
all thoughts of Donaghue's being connect- 
ed with them by any other ties than those 
of friendship and esteem were now at an 
end, she knew no one, next to him, whom 
she felt more inclined to approve of for 
her daughter than lord Altidore. ^^ 

^5. Miss Erin, no more than her parents, 
was unjust to his merits ; she saw what 
their wishes were, and she determined to 
make every exertion in her power to gra- 
tify them. Donaghue was now only 
thought of as a being devoted to another; 



S32 TRADITION or THE CASTLE. 

but Still, till she was conscious of feeling a 
preferable regard for lord Altidore, she 
could not bring herself to do more than 
permit him to have the requisite oppor- 
tunities for recommending himself to her 
esteem. She would have been shocked in- 
deed, had she believed herself for a moment 
capable of the romantic folly of dwelling 
on the idea of a person now proved to be 
indifferent about her ; and that she had 
cherished it so long, was, at times, a mat- 
ter of surprise to her, till she reflected how 
much the interest excited by his change 
of fortune had contributed to keep it 
alive, and the early prepossession inspired 
for him by the representations of her mo- 
ther; and in short, from the attentions she 
now forced herself to permit from lord 
Altidore, and the familiar terms on which 
he now appeared to be at the Vale, it was 
shortly the universal report and belief of 
the neighbourhood, that a marriage was 
in agitation between them. 

What the feelings of Donaghue were at 
this juncture must be superfluous to say; 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 233 

how alternately he condemned and ap- 
plauded himself for the manner in which 
he had acted, now accusing himself of fol- 
ly, then again conceiving, consistently 
with proper pride and generosity, he could 
not have acted otherwise than he did; 
suffice it, that whatever was his secret an- 
guish, his mind was shortly, in some de- 
gree, diverted from it, by the curiosity and 
^conjectures excited by some curious pro- 
ceedings in the castle. 

From an unquiet sleep, after a day of 
restless agitation at the Vale, Donaghue 
was suddenly awoke one night by a noise 
in his chamber ; gently drawing back the 
curtain to see from what it proceeded, by 
the light of the candle which he had left 
burning, under the idea that if he could 
not compose himself to rest, he might like 
to rise and resume the book he had been 
reading, he perceived the figure of a man 
stealing on tiptoe towards the bed. With 
equal caution Donaghue raised himself 
immediately in it, desirous of ascertaining 
what his intentions were ere he seized 



234 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

him. The intruder continued to advance, 
but not without looking behind him al- 
most every instant as he did so, like a per- 
son in terror and alarm of being followed, 
and to this circumstance was alone owing 
Donaghue's not almost directly giving 
way to the persuasion of his being some 
one belonging to the castle trying to play 
him a trick, when he discovered that he 
was habited in the exact manner so often 
described as the costume of his ancestor, 
Mr. Dennis O'Brien, the supposed fre- 
quenter of it still, namely, in a yellow silk 
nightgown, red morocco slippers, and a 
crimson velvet cap. Seeing him within a 
few yards of the bed, Donaghue was on 
the point of springing from it, when the 
other suddenly paused, stood listening for 
a moment with seeming anxiety, and then 
hastily turning to the closet, vanished 
into it from his view. 

Darting from the bed, Donaghue pro- 
ceeded to search it, persuaded he should 
find him concealed here ; but he was mis- 
taken ; and how he had effected his escape 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 235 

was to him a matter of extreme perplex- 
ity, since through the closet it had assur- 
edly been effected, and yet here was no 
door but the one into the bedchamber, 
neither window that was not firmly secur- 
ed at the moment. Whilst musing on 
the circumstance, and regretting his hav- 
ing delayed to seize him, he heard the 
corporal's voice demanding admission ; not 
a little surprised at this demand at such 
an hour, he was turning to open the door, 
when suddenly recollecting the disturb- 
ance that might be occasioned in the cas- 
tle by his at present letting the one he had 
met with be known, he thought the wisest 
plan would be for him to return to bed, 
ere he raised the night-bolt. As he did 
so — " In the name of wonder, corporal," 
he demanded, " what has brought you 
here at so extraordinary an hour as this ?" 

"Brought me here !" as if involuntarily, 
repeated Cormick ; " why sure, an' please 
your honour, your honour's bell." 

" My bell ! nonsense — are you mad, or 
dreaming ?" 



SS6 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" Neither, plase your honour, at pre- 
sent; though, to be sure, I couldn't say so 
much a few minutes ago, for I was drean)- 
ing fast enough when your honour's bell 
woke me." 

" ISIy bell again !" said Donaghue ; '" why 
I tell you I did not ring for you." 

" Not ring for me ! The holy saints 
protect us, but if I could not swear I heard 
your honour's bell just as plain as I now 
hear myself speaking; and what is more 
remarkable, till I heard it a second time 
ringing quite a peal, as one may say, I 
thought it must be a fancy my thinking 
myself woke by it, owing to being dream- 
ing at the moment that your honour was 
calling to me in a great hurry to come dig 
with you for the money that the old gen- 
tleman had been to tell you about, and 
who (the lord save and defend us !) is, I 
believe, beginning to trouble the castle 
again ; for if your honour did not ring the 
bell I heard, as to be sure I know now 
you did not, who or what else but a ghost 
could have rung it?" 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 237 

** What old gentleman do you mean? 
or what are you raving about ?" cried Do- 
naghue, pretending not to know, though 
perfectly aware, in order to have a pretext 
for asking questions he might not other- 
wise have thought of, his curiosity being 
somewhat raised by what had just occurred 
in his own chamber, and drawing aside the 
curtains as he spoke. 

" Why sure your honour must know." 
" Do not be sure ; your meaning may 
not be as plain to others as to yourself." 
^ " Why, any how, it can't be now, sure, 
"that your honour has to hear the story of 
your great-uncle or grandfather, squire 
Dennis O'Brien, he whose picture hangs 
in the library, in the fine yellow silk night- 
gown, covered all over with roses, and 
with a velvet cap on his head, and red 
slippers on his feet, and who, to be sure, 
as your honour must have heard, will 
never rest till he has discovered to some 
one belonging to him the great pot of 
money he hid in the time of the troubles, 
somewhere in the castle !" 



S38 TRADITION OF THE GASTI.E* 

" If yoii verily believe in this stofy," 
said Donaghue, not however without 
thinking there was something like a cu- 
rious coincidence in its introduction at 
this moment, after what he had just seen, 
" I wonder, Cormick, you do not try to 
profit by it, by making a search after this 
hid treasure yourself" 

"Me, your honour! Ah then, it*s a 
good chance I'd have of finding it to be 
sure. No, no, your honour, 'tis your own^ 
self that will be yet getting it — as, to h6i 
sure, who has so good a right, being th^' 
nearest now living to squire Dennis, and^^ 
who, 'tis well known, never yet appeared' 
to any about it that did not belong to him- 
self, nor what -.vas more, didn't stand ini 
want of it just at the time? 'Tis many aai 
long year now since he was seen in the 
castle, and the last time he was, it's said 
it was in this very chamber, the tapestry 
chamber, by a young gentleman of the'^ 
family that was crossed in love for the 
want of a fortune, and who might have 
got all squire Dennis's money, but that 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 239 

he wouldn't follow him, as he wanted, to 
the place where it was hid; my mother 

has the whole story, and But, Roly St. 

Patrick ! what was that ? didn't I hear a 
noise? wasn't that very like the rustling 

of a silk ? — speak of " 

" That is a very irreverent quotation, 
corporal," interrupted Donaghue, when 
speaking of so good-natured a personage 
as you have described my kinsman squire 
Dennis; but come," jumping out of bed, 
for he also imagined he heard a sound at 
the instant in the closet, " since your 
dreams or fancies have brought you here, 
be so good as to assist me in searching 
whether any cat has got in here, for I ra- 
ther thought I heard a noise in it," lead- 
ing the way to the closet as he spoke ; but 
again it was examined to no purpose, Do- 
naghue conceiving that there might be 
some means of evasion there, that, at the 
first glance, had escaped him, but nothing 
of the kind could be detected ; that, how- 
ever, there was some way of escape from 
it he could not possibly doubt, after what 



240 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

he had seen ; and whoever had attempted 
to play this trick upon his creduHty had 
certainly, he conceived, managed the mat- 
ter extremely well, for that what had 
happened was a mere contrivance for 
amusement, he, of course, was by this 
time convinced ; the dress of the figure 
did not permit a doubt on the subject, and 
his suspicions fell upon Rosebud, know- 
ing the delight he would take in any 
thing of the kind. Lest, however, he 
should not like to confess the truth at 
first, he thought it better, for the present, 
to be silent on the subject, and according- 
ly dismissed the corporal, without permit- 
ting him to suspect any thing had happen- 
ed to disturb him, perfectly easy now with 
regard to it, from the supposition he liad 
given way to concerning it. 

But though he could hardly think that 
Melville would join Rosebud in any thing 
so boyish as the trick of the preceding 
night, this did not prevent his watching 
his looks as closely the next morning at 
breakfast as he did the doctor's, persuaded, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 241 

if guilty, they would betray him on meet- 
ing his scrutiny — that he was not, he was 
soon convinced, and indeed there was as 
little reason, from his looks, to persevere 
in suspecting the doctor; suspect him, 
however, he still did, and accordingly de- 
cided on not resting till he had led him 
to betray himself. 

In pursuance of this determination, 
breakfast was hardly over, ere he got him 
to the library, where, after engaging him 
for some time in chatting on various mat- 
ters, he suddenly paused in something he 
was saying, to ask him whether he did 
not think that picture, glancing as he 
spoke at the gentleman's in the yellow 
nightgown, a well executed one ? 

" I protest I don't know," said Rose- 
bud, advancing towards it as he replied ; 
" for I don't know that I ever before no- 
ticed it particularly." 

" Not that picture!" said Donaghue, 
with something of emphasis. 

"No; is there any thing particular 
about it r 

VOL. Ill, M 



242 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" Well, really you surprise me by what 
you say ; I should have conceived, from 
the story here on record about the person 
it was done for, that it would have en- 
gaged your particular attention." 

" Story! what story, my dear fellow?" 
with the greatest eagerness ; " any thing 
very wonderful ?" 

" And now really have you never heard 
anv thinec of it ?" 

*' Really never." 

" May I positively believe you serious 
in saying so ?" 

"Positively; on the word and honour 
of a gentleman, and a regimental surgeon, 
you may. So come, if 'tis any thing very 
strange, wild, or wonderful, do let me 
have it ; for I have quite as greedy an ear 
for tales of this description as any old 
gossip or pretty little dairymaid whatever." 

" You must excuse me, my dear doc- 
tor, I am a very bad detail er of the mar- 
vellous ; but you have only to make love 
to nurse here, to get it from her, if you 
really wish for it." 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 243 

" Wish for it !" and he protested no- 
thing but having a long letter to write 
that morning would have prevented his 
immediately seeking her for the purpose. 

Donaghue knew not now what to think ; 
if he acquitted the doctor of what he had 
suspected, he was utterly at a loss whom 
to suspect in his place; and yet how, after 
what had just passed, his declared igno- 
rance of the story, to which was imputed 
all that had occurred last night, could he 
persist in imagining him the contriver of 
it? But he might not conceive there was 
any thing very re})rehensible in the de- 
nial of such a matter; and in short, from 
this idea, and his well known propensity 
to things of the kind, Donaghue could 
not bring himself to believe he was not; 
and what tended not a little to confirm 
him in the persuasion that he was, was 
the recollection of the artifice which the 
figure had had recourse to, by still keep- 
ing the head turned away, as if fearful of 
being followed, to prevent his seeing the 
M 2 



244 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

countenance. The only thing that puz- 
zled him was, how he had obtained a 
knowledge of the secret inlet into the 
chamber ; for that such a one existed was 
now clear, since, if even acquainted with 
it, he could not for a moment imagine any 
of the inmates of the castle would have 
ventured to aid him in playing the trick, 
by disclosing it to him ; that he had, how- 
ever, by some means or other learned it, 
was not to be doubted; and Donaghue 
now set himself more diligently than ever 
to work to find it out, in order to prevent 
any further interruption to his rest from 
him ; but in vain he sought, and indirect- 
ly inquired about it — neither old Cormick 
or his wife could give him the slightest 
idea of it. 

Melville had gone out, the doctor was 
still busied in writing, and Donaghue, in 
a very listless humour, at length strolled 
from the castle by himself Unconscious- 
ly almost he took the direction leading to 
the abbey, and ere he was well aware of 
it, found himself there. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 245 

The day was sultry, and it was now the 
hottest hour, when, vertical, the sun pours 
down his fiercest influence, and gladly 

" Dew-dropping coolness to the shade retires, 
There on the verdant turf, or flowery glade, 
By gelid fount, and ceaseless rills to muse." 

And all around there was a kind of lan- 
guid stillness in the place, that was not 
without its effect upon him. He advan- 
ced within the walls, and with loitering 
steps was making his way through the 
chapel, to another staircase he had disco- 
vered, leading to the chamber he had been 
in the habit of frequenting above, when 
the vsound of music made him suddenly 
check himself, and the next instant re- 
treat, under the idea of its being lady Jane 
he had heard — that unprincipled woman, 
to whose artifices he could hardly avoid 
believing his present misery imputable, 
since, but for her, he conceived he should 
never have thought of the deception he 
had practised — a deception that, spite of the 
command he struggled to maintain over 



246 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE* 

himself, his romantic notions of generosity 
he could not help at times repenting, at 
least whenever the maddening idea of 
seeing Eveleen another's occurred to his 
imagination. 

Anxious at all times to avoid her lady- 
ship, but more especially when in a hu- 
mour to contemplate her with bitterness, 
he was flying from the place, when the 
voice of Millicent Erin, asking him, with 
a laugh, as she thrust her head through 
one of the narrow arches of the cloisters 
above, whether they had frightened him,, 
arrested his steps. 

" Frightened me !" repeated Donaghue. 
** Why, who is with you ?" 

" Not lady Jane," said Miss Erin, laugh- 
ing, as, to his utter surprise, she also now 
came forward ; " and is it not a convin- 
cing proof that you knew it was not her 
delightful strains you heard, your attempt- 
ing to make so precipitate a retreat? 
But come, don't look so embarrassed ; as 
you could not guess who else it was, I 
shall not consider your doing so as any 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 247 

positively intended affront to me. But 
my nnother is here, and if you come up, 
you shall see what a delightful retreat we 
have fitted up here." 

Donaghue was in a moment with her 
in the gallery, and through various pas- 
sages she led the way to the apartment 
which he himself had frequented, and 
which by this time was tastefully furnish- 
ed with whatever was requisite for the 
accommodation of those who might like 
to amuse themselves with reading, draw- 
ing, or music, in it. 

" Well," said Miss Erin, advancing into 
it, while Millicent, missing her aunt, 
darted away to look for her, " what do 
you think of this now ? Do you not 
think it well adapted to the purposes to 
which it seems devoted ? But you should, 
and I know you will admire it, when I 
tell you, that the idea of it was suggested 
by lady Jane." 

" By lady Jane !" repeated Donaghue, 
with something of indignant contempt, 
hurried out of himself by the feelings ex- 



248 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

cited by this intimated belief of an at- 
tach nf)ent to her ; "and do you think 
that that is a circumstance to make me 
admire it ? Oh, no, no !" he passionately 
exclaimed, pacing the room with an agi- 
tation of which he was perhaps not con- 
scious, as he spoke — " oh, no, no! 'tis 
not lady Jane's idea that would give it 
any charm in my eyes; but hers who 
gives interest to whatever it is connected 
with." 

Miss Erin looked at him with asto- 
nishment; after all that had passed, the 
long continued constraint of his manner 
towards her, to hear such a burst of pas- 
sion But she suddenly recollected, that 

for the few last days there had appeared 
a coolness between him and her ladyship ; 
and it instantly struck her that to this 
was owing what had now occurred. Find- 
ing him still insensible to her advances, 
lady Jane, like a true coquette, suddenly 
thought what piquing his pride might 
effect, and accordingly renewed her sus- 
pended flirtation with Mr. Lawless, a ri- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 2!49 

val sufficiently formidable to alarm the 
jealousy of any admirer she conceived ; 
and to this, the resentment inspired by 
the circumstance, and a wish of rendering 
her instrumental to revenging it, Miss 
Erin was now led to ascribe what had es- 
caped him; and, in indignation at the 
thought, her cheek flushed to the deepest 
crimson, as with a look of scorn she turn- 
ed away her head from him. 

Her look recalled Donaghue to recol- 
lection and indescribable confusion, at the 
idea of what he had been betrayed into ; 
he stood gazing at her, utterly at a loss 
how to act, whether at once to throw him- 
self upon her mercy, and confess the truth, 
or remain under the injurious opinion he 
saw she had conceived of him. 

Whilst undecided, lady Erin entered 
from an adjoining gallery, and Donaghue, 
starting from his fixed attitude, hastened 
to meet her ; but the hand that used to 
be extended on seeing him was now held 
back ; and bowing to him, with an air of 
m3 



2150 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 

the coldest gravity, she passed him to a 
seat. 

A bolt of ice transfixing his heart could 
not have given acuter pain to Donaghue, 
than was experienced by him at this mo- 
ment. Stung to the very soul by her 
ladyship's altered manner, he hastily turn- 
ed away, and retreating to a window, lean- 
ed against it for a few minutes, with feel- 
ings nearly overwhelming. And was she 
too offended, his amiable, his maternal 
friend, whom he had so many reasons for 
regarding ? But to displease one, was, of 
course, to displease both ; and he saw he 
had had the misfortune to do so. Lady 
Erin had even heard, it was evident, what, 
in the agitation of a moment, had escaped 
him, and interpreting it in the same way 
her daughter had done, was equally of- 
fended by it ; and this was the effect of 
the deception he had allowed himself to 
practise — for surely it was a deception, to 
remain passive under the mistake which 
the artifices of lady Jane had laid tlie 
foundation of, with regard to his senti- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 251 

ments; for would it not have been ten 
thousand times better for him to have left 
the neighbourhood at once, since his no- 
tions of pride and generosity would not 
permit him any longer to think of Miss 
Erin, than, for the mere sake of being 
where she was, weakly run the risk of 
being betrayed into the semblance of act- 
ing a double part? But it was now too 
late to repent all this; all that now re- 
mained for consideration was, whether or 
not he should immediately fly the place. 

While these bitter reflections were pass- 
ing through his mind. Miss Erin, losing 
in the pity excited by the confusion into 
which her mother's manner had thrown 
him the anger he had caused, cast an im- 
ploring look at her ladyship, and perhaps 
also of a little relenting at her own side, 
at length made an effort to enter into con- 
versation with him; but Donaghue was 
hardly able to profit by her condescen- 
sion, so embarrassed and agitated did he 
remain from what had occurred; till at 
last, some wandering glances caught from 



252 TRADITION OP THE CASTLE. 

Eveleen began a little to recompose him, 
from the hope they inspired, if he had 
offended, of not having done so irrepa- 
rably ; or rather, perhaps, of her having at 
length begun to surmise the truth; but 
their effect upon him was but transient. 

Commenting upon some remarks lady 
Erin had made on the prospect the apart- 
ment commanded — " But I think," she 
said, " in this scenery nothing is so beau- 
tiful as the fine opening in those woods 
yonder, that admits a view of the ancient 
mansion of lord Altidore on its elevation 
of green downs. Really, for the sake of 
seeing that alone, I should think this 
chamber delightful.** 

Donaghue felt almost as if a viper had 
bitten him at the instant, so acute was the 
sensation excited by these words. He had 
begun, almost unconsciously perhaps, to 
give way to an idea — for what are not the 
romantic fancies to which an ardent ima- 
gination leads! — that perhaps to some 
thought connected with him might have 
been owing Miss Erin's positive choice 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 258 

of this apartment for a temporary retreat, 
as he understood from lady Erin was the 
case, in preference to several others that 
were pointed out as equally desirable for 
the purpose; but after this declaration, a 
declaration that seemed made for the pur- 
pose of indirectly rebuking the vanity that 
led to the suggestion, he could no longer 
think so; she had given him clearly to 
understand, from what she said, that she 
had chosen it from no motive that could 
possibly flatter him ; but quite the reverse 
indeed — for the sake of one particular 
view, and that of the mansion of his rival. 
Ay, that was the offence, and he felt it 
as such ; for trifles light as air are indeed 
matters of moment to the enamoured ; his 
cheek grew red — his eyes sparkled with 
resentful feelings — his whole form seemed 
to dilate itself with offended pride — and 
rising from the window-seat on which he 
had languidly thrown himself, after loiter- 
ing for a few minutes about the room, 
pretending to look at some prints that 
embellished it, with an air that might 



254 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

have proved, to any one interested in it, 
he had not altogether forgotten the fashion- 
able nonchalance of former times, he sud- 
denly murmured something of having re- 
collected an engagement elsewhere, and 
took a precipitate leave of the ladies. 



CHAPTER VII. 



" Tis now the very witching hour of night, 

When churchyards yawn, and graves give up their dead.** 

We shall not follow Donaghue particu- 
larly through the remainder of the day — 
suffice it, after being dragged by Rosebud 
to a dinner-party at sir Ulick Magennis's, 
where, however, to his great relief, he did 
not meet the family from the Vale, he 
was, at twelve o'clock, in his chamber read- 
ing, determined against going to bed for 
some time, lest of any attempt being made 
to disturb him again this night. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 255 

From time to time his looks were turn- 
ed towards the closet, the door of which 
he had purposely left open, that he might 
be ready, on the slightest indication of 
any one's being there, to seize upon the 
intruder ; and he could hardly suppress a 
smile at times, at the idea of the absolute 
anger he was convinced the doctor would 
feel at being so immediately detected. 

One — two, however struck, and nothing 
was heard to disturb him ; no sound in- 
deed, save now and then the low moaning 
of the wind outside the casements, or the 
rustling of the long streaming grass and 
weeds that begirt them ; and at length, 
giving up all idea of seeing either a real 
or fictitious ghost that night, he thought 
he might as well go to bed, as he was 
getting sleepy ; and to bed accordingly he 
went, taking the precaution, however, of 
first locking the closet, so that, if he re- 
ceived a visitation this night, as the cham- 
ber-door was also secured, he really felt 
he should consider it rather an extraordi- 
nary circumstance. 



256 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

His head had not been long on the pil- 
low,' ere, spite of all the pangs and pains 
of the day, he fell fast asleep, probably ex- 
hausted by them ; but had not very long 
enjoyed this sweet oblivion of human 
care, when he was roused from it by the 
drawing back of his curtains, and starting 
up in the bed, he beheld the same figure 
as on the preceding night retreating from 
it towards the closet; and as it did so, 
beckoning to him to follow. 

" Well, really," cried Donaghue, " this 
is marvellous ! Now do, my dear doctor," 
he added, fully impressed with the idea 
of its being him he saw, " do let me know 
how you got access to my chamber, or I 
shall really have you taken up for a ma- 
gician. Consider how much it behoves 
me to know all the secret inlets and out- 
lets of this old fabric of mine !" No re- 
ply. " Then really, my dear friend, you 
must excuse my intercepting your re- 
treat," and as he -spoke he sprung from 
the bed ; but ere he reached the figure it 
had disappeared; and, to his utter sur- 



TRADITION OP THE CASTLE. 257 

prise, he found the closet open, since 
from this it seemed as if it was by the 
chamber the intruder had entered, and 
yet the door of this still remained fastened. 

Donaghue stood for a moment lost in 
perplexity ; then conceiving, if it was 
indeed the doctor, he should, by hasten- 
ing directly to his chamber, be enabled to 
detect him in his return to it, and thus 
prevent the repetition of what was really 
very teazing, he threw on his nightgown, 
and without another moment's delay, pro- 
ceeded to it. The door was unbolted ; he 
softly opened it, and was speedily con- 
vinced, from the heavy breathing he heard, 
that whoever it was he had seen, it was 
not Rosebud, knowing it was utterly im- 
possible for him to have got to his room 
before him. 

More at a loss now than ever to account 
for what had occurred, since, from being 
now compelled to acquit the doctor of any 
concern in it, he knew no longer how to 
impute it to any idle contrivance for 
amusement ; and yet, if any thing serious 



258 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

was intended by it, surely he would not 
each time have been put on his guard, by 
being roused from his sleep. The manner 
in which he had been disturbed on a for- 
mer occasion, by the violent shaking of 
his bed, when he had every reason to im- 
agine there was some one in the room, 
now recurring to his recollection, he slow- 
ly turned away, and retraced his way to 
his chamber, half inclined to call Cormick, 
and yet still unwilling, from a fear of cre- 
ating any superstitious terror in the castle. 
By the time he reentered his chamber, 
the candle, by the fitful light of which he 
had been able to perceive the motions of 
his visitant, was out ; but there was a 
bright moon by this time shining in the 
heavens, and he drew aside a window- 
curtain to admit her light. Hardly had 
he done so, when a rustling sound behind 
him made him turn with quickness, and 
he again beheld the figure stationary at 
the closet. He was instantly darting for- 
ward, when suddenly recollecting the man- 
ner in which it seemed enabled to evade 



TRADITION OP THE CASTLE. 259 

his grasp, he checked himself, to demand 
who it was, or what it required of him. 

No other reply was made, than a mo- 
tion to follow into the closet, to which it 
made a movement at the moment. 

" Follow !" cried Donaghue, indignant- 
ly. ** No, assuredly. Have done, there- 
fore, with this idle mummery, which, let 
it be intended for what it may, will not 
in any way succeed, and may be the means 
of involving you in greater trouble than 
what you may be aware of. Confess at 
once your motive for coming here, if you 
wish to escape the consequences of that 
detection I am resolved on." 

Still, however, as if utterly regardless 
of this threat, the figure continued to 
beckon him to advance, keeping gently 
receding all the time into the closet. 

Donaghue kept his eye steadily fixed 
on it for a moment, and then making one 
dart forward, was sure of having secured 
it ; but at the very instant it seemed within 
his grasp, it was gone. 

To think of any further repose that night 



260 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

was, after such an incident as this, out of the 
question. His perplexity at it was heigh- 
tened by not knowing how to mention it 
to any one, lest it should be the means of 
inquiries and conjectures that might be 
troublesome. His threat might, he re- 
flected, prove availing; and till he had 
ascertained whether it had or not, he final- 
ly decided on being silent on the subject. 
The recurrence of a few nights without 
any thing farther to disturb him, induced 
a persuasion that it had, and equally tend- 
ed to confirm him in the one of what had 
happened being the mere idle contrivance 
of some one for amusement ; but who that 
some one was remained still to be dis- 
covered, as also the secret means of access 
to his chamber, the knowledge of which 
occasioned him, from this time, to take 
the precaution of having firearms laid 
every night by his bedside ; and he would 
probably indeed have abandoned the apart- 
ment altogether, but that from what he 
had ascertained, he conceived it requisite, 
for the safety of the castle, that some one 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 261 

should remain in it. More than once the 
story connected with it, as related in the 
old papers he had by such chance dis- 
covered, now recurred to his recollection ; 
and altogether, he made not the slightest 
doubt, that if the present had been days 
of superstition, the coincidence between 
this and what had lately occurred would 
not have been without its due effect on 
his imagination. 

But all this time he was not unmindful 
of Melville. There was something, he 
thought, strange and unusual in his man- 
ner — an abstraction and restlessness he 
had never before noticed, united to which 
he was continually missing him, without 
ever learning where he had been, and al- 
together, from these circumstances, and 
the confusion he had betrayed about the 
hurt in his hand, he could hardly help 
suspecting, spite of the high opinion he 
entertained of his prudence and principles, 
that he w^as engaged in some adventure 
or other, and not unfrcquently rallied him 
on the subject. 



262 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Melville merely laughed in return; un- 
decided still how matters might end be- 
tween him and his pretty Lavinia, he de- 
termined, for the present at least, to re- 
main silent on the subject of the passion 
she had inspired. Every day, however, 
tended still more strongly to persuade 
him that they would yet have a very 
serious conclusion; for every day seemed 
to rivet still more firmly the chains she 
had wound round his heart. To be loved 
for himself alone ! there was really some- 
thing seducing in the idea; and JMelville 
knew hardly any thing that could tempt 
him to give up a conquest of which he 
had such reason to be vain. 

For his wish of seeing her, the indispo- 
sition of her poor friend Rosetta proved 
propitious, by delaying that introduction 
that would have prevented her having so 
much the command of her actions as at 
present ; for though she could not possibly 
think of exchanging the sick chamber of 
the invalid, the only confidant as she was of 
that secret anguish that was undermining 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 263 

her health, and like a worm in the bud, 
indeed, feasting on her damask cheek, for 
scenes of gaiety that would keep her 
whole hours away from her, yet there was 
no reason why she should not just now 
and then leave it, for the purpose of re- 
lieving the languor it sometimes occasion- 
ed, by breathing the pure air ; and some- 
how, it so happened, that wherever she 
turned her steps for this purpose, she al- 
most always found Mr. Dennis Scanlen 
inhaling it in the same direction, and so, 
by this means, very unintentionally to be 
sure, their acquaintance was kept up. But 
it would soon be at an end, for it was not 
to be supposed that he would continue 
much longer loitering in the neighbour- 
hood ; and when once introduced at the 
Vale, she had reason to believe she should 
not be allowed to pass much of her time 
at Rosehill. At the idea of the gaiety, 
and splendour, and admiration to which 
this introduction made her look forward, 
it was impossible for her not to be de- 
lighted, since, whatever her romantic feel- 



264 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ings might be, neither her pride or am- 
bition were at all subdued. Yet, not- 
withstanding, there was at times a heavi- 
ness on her heart she knew not how to 
shake off, and something like a wish to 
avoid what she yet loved to dwell on. 

The preparations made for her being 
introduced into society were of the most 
expensive description, such as plainly 
evinced her being held in no little estima- 
tion by her unknown guardian ; but 
though she was, of course, gratified by 
the advantages afforded her, yet, whilst 
she remained in ignorance of his motive 
for thus wishing to render her of conse- 
quence, she felt it impossible to be com- 
pletely happy — the most fearful ideas from 
time to time haunting her imagination 
respecting him, deeming it, as she did, 
most unlikely that, if any tie but that of 
whim or caprice connected them, she 
would not before this have been acknow- 
ledged by him. 

The mystery connected with her was 
imparted by sir William to lady Erin and 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 265 

his daughter, on his mentioning her in- 
tended introduction to them ; the person 
who requested their patronage for her 
knowing it could not, with propriety, be 
expected without their really knowing 
who she was. The interest excited by 
her story was not lessened by her appear- 
ance; and to induce them to render her 
every attention in their power, they felt 
nothing more was requisite than this. 

Lady Erin wished to have brought her 
at once to the Vale ; but though Lavinia 
was much pleased with these new friends 
her guardian had obtained her, still she 
shrunk from the thought of being thus 
abruptly torn, as it were, from her first 
and long-tried ones ; and at her earnest 
request, her ladyship excused her then 
becoming her inmate, but insisted on the 
next day being spent with her. 

The Wheatleys, with whom the family 
were greatly pleased, were pressed in the 
warmest manner to accompany her, but 
which Mr. Wheatley positively, though 

VOL, HI. N 



266 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

gratefully, declined, having long ago, 
though he did not think proper to naake 
the acknowledgment peremptorily, given 
up for himself and family all society but 
that in his own level line, conceiving that 
one cannot feel independent if they accept 
attentions they have not the power of re- 
turning. 

How Lavinia's engagement came to be 
relinquished has already been explained. 
Kosetta's spirits were so much affected by 
the sight of Miss Erin, conjuring up as 
it did a number of painful ideas, that she 
grew ill ere she had well departed, and 
was unable, for some days after, to leave 
l^er chamber. 

But much as the thoughts of Lavinia 
dwelt on the Vale, not once did a word 
relative to it escape her to ]\Ir. Scanlen. 
She certainly did not wdsh him, by any 
means, to forget the difference between 
them ; yet still, she knew not how it was, 
she did not like immediately to remind 
him herself of it. He must hear of her 
introduction at the Vale without her men- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 26? 

tioning it to him, from the noise which 
her dthut in the fashionable circles of the 
place would no doubt make in it. Dear, 
how she should like to know what she 
was intended for ! whether the wife of this 
hideous old guardian of hers, for she would 
have him so, or his heiress ; and how pro- 
voking to think she must remain some 
time longer in suspense ! — the hope which 
she had indulged of being able to learn 
something of him at the Vale being de- 
stroyed, by Mr. Wheatley's telling her 
she must not, on any account whatever, 
make the slightest allusion to him there. 

The announcement of a subscription 
ball at , set her little heart in a flut- 
ter, and it was finally settled that her first 
appearance in public should be there. 

Inexpressible was her dehght on the 
occasion, aware, as she was, that all the 
fashion in the neighbourhood would be 
there — every young man of elegance and 
consequence belonging to it; lord Alti- 
dore — that, to be sure, was a prohibited 
N 2 



268 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

name at Rosehill; and the owner of that 
magnificent old castle she so much ad- 
mired, and his friend, Mr. Melville, two 
of the handsomest, most captivating crea- 
tures, she was assured, by several young 
ladies belonging to the place, in the world ; 
and certainly it would be pleasant to be- 
come acquainted with such ; and in short, 
in spite of some obtruding thoughts, she 
actually became impatient for the evening. 

The evening at length came ; nothing 
that taste and elegance could do to set 
her off was omitted ; and Rosetta, who 
assiduously attended at her toilet, thought 
it impossible she could be surpassed in 
the scene of gaiety to which she was going 
— an opinion in which we are inclined 
to think Lavinia herself did not very es- 
sentially differ from her. 

Could Donaghue possibly have excused 
himself from making one of the brilliant 
assemblage, he certainly would have been 
happy, so much was he teazed and tor- 
mented about lady Jane. 

Lady Erin, quickly getting the better of 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 269 

the anger inspired by the incident in the ab- 
bey, set about remonstrating with lady 
Jane on the coquetry to which she im- 
puted what had offended her there, his 
wishing to have it appear, out of jealous 
pique, that he had veered about in his ad- 
dresses from her to her daughter. 

Lady Jane was delighted at her re- 
monstrance on the subject, from the con- 
firmation it afforded of her giving credit 
to what she wished; she affected the pret- 
tiest air imaginable of innocence and re- 
gret on the occasion — protested she did 
not know that Donaghue had any right 
to be offended — but since her ladyship 
said she should be more particular in her 
conduct, why she would be so, more es- 
pecially as she now saw what his temper 
was — so captious, so jealous ; and in short, 
she had not the slightest objection to her 
interfering between them, artfully calcu- 
lating on the possibility there was, by her 
doing so, of Donaghue's being betrayed 
into some acknowledgment from which 
he could not retract, or at least, which 



270 TRADITION OF THE CASTLIT, 

was the same thing, being led by it to be- 
lieve their attachment was too firmly cre- 
dited for him to be able to deny it with^ 
out injury to her honour. 

Donaghue, however, with all his warmth 
of feeling and acute sensibility, was not so 
easily to be betrayed into any thing re- 
volting to his feelings or principles as she 
hoped might be the case ; and according- 
ly, on being forced again to the Vale, 
which, after what had occurred at the 
abbey, he absented himself a day or two 
from, on her ladyship taking him to task 
about the little brouillerie, as she called 
it, existing between him and lady Jane^ 
and entreating him to think no more 
about it, as really her ladyship was quite 
penitent for any little cause of uneasiness 
or resentment she had given him, he posi- 
tively protested against feeling any re- 
sentment against her, vehemently decla- 
ring that, as far as he himself was inte- 
rested in it, it was not possible for her 
conduct, be it what it might, to give him 
any uneasiness or concern whatever. But 



TRADITION OI^^HE CASTI.E. 271 

in vain he persisted in this declaration ; 
lady Erin continued to smile incredulous- 
ly ; and his anger and vexation at her ob- 
stinate doubt of his veracity was aug- 
mented by Miss Erin's being present on 
the occasion* 

" After Vv^hat we have witnessed " 

said lady Erin, at length. 

" What we witness is not always to be 
depended on," said Donaghue, still more 
vehemently ; " errors and mistakes are 
continually occurring in life, through too 
much dependance being placed on chance 
circumstances. My manner to lady Jane 
may sometimes have worn the semblance 
of particularity ; but let it have deceived 
wlio it may, it could never possibly de- 
ceive her; for never did a profession es- 
cape my lips that could be construed into 
any thing like a hint of an attachment." 

" Come, come," cried lady Erin, play- 
fully putting her hand before his mouth, 
" I'll listen to no more of this, because I 
know, the moment your vow of allegiance 



272 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

is renewed to your liege lady, you'll be 
repenting and wishing it all unsaid." 

" My liege lady !" with a sigh from the 
very bottom of his heart, involuntarily 
repeated Donaghue, and a mom.entary 
glance at Eveleen, who all this time ap- 
peared to be so busily engaged with a 
drawing, as to be unconscious of the con- 
versation that was going on. Then, with 
still greater earnestness — " Upon my ho- 
nour," he exclaimed; " upon " 

" Stop !*' said lady Erin, again interpo- 
sing to prevent his utterance. " Though 
Jane laughs at lovers* perjuries, I cannot ; 
this is positively carrying resentment too 
far ; but lady Jane has explained all — your 
early attacliment, and the unfortunate dis- 
trust of hers, the cause of all this prone- 
ness to jealousy, which her being com- 
pelled to yield obedience to the arbitrary 
will of a selfish father occasioned." 

With all his vexation, Donaghue could 
not help laughing outright, at such a state- 
ment having been imposed upon her lady- 
ship. That lady Jane could for a mo- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 27^ 

ment have thought of representing herself 
in the light it seemed she had done to 
her — as a poor timid, trembling, submis- 
sive daughter, really struck him as so lu- 
dicrous, that he could not immediately re- 
cover from his risibility. — " Well, really," 
he cried, " this is amusing !" But his tone 
had all the bitterness of sarcasm in it ; and 
his laugh was evidently one more of ridi- 
cule than enjoyment. " The next thing 
lady Jane will do, I suppose, will be to 
entertain, I mean interest, your ladyship, 
by the account of the melancholy senti- 
mental turn she has since acquired." 

" Ay, there's the rub," cried her lady- 
ship ; " that's what offends — her not seem- 
ing to feel what happened more than she 
has done; but really 'tis but natural for a 
fine young woman like her." 

Donaghue could not command himself 
any longer ; he rose, impatiently, and ta- 
king up a new publication that was lying 
on a table, forced her ladyship to change 
the conversation, by beginning to speak 
N 3 



274 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

of it. Much, however, as this conversa- 
tion had irritated him, yet, upon a little 
reflection, he was not sorry that it had 
occurred, from the opportunity it afforded 
him of explicitly declaring himself, with 
regard to lady Jane : at present he saw 
indeed this could be of no use, but the 
time might come when, being able to re- 
fer to it, might be a means of preventing 
an imputation on his honour. How he had 
run the risk of incurring this, which he was 
now sensible he had done, by the encou- 
ragement he had given to the continuance 
of the mistake the artful contrivances of 
lady Jane had led to, he was now asto- 
nished. In time, however, he trusted he 
had become sensible of the consequences 
likely to accrue from such conduct, with 
a conviction that it is vain to hope we can 
ever turn into the maze of dissimulation, 
without regret and repentance. 

But though he now shunned every as- 
siduity to her ladyship, avoided every at- 
tention that was not absolutely required 
by politeness, still lady Erin, through the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 275 

artifices of lady Jane, would not give up 
the persuasion that was so provoking to 
him, persisting in imputing this coolness 
and indifference towards her, entirely to 
the effect of jealous resentment at her flir- 
tation with Mr. Lawless, and in conse- 
quence took every opportunity that oc- 
curred, for either remonstrating with him, 
or rallying him on the subject, fearful in- 
deed, if he persevered much longer in such 
conduct, her ladyship, in some sudden 
pet, would veer about to some other ad- 
mirer, and thus deprive him of the chance 
he now had of retrieving his fortunes by 
a union with her ; and so convinced was 
Donaghue that she would go on the same 
way at the ball, no doubt from the best mo- 
tive, but still that did not prevent its 
being very teazing to him, on finding he 
would not dance with lady Jane, that 
could he have declined going to it witli- 
out disobliging Melville, he certainly 
would have done so. 

But Mr. Sedley would not have been 
quite so anxious as he was to exhibit him- 



276 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

self there, had he been aware of the sur- 
prise that there awaited him, in the person 
of Miss Lavinia. Having, as we have al- 
ready hinted, out of regard to his supposed 
feelings as Dennis Scanlen, carefully avoid- 
ed letting him know the introduction that 
was about taking place, no language can 
do justice to his gesture, to his astonish- 
ment, when, on his entering the ball- 
room, the first object he beheld was her, 
seated at the upper end of it with the 
Erin party, attired in all the elegance of 
fashion, glowing with resplendent beauty, 
and certainly neither, apparently, inatten- 
tive, nor yet undelighted with the general 
admiration it excited. Who could have 
thought of such thing? and was ever any 
thing so mal a propos f and what should 
he do ? for not for the world would he 
have their acquaintance discovered here, 
or the imposition he had practised on her 
detected ; and in short, he saw no other 
plan for him to pursue, by which to ex- 
tricate himself from the dilemma in which 
he felt himself, than to disengage liimself 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 277 

from Donaghue, and as soon as he had 
done so, quit the place, leaving a message 
for him, that it was owing to sudden in- 
disposition. 

Accordingly, as Donaghue was making 
his way to join the party from the Vale, 
he drew away his arm from him, pretend- 
ing he missed one of his gloves, and tell- 
ing him not to stop for him, abruptly 
quitted him ; but hardly had he done so, 
when, full plump, he encountered sir Wil- 
liam Erin. — " Well met, my dear fellow," 
cried the baronet, catching him by the 
arm, and whirling him about as he spoke ; 
" I have been on the look-out for you 
ever since I entered the room, to apprize 
you of an obligation you owe me." 

" I really owe you so many, my dear 
sir, for your kind attentions to me since I 
came here," said Melville, but rather in a 
languid tone, hardly able to conceal his 
vexation at this encounter; the baronet 
keeping firm hold of him by the arm. 

"Oh well, that is allowed," said sir Wil- 
liam, " but you will acknowledge this sur- 



278 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

passes them all, when you learn that it is, 
having secured for you the hand of the 
very prettiest creature in the room." 

" That certainly is one that can never 
be sufficiently acknowledged," replied 
Melville, trying to force a smile, but in a 
tone expressive of any thing but satisfac- 
tion, since, certainly, if the baronet's taste 
and his did not differ essentially, the very 
prettiest creature in the room was exactly 
the ver}^ person he most wished at that 
moment to avoid. 

"There! you may judge for yourself 
whether she is not," cried sir William, 
pointing out Lavinia to him, as, for a mo- 
ment, they were impeded in their approach 
to her; " that is my little Hebe, and I 
certainly do think she merits the name." 

Against what was to be, Melville saw 
it was useless to contend, and so suffered 
himself, without further resistance, to be 
led forward, hoping he should, by his looks, 
be able to render himself sufficiently in- 
telligible to Lavinia to prevent those iii- 
dications of surprise she must assuredly 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 279 

feel at the discovery that was now about 
taking place. 

What this surprise was may well be 
imagined ; no language, indeed, could 
portray her astonishment at finding Mr. 
Denny Scanlen, whom her pride made her 
continually reproach herself for having, 
in the slightest degree, noticed, metamor- 
phosed into the elegant, accomplished, 
fashionable Mr. Melville, the nephew and 
heir of sir James Melvillej and whom all 
the dashing belles of the place were vying 
with each other to attract. That it must 
have led to what Melville wished to pre- 
vent, there could be no doubt, but that at 
the very moment sir William was present- 
ing him to her, his attention was called 
away by a party that had come up to pay 
their compliments to lady and Miss Erin; 
and merely saying — " Miss Audley, this 
is the gentleman I wished to secure your 
hand for," he left them to themselves. 

" I do not wonder," whispered Melville, 
insinuating himself into a seat beside her, 
" at your look of surprise, but suspend 



280 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

your opinion of what appears extraordi- 
nary till I have a better opportunity of 
explaining the cause of it ; as soon as we 
stand up to dance, I shall be more explicit.** 

" Stand up to dance !" and Lavinia in- 
dignantly pushed him back with her el- 
bow ; no, indeed, there was an end of any 
further dancing or communication with 
him. If she could think of any further 
acquaintance with him, after the imposi- 
tion he had practised on her, she should 
conceive, to a certainty, that she was wil- 
fully exposing herself to still further de- 
ception from him, such as she now believ- 
ed him capable of; for to the most insidi- 
ous motives she imputed that which had 
been discovered ; there was no other way 
in which she could account for it, than by 
imputing it to some designs inimical to 
her peace and innocence ; and her pride 
and purity equally alarmed by the idea, 
she determined to let him see she was nei- 
ther directly or indirectly to be insulted 
with impunity. 

" Do not frown so terribly," said Mel- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 281 

ville, " it will excite curiosity ; have a lit- 
tle patience, and I shall be able to con- 
vince you, you have no reason to be angry 
or offended." 

" If my credulity was equal to your 
confidence, I might give credit to the as- 
sertion," replied Lavinia; "but as that 
does not happen to be the case, I shall not 
certainly put you to the necessity of rack- 
ing your invention : from this moment I 
must insist on it that you do not make 
any further attempt to intrude yourself on 
my notice ; should you do so, I shall feel 
myself reduced to the disagreeable neces- 
sity of explaining what I deem so affront- 
ing, as to wish, from a feeling of pride, to 
have concealed ; and as it is useless to ex- 
pect my dancing with you, if you have 
any wish to dance, do not let yourself be 
detained here another minute." 

She had all this time been speaking 
without looking at him ; and at this in- 
stant, sir Edward Surrey, who had for 
some time been gazing at her, as if she 
was a kind of wonder, approached. — "I 



282 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

presume, ma'am," he said, with what h^ 
certainly at least intended for one of his 
very best bows, " from seeing that gentle- 
man," glancing at Melville, " beside yon, 
it is useless to solicit the honour of your 
hand for the first set ; but for the second 

" Oh, by no means, sir," said Lavinia; 
" it so happens that for every set that will 
be danced this night I believe I am en- 
gaged, but for the very first, and that I 
shall have very great pleasure in dancing 
with you ;" immediately giving him her 
hand, and allowing him to lead her out to 
join the set that was now beginning to be 
formed. 

Poor Miss Bond, who had completely 
calculated on having the baronet for a 
partner, and had, in consequence, refused 
an overture or tv>^o that was made for her 
hand, was utterly unable to conceal her 
vexation at the disappointment she met 
with; expanding her little fan, she pro- 
tested, as she used it with some violence, 
it was very extraordinary, indeed, that 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 2B3 

Miss Audley had not given sir Edward 
time to explain that it was not for the first 
set he wanted to engage her. 

" Well, no matter," said Melville, who, 
with all his vexation, and vexed he cer- 
tainly was very much at what had hap- 
pened, from not knowing whether he real- 
ly should be able to vindicate himself in 
the opinion of Lavinia, of what it was 
evident to him she accused him of, was 
hardly able to refrain from laughing at 
the disconsolation she betrayed, " let me 
profit by the circumstance, by having your 
hand for this set." 

In a moment it was granted. Hardly 
had they taken their places in the set, 
which Melville contrived should be next 
to Lavinia, ere sir William joined them. 
— " Well, Miss Audley," he began — but 
whatever he was about saying to her was 
prevented by surprise at the change with 
regard to partners — " why how is this?" 
he said — " I thought, JNliss Audley, you 
had promised to dance with the gentle- 



284 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

man for whom I solicited the honour of 
your hand ?" 

" Yes, I believe I might, sir," said La- 
vinia, composedly, " but I changed my 
mind since I came into the room." 

" And pray may I take the liberty of 
inquiring why ?" 

" Because I liked dancing better with 
sir Edward Surrey than the gentleman 
you asked me for." 

" Hem !" said the baronet, coughing a 
little, " more blunt than polite this, it 
must be confessed. — Well, and, fair lady, 
pray are you always in the habit of doing 
what is most agreeable to yourself?" 

" Yes, when I can." 

" And do you," he hesitated a little, 
" think this is always the most eligible 
plan to be pursued ?" 

" I don't know — it is the pleasantest. — 
Yes, but what is pleasantest is not always 
the safest ; that is what I know you were 
going to say, sir," she said, laughing sau- 
cily in his face, as she turned away to join 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 285 

in the figure with the couple that were 
leading down. 

" So, so," thought sir William ; " I think 
there will be some little exercise for my 
friend here, if he takes this young lady in 
charge himself" Then crossing over to 
Melville — '* Why how is this, my friend ?" 
he cried ; " you do not seem to have play- 
ed your cards well with this Hebe of mine, 
that she gave you up for sir Edward." 

" So it seems, sir," said Melville. 

" Can you guess why it is she preferred 
sir Edward ? for of the two," and the ba- 
ronet laughed, " I should have conceived 
that you stood the best chance of pleasing 
her." 

" Thank you, sir," said Melville, in the 
same kind of tone, " for the flattering 
corapluTient; what a high one to allow 
me to think I could at all enter into com- 
petition with the baronet ! but as to your 
question, I really," a little evasively, " can- 
not answer it." 

" Only you are utter strangers to one 
another," said sir William, " I really should 



286 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

have conceived there was some kind of 
quarrel between you, that, in short, you 
had given her some kind of offence ; for, 
after all, I cannot think the bluntness with 
which she replied to my question about 
you natural to her. With all her apparent 
giddiness, there is an elegance and feminine 
delicacy about her that forbids the idea; 
besides, 1 thought I discerned, while speak- 
ing to me, something malicious lurking in 
that dimpling smile of hers/' 

" Oh ! I dare say you did," said Mel- 
ville, a little spitefully ; " it is not singu- 
lar for a flattered young beauty, I believe, 
to have pleasure in the idea of being able 
to give pain." 

" You allow then that she is a beauty ?" 
said sir William, as if he had only attend- 
ed to that part of the observation from 
which this inference was drawn. 

"Yes," but as if almost reluctantly, 
assented Melville, " I suppose I should be 
deemed singular if I did not." 

*' Why yes, I rather think you. would ; 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 287 

for, in my opinion, she is a sweet pretty 
creature, and then so playful." 

" Oh, yes, playful enough, I believe, 
and mischievous too, I fancy, might be 
added," said Melville, in an under tone. 

'* She's a kind of creature that one could 
hardly know, without feeling a high de- 
gree of interest about," resumed sir Wil- 
liam. 

Melville was very much inclined to be 
of the same opinion ; but not liking ex- 
actly to have this known, he affected care- 
lessness,- smiled, nodded, and looked about 
him, as if more engrossed by what was 
going on than what he was listening to ; 
then, but with rather a vacant air — " True, 
as you were saying, sir, it would indeed 
be impossible, at least for those acquaint- 
ed with her connexions ; and I — I — think," 
anxious to know a little more about her 
family than he yet did, " you said you 
were intimate with them ?" 

" Me! — Yes, very— that is with the 
friend who introduced her to us, and be- 
spoke our kindness for her. Yes, I am 



288 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

very intimate with him ; and on his ac- 
count both my family and I are most par- 
ticularly anxious to be of service to her 
on her introduction into life. — But if I 
keep you much longer abstracted in this 
way from Miss Bond, she will be telling 
me this was not the kind of politesse she 
was accustomed to when she was in Paris ; 
and besides, there's a whist-party waiting 
for me in the card-room ; so adieu for the 
present, and I hope, before the dance is 
over, you'll let the young lady see what a 
loss she has sustained, by not keeping her 
promise about you." 

The young lady, however, seemed de- 
termined to appear to regret nothing but 
that she had ever known the disgraced 
Melville. If, notwithstanding her studious 
avoidance of his glances, their eyes would 
perversely encounter, hers were always 
sure to be instantly turned away with a 
look of scorn ; in vain too was her hand 
sought in the evolutions of the dance; 
and in short, Melville began to be serious- 
ly alarmed. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 289 

While matters were going on in this 
way between them, Donaghue was anxi- 
ously watching the attentions of lord Al- 
tidore to Eveleen, who opened the ball 
with him, he and major Mackenzie being 
stewards. Young MilUcent was Dona- 
ghue's partner, to the utter rage and dis- 
appointment of lady Jane, who, being de- 
termined on making what may be called 
a dead set at him this night, had refused 
several solicitations, previous to his enter- 
ing the ball-room, for her hand, and 
amongst others, one from Lawless, under 
the pretext of being engaged ; so that, on 
being defeated in her plan of obtaining 
him for a partner, she was obliged to sit 
still, with every probability of being obli- 
ged to do so for the remainder of the 
evening, from the offence she saw her con- 
duct had given, it being now discovered 
that her rejection of so many partners was 
owing to her reserving herself for some 
particular person, contrary to the esta- 
blished rules of assemblies. But it was not 

VOL. in. o 



290 TRADITION OF THE Cx\STLE. 

entirely on this account slie was so exas- 
perated by his conduct, though it was 
quite sufficient to provoke her witli it, to 
think it might be the means of making 
her appear neglected, a thing hardly en- 
durable to her, from her wish to be thought 
the object of general attention every where. 
Should Donaghue persevere much longer 
in acting in this manner, she thought it 
hardly possible but that lady Erin must 
become undeceived, with regard to him; 
and what a deathblow might not this be 
to every future hope ! Slie had been on 
the watch for him from the moment she 
entered the room, and the instant she saw 
him approaching, she started up, and 
whispering to lady Erin that she had re- 
ceived a written entreaty that morning to 
make it up with him this evening, seized 
his arm, and ere he was well allowed to 
pay his compliments to the party, whirled 
him from them. — " I have been so anxi- 
ously expecting you, Donaghue," she said, 
as she forced him to parade her down 
the room, " being disappointed of seeing 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 291 

you yesterday, and not knowing but that 
I might be equally so when you next 

called — and I really wanted to — to " 

(she was for a moment at a loss to say 
what) — " to scold you," she then suddenly 
added, " for those abominable complaints 
you are continually making of me to lady 
Erin, getting me, in consequence, such 
long sermonizing lectures from her." 

" I make complaints of you to lady 
Erin !" said Donaghue ; " surely, my dear 
lady Jane, you must have been dreaming 
to think so ; for I cannot imagine her 
ladyship could possibly assert what was 
not the case." 

" No, 1 don't positively say she asserted 
it, but then from her continual lectures " 

" On what score could I possibly com- 
plain of you?" resumed Donaghue. " Com- 
plaint implies some right of interference, 
or sense of injury, and I neither pretend 
to one, nor suffer under the other; and 
should, in short, conceive myself guilty of 
a very unwarrantable liberty if I could 
o 2 



292 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

presume to mention your name in the 
manner you have insinuated to lady Erin." 

" Donaghue, how can you talk in this 
way ?" cried her ladyship — " how perse-* 
vere in still trying to deceive yourself and 
me ? Do you think I don't know, not- 
withstanding all this loftiness of language, 
that you still feel as if I had once wronged 
you, and that to this is owing all your va- 
riations of conduct towards me, and the 
jealousy and resentment with which you 
behold the slightest appearance of encou- 
ragement from me to the particularity of 
any other person — a jealousy and envy so 
apparent, as certainly to appear like indi- 
rect complaints, at least to an}' one who 
notices them, amongst which number is 
lady Erin?" 

Donaghue only replied to this speech 
by a smile of derision ; he would not allow 
her to suppose he deemed it worthy of any 
other reply ; and to make her still more 
perfectly comprehend the feeling inspired 
by this attempt to persuade him out of 
his senses, immediately proceeded to re- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 293 

mark, that dancing would now soon com- 
mence, as the gentlemen had begun draw- 
ing for places. 

" Well, no matter," said her ladyship, 
hardly able to control her rage at this cool 
contemptuous indifference, for so she con- 
strued it, *' you are not very anxious about 
yours, I suppose ; so there's no occasion 
to be in a hurry to rejoin the party." 

" Pardon me," said Donaghue, impa- 
tient to avail himself of the pretext he 
had for disengaging himself from her, " I 
should consider it a bad compliment to 
any lady who might honour me with her 
band, if I did not feel a little anxious about 
the place I had secured for her in the set." 

" Oh, well," and under the flattering 
persuasion that his expressing himself in 
this way was an indirect intimation of his 
considering that they were to be partners 
for the first set, lady Jane was beginning 
to declare, that so she liked her partner, 
she cared very little, except on certain oc- 
casions, when there was any thing of arro- 
gant pretensions, what place she occupied 



294 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

in a set, when Donaghue, having led her 
back to her seat, withdrew his arm, and 
directly turning to Millicent, asked her 
hand. 

The feelings that at this instant perva- 
ded the soul of lady Jane were almost be- 
yond suppression ; and lady Erin's whis- 
pering her, as she conceived, with a sneer, 
though in conceiving so she certainly did 
her injustice, did not assuredly tend to 
allay them. 

Whatever were the resolutions of Dona- 
ghue, with regard to the avoidance of any^ 
particularity to Miss Erin, he certainly 
had not the fortitude to retain them, when, 
at the conclusion of the first set, he found 
himself seated beside her, without any one 
to interfere in their conversation but Mil- 
hcent, sir William and lady Erin being 
engaged in the card- room, the rest of the 
party scattered, and lord Altidore obliged, 
by his duties as a steward, to leave her 
soon after conducting her to her seat. 

How long was it since he had had an 
opportunity of gazing on her — of conver- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 295 

sing with her without restraint ! but what 
happiness, what pleasure could he derive 
from this, when he dared not profit by it ? 
As if to heighten the feelings this reflec- 
tion inspired, the place, the scene, revived 
the recollection of the folly to which all 
this misery was owing; for in this very 
room how slightingly had he once treated 
her, from the ungenerous belief that he 
might trifle as he pleased with her feel- 
ings with impunity ! The deep, deep sigh 
that unconsciously escaped him, at the 
moment, seemed to startle Miss Erin. 
She turned with quickness towards him 
from Millicent, to whom she was speak- 
ing at the moment; and Donaghue co- 
loured like scarlet at her look of mingled 
alarm and inquiry. — " This — this room," 
he said, as if replying to it, " is so — so 
warm," affecting, as he spoke, in extreme 
confusion, to rub back his hair from his 
temple. 

" If you find it oppressive, had you not 
better repair to the card-room ?" said ]\Iiss 



296 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Erin. " Go, and see how Fortune is fa- 
vouring my mother." 

" No," replied Donaghue, in a melan- 
choly tone, and with a look that perfectly 
assimilated to it, " she has for an instant 
favoured me, and I will not slight her 
kindness." 

" Certainly not ; you would be wrong 
if you did," said Miss Erin, laughingly, as 
if treating what he had said as the indi- 
rect compliment of common-place gallan- 
try. " But is not our assembly here very 
brilliant to-night? The assemblage here 
gives encouragement to the plan of hav- 
ing subscription balls more immediately 
in our neighbourhood than these the en- 
suing winter, and which you must hold 
yourself in readiness to be called upon to 
patronize." 

" Nothing could afford me greater plea- 
sure," replied Donaghue, " than to concur 
in any plan or scheme that could promote 
sociability ; but Heaven knows before next 
winter where I shall be !" 

" Be !" repeated Miss Erin. " Why," 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 297 

in a tone of earnestness, "you are not 
going to leave Altoir-na-Grenie ?" 

" I should have done so before this, but 
that I rather wished not till the return of 
general O'Donaghue from abroad ; but as 
that now appears very uncertain, I cer- 
tainly shall not pass another winter at it, 
as I really have not courage to endure for 
another its lonely horrors." 

There was some slight indication of 
emotion in the manner of Miss Erin ; she 
paused for a minute, and seemed thought- 
ful ; then, again addressing him — " But are 
you not rather to blame yourself," she 
said, but rather hesitatingly, " for finding 
it so lonely? There's a pleasant neigh- 
bourhood." 

" There is," said Donaghue ; " but can 
you not well imagine, that tlie sight and 
enjoyment of domestic happiness abroad, 
must render a solitary home still more 
dismal?" 

Miss Erin was again silent for an in- 
stant. — " Yes, I believe I can," she then 
o3 



298 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

said ; " but — but — '* and her accent again 
became a little hesitating, " might not 
yours," half glancing at him, " be very 
different from a solitary home, if you 
pleased yourself? If — if — you would but 

forgive what was " 

Donaghue cast up his eyes impatiently ; 
he could not permit her to proceed — 
" Pardon me for interrupting you," he 
said, " but I cannot check my emotion, 
when I hear myself still suspected of 
what I have so peremptorily denied. I 
perfectly comprehend your allusion, but, 
beheve me, it is all a mistake, what is ima- 
gined of my ever having been attached to 
lady Jane, and that to anger and resent- 
ment is owing my not now acknowledg- 
ing that attachment. I conceive it due to 
her, as well as myself, to declare this, lest 
the continuance of the error respecting us 
should be the means of preventing a hap- 
py alliance elsewhere. How could I pos- 
sibly feel anger or resentment at what, to 
me, was a matter of total unconcern ? and 
with the conviction on my mind I have. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 299 

that I can never experience any particular 
interest about her, I should conceive my- 
self the most despicable of human beings, 
indeed, if I could possibly lay myself out 
to win her regard." Donaghue expressed 
himself with as much delicacy as he could 
about her ladyship — " Do not — do not, 
therefore," he added ; and as her hand lay 
temptingly in his way, his ventured to 
touch it, to give greater emphasis, perhaps, 
to his words — " do not, after this, wound 
my — vex me, by letting me imagine you 
still discredit me; but surely — surely — '* 
with an emotion that was not controllable, 
" you are the last being on earth who 
should have believed what has been insi- 
nuated — you, who " 

" Me !" cried jMiss Erin ; " and pray " 



but her deep blush, at the instant, she felt 
but too conscious had betrayed her per- 
fect comprehension of his meaning to per- 
mit her to finish the question. 

" Yes, you," said Donaghue, as if he 
had heard it, transported out of himself by 
the soft confusion of her looks—" you T 



300 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

again gently seizing her hand, in one mo« 
ment of emotion forgetting all the re- 
solves of pride and romantic generosity, 
and a hundred other absurd notions, as 
perhaps they might be termed ; and from 
the agitation of the lady, and the impas- 
sioned feelings of the gentleman, there is 
no knowing what eclaircissement might 
have ensued, had not, at this very critical 
moment, a young lady run across the 
room, to speak to Miss Erin. 

Donaghue, as she hastily withdrew her 
hand from him, turned away his head, to 
conceal his vexation at this interruption, 
and the next instant, without Miss Erin 
having an idea of what the occasion of it 
could be, her attention at the moment be- 
ing occupied by the young lady who had 
come up to her, he started from her side, 
and rushed towards the tea-room. 

Lady Jane, on finding herself compel- 
led to sit the first set, in order to prevent 
the mortifying circumstance as much as 
possible from being remarked, retired to 
this room, the entrance to which was 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 301 

nearly close to the seat now occupied by- 
Miss Erin, and just within which she pla- 
ced herself, for the purpose of seeing all 
that was passing without. Keenly watch- 
ful of every movement of Donaghue and 
Miss Erin, she no sooner saw they were, 
as it might be said, left to themselves, 
than she maliciously determined on in- 
stantly joining them; this determination, 
however, was prevented by her admirer, 
Lawless, as great a coxcomb as ever figured 
on the pave in Bond-street, and who hav- 
ing followed her from London on a spe- 
culating plan, was excessively enraged by 
her equivocal, or, as he termed it, jilting 
conduct towards him. 

Quite as watchful of her as she was of 
Donaghue, on seeing her enter the tea- 
room, he also took his station there, but 
without deigning to seem to notice her, 
so much was he offended by her refusing 
to dance with him, from her expectation of 
being asked by Donaghue, as it was now 
evident was the case, till he saw her rising 
to quit it, when, aware of her motive for 



30S TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

doing so, he rushed forward, and placed 
himself in the doorway in such a manner 
as to prevent her passing. 

" Pshaw [ what folly is this ?" she cried. 
" Really you are vastly disagreeable to- 
night. Lawless. Stand aside, I desire, 
and let me pass !" 

" No, I am too good-natured for that — 
it would only be to let you spoil sport to 
do so ; and if you had that regard for the 
gentleman you profess, or at least evince, 
you certainly would not endeavour to 
prevent his trying his chance with the 
heiress, now that the old fox that watches 
her is out of the way." 

In expressing himself in this manner, 
Mr. Lawless was not exactly aware there 
was any one but lady Jane to hear him, 
or he probably would have been a little 
more cautious in his language. It happen- 
ed, however, that Melville was at his 
elbow at the very moment, deliberating 
whether or not he should address himself 
any more to Lavinia that evening, and 
his rage at what he overheard — the inso- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 30S 

lence of the allusion to Donaghue, was so 
great, that nothing but prudential consi- 
derations — the injury it might be to Dona- 
ghue, to make him the subject of a quar- 
rel, could have induced the suppression 
of it. 

Not to give way in some degree, how- 
ever, to his indignation, was utterly im- 
possible ; and he accordingly made the 
impertinence of Lawless to lady Jane the 
pretext. — " Why don't you stand out of 
the way, sir," said he, " when her lady- 
ship wishes to pass?" 

" Sir !" cried the other, somewhat start- 
led, however, at finding he had been so 
near him all this time, but trying to con- 
ceal this under a tone of bravado. 

" I say, sir, how can you possibly have 
the insolence to obstruct any one's passage 
from one room to another? Your con- 
duct is excessively indecorous ; and if you 
don't immediately remove yourself, I shall 
take the liberty of doing so !" 

" Upon my soul !" with a laugh, but 
evidently a forced one, " that is very good. 



304 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

as if I would permit; but, to be sure, 
there's nothing like " 

" Keeping one's word," said Melville, 
catching him by the arm as he spoke, and 
dragging him from the door. 

The rage of the other, at so utter a dis- 
comfiture before lady Jane, was so great, 
that, transported beyond all considerations 
of prudence, he was in th^ act of paying 
Melville for his hasty ejectment of him 
from the doorway by a blow, when Dona- 
ghue, whose eye was attracted towards 
the spot at the instant, rushed forward to 
prevent him, by seizing his arm, just at 
the moment that Miss Erin's attention 
being called away from him, she was 
startled by seeing him dart off in such a 
manner. 

All was now tumult; lady Jane scream- 
ed ; Lawless, finding there was some one 
to interfere, affected to bluster, and every 
one came crowding to the spot; while 
Miss Erin, terrified beyond expression, 
tremblingly demanded what the matter 
was? 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 305 

** Oh, I — I," cried lady Jane, purposely- 
making her way to her, determined on 
trying whether she could not make some- 
thing of this incident — " I am the unfor- 
tunate cause of all this !" 

" You !" said Miss Erin, perhaps wil- 
fully wishing not to understand her. 

" Yes, I indeed," and affecting to trem- 
ble as if she required support, she passed 
her arm under the really trembling Eve- 
leen's. " But I guessed how it would be; 
I guessed the evening would hardly pass 
over without a burst between these hot- 
headed creatures." 

"What hot-headed creatures?" asked 
Eveleen. 

" My dear, how can you pretend igno- 
rance—I beg pardon — not instantly to 
guess who I mean? — Donaghue, to be 
sure, and Lawless. Yet I certainly have 
not been to blame, as I did all I could to 
keep peace between them, by refusing to 
dance with either, lest the other should 
be jealous, and so lost the first set entire- 
ly ; but, as I dreaded, all wouldn't do— » 



S06 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Donagbiie is of SO terribly jealous a tem- 
per. Didn't you see how he was watch- 
ing me ail the time he was conversing 
with you-^— that his eyes were continually 
in the direction of the tea-room, because 
he saw Lawless had stationed himself near 
the seat I had taken — just taken within 
the door ?" 

** No, I cannot exactly say I did per- 
ceive his eyes continually in that direc- 
tion," replied Miss Erin, turning upon her 
such a look of involuntary keen scrutiny 
as, notwithstanding all her effrontery, made 
her blush — a circumstance, however, that 
could do her no injury, as it could not be 
perceived. 

" Indeed! Oh, well, that was because 
you were not always minding him ; but 
you see, the moment your being engaged 
wdth another person gave him an oppor- 
tunity for interrupting me and Lawless, 
as he conceived, he embraced it ; and, Hea- 
vens ! like an enraged tiger positively he 
came down upon the poor fellow. — But 
how you tremble, my dearl Really, I 



TRADITION OP THE CASTLE. 307 

believe my tremour has been contagious," 
and she begged some of the company, that 
impeded them, to make way, and getting 
Eveleen to a window, she presently re- 
covered iierself. 

She had felt a shock indeed, but it was 
but momentary — that shock which a mind 
of integrity cannot help feeling, if it con- 
ceives itself wilfully imposed upon by a 
person whom it wishes to be allowed still 
to esteem. She could not believe it pos- 
sible, that Donaghue could be guilty of 
the deliberate insincerity of which she 
must accuse him, if she gave credit to this 
statement of lady Jane, or of ungene- 
rously seeking to revive former senti- 
ments, as certainly had appeared to be the 
case, for the mere purpose of making her 
instrumental to revenging the perfidy of 
another ; and in proportion as she acquit- 
ted him, she felt dislike to the person who 
had surprised her into a transient injustice 
towards him. 

Her looks were too intelligent not to 
let lady Jane, keenly penetrating as she 



308 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

was, discover the distrust she had excited, 
and how to overcome it became now her 
object, since, if there was an end to any- 
further belief of Donaghue's entanglement 
with her, she feared there was an end to 
any further hopes of preventing the union 
she had made so many exertions, or rather 
had had recourse to many artifices to try 
and hinder, from the explanations that, in 
that case, it was too probable would take 
place. 

Whilst revolving the matter, Donaghue 
was in no little agitation, from the answer 
he had heard her give to Miss Erin's in- 
quiry, well aware of the invidious infe- 
rence to be drawn from it. 

The matter about Lawless was brought 
to a speedy issue. Lord Altidore, as one 
of the stewards, came forward, and insisted 
on his either apologizing to the parties he 
had offended, and the company in general, 
for the indecorum of which he had been 
guilty, or instantly withdrawing; and 
Lawless, not sorry to have a plausible 
pretext for making that apology to Mel? 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. S09 

ville, without which he rather argued dis- 
agreeable consequences to himself, very 
readily permitted himself to be prevailed 
on to do what was required. 

The moment the bustle attendant on 
this Jracas had subsided, Donaghue went 
to seek Miss Erin. The room Vvas ex- 
tremely crowded, so much so, as to pre- 
vent his directly seeing from one part to 
another ; and while he was looking about 
him, near the tea-room, to try if he could 
catch a glimpse of her, lady Jane approach- 
ed, with one of the Miss Magennises, for 
whom she had purposely left Miss Erin, 
in order that she might be at liberty to 
watch for him. She no sooner saw him, 
than withdrawing her arm from her com- 
panion, she darted to him, and catching 
hold of him — " So this silly affair is over !" 
she cried. " Really Lawless's conduct 
has been quite preposterous ; and then so 
very provoking, from the errors and mis- 
takes 1 dare say it will be the means of 
occasioning. I had the greatest difficulty 
in the world, in trying to make But 



310 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

we are in the way," and she drew him 
back towards the entrance of the tea-room, 
which was now quite vacated, "in making 
Miss Erin believe that you were not con- 
cerned in the quarrel ; and from explaining 
who was, and all about it, I suppose, be- 
fore to-morrow, your friend Melville will 
have the honour of being set down as one 
of my admirers." 

" And you really did explain how it 
was to Miss Erin?" said Donaghue, look- 
ing earnestly at her. 

" To be sure I did. I am sure you 
must have overheard my telling her I 
was the cause of it, and I naturally ex- 
plained how much I was indebted to Mel- 
ville for making that puppy Lawless re- 
gret his insolence. But 1 see you are im- 
patient to be gone, as dancing will soon 
be recommencing; and I am in a huiTy 
indeed myself to go to the card-room, 
where there is a loo-party waiting for me, 
as I shan't dance to-night; so here, take 
my hand, let what passed in the early 
part of the evening be forgotten, and 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 311 

give me the pleasure of thinking that — 
that as a friend I may at least consider 
you !" 

" Most assuredly, most decidedly," cried 
Donaghue, in the generous warmth of his 
heart, affected by the well-counterfeited 
emotion she betrayed at the instant, and 
delighted to think that no injury had been 
done him with Miss Erin, and eagerly 
taking her offered hand as he spoke, he 
was in the very act of raising it to his lips, 
with a look that might well have been ta- 
ken for one of real tenderness, when his 
eyes encountered Miss Erin's full upon 
him. He started, and with a feeling of 
indescribable confusion, let drop the hand 
of lady Jane. 

Miss Erin smiled superciHously, and, 
with a slight nod to lady Jane, passed on 
with her party. 

Alarmed by this smile, Donaghue turn- 
ed to lady Jane, and in her countenance, 
at the moment, read such an expression of 
malicious triumph, as left him no room to 
doubt his agitation being the result of 



312 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

treachery on her side. Nor was he mis- 
taken in the persuasion; she had been 
aware, all along, from the direction in 
which she stood, of the approach of Miss 
Erin; and to her perceiving that her 
eyes were upon them, was owing her hav- 
ing made the effort she had done to draw 
him into some appearance of tenderness 
towards her. 

Incensed, disgusted, Donaghue quitted 
her, without another moment's delay, and 
w^as involuntarily hastening after Miss 
Erin, when he encountered Millicent and 
Miss Bond. She took his arm, and in her 
way proceeded to detail the whole of what 
lady Jane had told her cousin of his jea- 
lousy being the cause of the recenty/^aca^ ; 
and, from her detail, Donaghue at once 
saw what the plan of lady Jane was, in 
betraying him into the appearance of at- 
tachment she had just done ; he feared 
its success ; from the manner in which she 
had managed, it certainly would seem as 
if she had been sought for the purpose of 
a reconciliation taking place between them, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 313 

and he could have gnashed his teeth in 
downright exasperation of spirit, at the 
idea of being her dupe. But could he ob- 
tain an opportunity of conversing with 
Eveleen again before the evening was 
over, she might be defeated ; and under 
this hope, he now hurried forward his fair 
companions to join her. On coming up 
with her — " I almost fear," said Donaghue, 
" I am too iate for this set; but if, for the 
one after, you are disengaged, may I en- 
treat " 

" I am engaged not only for this set, 
but for as many after as, I beheve, will be 
danced this evening, or, at least, as I con- 
ceive will be agreeable to me to dance," 
she replied, abruptly interrupting him, and 
slightly bowing, passed on. 

Donaghue resigned the arm of Milli- 
cent, who immediately followed her cousin, 
and, in utter disconsolation, then turned 
away. 

The artifices of lady Jane, it was, now 
too evident, had prevailed, and in succeed- 

VOL. III. p 



314 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ing in them, she had succeeded in render- 
ing him an object of derision and contempt 
to Eveleen, through silly spleen and jea- 
lousy, denying what the next moment he 
was ridiculously anxious to proclaim. The 
idea was not endurable, yet endure it he 
must, for he now saw no way of vindica- 
ting himself from the imputation he had 
incurred but by quitting the neighbour- 
hood, and on this he determined ; but at 
what a moment to do so, when Eveleen 
had appeared relenting towards him, from 
a persuasion on her mind, perhaps, that if 
it were as he had represented, matters 
might yet, possibly through the interfer- 
ence of her mother, be brought to a happy 
issue between them ! 

Dancing recommenced, but he neither 
heard the music nor saw the dancers, and, 
in short, was so completely lost at the mo- 
ment as he walked down the room, that he 
did not perceive Melville till he caught 
him by the arm. — " What, so triste /" he 
said ; *' why you look like the knight of 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 315 

the rueful countenance, Donaghue ! what 
the deuce is the matter ?" 

" I do not know ; what should you sup- 
pose the matter?" replied Donaghue, a 
little impatiently. 

" Oh, this love— this love !" said Mel- 
ville, laughing, though certainly not with- 
out being a little internally vexed himself 
at the moment. " Upon my soul, I am 
beginning to think it was no bad plan that 
of some monks I read of in this isle of 
ours, in former times, forbidding the ap- 
proach of any woman to their sacred pre- 
cincts ! for, assuredly, if she is the source 
of all that is divine in our joys, she is also 
the cause of all that is tormenting in our 
sorrows. But come, what really has hap- 
pened to discompose you in this manner ? 
confess, for who knows but your inquie- 
tude may meet with greater sympathy 
than you are aware of?" And, in short, 
he could no longer refrain from communi- 
cating to him the affair about Lavinia. 

With all his vexation, Donaghue could 
p 2 



316 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

not help laughing as he listened to him ; 
but though involuntarily diverted by it, 
this did not prevent his commenting on 
the imprudence of it, aware, as Melville 
must be, of the consequences that might 
result from disobliging his uncle, and which 
nothing seemed more likely to occasion 
his doing than forming an attachment 
without his sanction. 

" Come, come," said Melville, a little 
vexedly, at length interrupting him, " have 
done with this sermonizing, which only 
goes to prove how deucedly wise we are 
when we come to consider the affairs of 
others." 

" Thank you for the inference," said Do- 
naghue, laughing ; "but supposing it be 
as you have intimated, it is not so wonder- 
ful after all, since in considering the affairs 
of others, we have not those feelings of 
passion and prejudice to blind and pervert 
our judgments, that is too often the case 
when our own are under review." 

" Very well explained indeed," said 
Melville, "the cause of our being so much 



THADITION OF THE CASTLE. 317 

wiser with regard to others than ourselves, 
and a very appropriate scene this for dis- 
cussionand argument; but "and touch- 
ing his arm, JDonaghue perceived JMiss 
Erin and her party approaching, the se- 
cond set being just concluded. A slight 
bow was the only mark of recognition as 
she passed, and even this Melville could 
not obtain from Lavinia, whose conduct 
had disconcerted him so much as to pre- 
vent his dancing the second set. He had 
almost decided upon making no further 
attempt to converse with her that even- 
ing, but on seeing her pass, he could not 
resist withdrawing his arm from Donaghue 
to follow her. Lavinia perceiving this, 
not without a little secret exultation per- 
haps, immediately affected to be most bu- 
sily engaged in conversing with ^liss 
Bond, on whose arm she was leaning, se- 
parated from Miss Erin by the gentleman 
with whom Miss Erin had been dancin^r. 
— " And so," she cried to Miss Bond, who 
had forgiven her the supposed mistake that 
robbed her of sir Edward for the first set, 



318 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

on perceiving that she evinced no anxiety- 
whatever to monopolize him — " so all this 
recent /ram.9 was about that painted thing!" 

" Painted thing !" repeated Miss Bond, 
with great earnestness — " painted thing ! 
Yes, to be sure, lady Jane paints ; but, 
when I was in Paris, every body painted, 
and nobody thought any thing of it ; I be- 
gan to rouge myself while I was there, but 
grandmamma made me give it up when I 
came home." 

" She was quite right," said Lavinia ; 
" it will be time enough for you to rouge 
forty or fifty years hence, when you want 
to look young." 

" But lady Jane is young." 

" Yes, but not so young, I suppose, as 
she wishes to look." 

" And very handsome," resumed Miss 
Bond, " at least the gentlemen think 
her so; but, for my part, were she seven 
times handsomer than she is, I couldn't 
like her, she is so cross and disobliging at 
times. Why the other night, at Mr. 
O'Connor's — where, by-the-bye, I quite 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 319 

wished to have been introduced to you, 
and that pretty girl that was with you, 
you both took my fancy so much — if I had 
died for it, she would not wait to let me 
have one dance, though she knows I am so 
passionately fond of dancing, and had put 
on one of my Paris dancing dresses for 
the very purpose. I declare I cried with 
vexation, both then and afterwards, when 
I heard what a pleasant dance there was 
there." 

" Who told you that ?" demanded La- 
vinia. 

" Who told me ! I protest I don't re- 
collect ; but some one I know did." 

" Then I assure you they told you what 
was not correct, at least I thought nothing- 
could be more disagreeable, for, not to ap- 
pear too fastidious, I consented to go down 
one dance, and I got such a lout of a 
partner — ^ — " 

Here Melville, who had kept close be- 
hind them, as she was indeed aware of, 
coughed. 

" Bless me, Mr. Melville !" exclaimed 



320 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Miss Bond, " I did not know you were sa 
near us ; and now I think on it, as I sup- 
pose you have heard what we have been 
saying, there was a young man at the en- 
tertainment we were speaking of, that you 
have ever since very much put me in 
mind of, the only difference between you 
was his eyebrows being very black and 
somewhat bushy," as was the case indeed, 
when she observed him, but not exactly 
so when Lavinia did, the black about 
them being, by degrees, carelessly brushed 
away. 

" Ah, that was my partner ?* said La- 
vinia; " and yet," half turning round, and 
casting an affectedly careless glance at 
Melville, " I think there was a great like- 
ness between the fright I danced with and 
this gentleman." 

"Thank you for the compliment, ma'am !" 
said Melville, with a profound bow ; " let 
no one who has heard it wonder, after this, 
if I should be vain." 

Miss Bond laughed immoderately, nor 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 321 

could Lavinia, with all her efforts to pre 
vent herself, help joining in her mirth. 

Encouraged by this, Melville made a 
gentle effort to insinuate himself between 
them, and make each take an arm. Miss 
Bond most readily acquiesced in the plan, 
but on his attempting to make her com- 
panion, Lavinia darted round to the other 
side. 

" Don't you like him ?" asked Miss 
Bond, in a low tone, as Lavinia took her 
other arm. 

" Like him !" repeated Lavinia, colour- 
ing, and stammering at the question — 
" no ! why ? what makes you ask ?" 

" Why, because your saying what you 
just did, and your not accepting his arm, 
makes me think you don't ; and yet that 
seems so odd to me, as, I assure you, he is 
reckoned amongst our very handsomest 
and most elegant beaux here." 

" Indeed!" said Lavinia, composedly, 
perceiving he was attentively listening; 
" well, really I should hardly have thought 
p3 



322 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

that ; but some people have very singular 
tastes." 

Melville now suddenly thought what a 
little alarming Lavinia might effect; he 
clearly saw, with all her appearance of 
anger and disdain, that she was gratified 
by his following her about in this manner, 
and he suddenly decided on altering his 
conduct; accordingly, ere they had pro- 
ceeded many steps further, he begged 
Miss Bond to excuse his leaving her, and, 
with his usual bow to her, and as distant 
a one as he could possibly make to La- 
vinia, he turned away with an air of per- 
fect carelessness, and rejoined Donaghue, 
whom he found, by this time, anxious to 
depart, the disturbance of his mind ren- 
dering it impossible for him to derive any 
further entertainment from the scene. 

Melville, however he might have liked 
to linger a little longer in the room, made 
no objection, conceiving his positively 
quitting it might be a means of furthering 
his plan about I^vinia. The only thing 
that seemed likely to prevent their imme- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 323 

diately withdrawing, was the apprehended 
disinclination of Rosebud, who had ac- 
companied them, to give up cards so soon. 
On repairing, however, to the card-room, 
to apprize him of their wish, they found 
him quite as ready to be gone as they 
were, owing to an excessive run of bad 
luck, which always completely disconcert- 
ed him. 

Donaghue remained in so unhappy a 
state of mind, that on his companions 
quitting him for the night, he repaired to 
the library, instead of following their ex- 
ample, by retiring to his chamber. He 
took up a book, but quickly threw it 
aside, too unsettled to be able to read. He 
was mechanically pacing the apartment^ 
completely lost in revolving the embar- 
rassing predicament in which the artifices 
of lady Jane had placed him, when he 
perceived the door gently opening, and 
the dark visage of a man obtruding into 
the room. Donaghue darted to the door ; 
the man started back, and fled before him 



324 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

down the passage communicating with the 
chapel. 

Donaghue was rapidly pursuing him, 
when an unexpected interruption was put 
to his further pursuit, by the sudden ap- 
parition of the figure, in the dress of his 
kinsman Dennis, before him. Seeming to 
dilate itself in the passage to obstruct his 
proceeding, it motioned him back, with 
gestures indicative of the greatest anxiety 
to prevent his doing so. Donaghue be- 
came transfixed for a moment, partly thro* 
surprise, and partly from incertitude whe- 
ther or not these gestures were to be at- 
tended to, when the voice of Cormick, 
muttering to himself in broken sentences, 
as he came rushincr down the staircase that 
led into this passage, made him involun- 
tarily glance upwards, and when he turn- 
ed round again the figure was gone. 

Well, this was really most extraordinary ; 
and he was looking about him, with the 
vagueness of a person that hardly knew 
what to think, when the corporal, who, 
with his great horse-cloak about him, had 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 325 

nearly sprung down the whole of the last 
flight of stairs, on seeing him in the pas- 
sage, recalled him to himself, by his loud- 
ly demanding whether he had seen him ? 

"Seen who?" demanded Donaghue, yet 
a little struck by the question, from what 
had just occurred. 

" The ould gentleman, to be sure, in the 
yellow dress," replied the corporal ; " there 
is no one else but him that disturbs the 
castle." 

" No !" said Donaghue, affecting a care- 
lessness he did not exactly feel at the in- 
stant ; " I know not how that can be said, 
considering the extraordinary manner in 
which you appear to be acting yourself 
now, starting out of your bed, when it 
might be supposed you were quietly asleep, 

and but before we argue the point 

further, have the goodness to assist me in 
securing the door to the chapel, which I 
must beg you may be more particular 
about in future, as I have every reason to 
imagine your forgetting to fasten it to- 
night was near costing me my life ;" and 



326 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

he recounted what had happened — that is, 
his being surprised by the appearance of a 
man in the passage, but, of course, nothing 
about the gentleman in the yellow dress. 

Cormick, blessing himself, protested 
that this door was the one that, of all 
others, he was particular about in the 
castle, and that he could safely swear, by 
any saint, or all the saints, in the calendar, 
that he had, as usual, fastened it that night. 

" Then it must have been broke open," 
said Donaghue; a very slight examina- 
tion, however, sufficed to let them see that 
this had not been the case ; and, of course, 
from the consequent conviction of its hav- 
ing been opened on the inside, no doubt 
could remain of treachery of some kind 
having been practised. 

" Well," said Donaghue, on his return 
to the library, not a little curious to learn 
the circumstance to which it was owing, 
" let me know, now, the occasion of your 
strange question to me, Cormick, as to 
whether I had seen the old gentleman 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 327 

that, let him haunt what he will, certainly 
haunts your imagination ?" 

" Why, your honour, because if there 
be faith in the word of a sinner, I had a 
glimpse of him myself to-night ; and I am 
now certain, from what your honour has 
told me, that there is something keeping 
watch over you." 

" I should be very sorry indeed not to 
be certain of that myself," replied Dona- 
ghue ; " I hope, and firmly believe indeed, 
there is a good and merciful Providepce 
watching over us all — that keepeth watch 
about our bed, and about our paths, and," 
looking a little slyly at the corporal, 
" spieth out all our ways." 

" Yes, that I know, your honour, but 
that is not what I exactly meant by what 
I just said; I meant, that I am sure the 
spirit of your uncle Dennis troubles the 
castle on your account, and that my being 
roused out of my sleep to-night, since I 
find your honour was not in your cham- 
ber yourself to ring the bell in it, was for 



328 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the purpose of having me come to your 
assistance." 

" Explain yourself," said Donaghue, 
certainly with some indication of anxiety, 
so curious appeared this declaration, from 
what he had himself seen. 

" Why I was fast asleep, your honour, 
when I was suddenly woke, as I was a 
few nights ago, by your honour's chamber 
bell," began the corporal. 

" That bell appears to be quite an ala- 
rum-bell to you, Cormick," observed Do- 
naghue ; " but proceed." 

" Well, your honour, I only waited to 
be certain I was not dreaming by hearing 
it again, to jump out of bed, when catch- 
ing up my cloak, as the readiest thing to 
throw over me, I opened the door, and 
was rushing out, when — holy St. Patrick 
save and defend us ! — there, as plain as I 
now see your honour, I saw the ghost of 
squire Dennis, in his beautiful rustling 
silk nightgown, gliding away from it; 
and, to be sure, I won't deny, that, at such 
a sight, I lost the power of moving, and 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 329 

might not, perhaps, have recovered myself 
yet, but that I suddenly bethought me 
there must be something amiss, or I never 
would have been summoned in such a 
manner; and right enough it now seems 
I was, in thinking so ; and after this, sure 
your honour cannot doubt the castle being 
troubled." 

" It would be odd if I did," said Dona- 
ghue, " with such a restless being as you 
in it. However, as I do certainly think 
there has been something extraordinary 
going on in it to-night, I conceive you 
may as well stretch yourself on the couch 
in my room." 

Cormick was not sorry at the proposal, 
as, after what had happened, he by no 
means relished the thought of going back 
to his own chamber. The object of Do- 
naghue in making it, was to have his as- 
sistance in securing his nocturnal visitant, 
in case he should make his appearance 
again that night, which, all circumstances 
considered, he deemed not unlikely. The 
absurd idea to which he had at first im- 



330 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

puted this, was now given up — to some- 
thing infinitely more serious than he had 
at first imagined, his apparently keeping 
haunting him, as he did, was now ascribed. 
It struck him, from all that had occurred, 
his giving the alarm to Cormick at the 
very moment that he, Donaghue, was sur- 
prised in the library, and then interposing 
to prevent his pursuit of the ruffian into 
the chapel, which, unarmed as he was, Do- 
naghue was now aware would have been 
highly imprudent, that he was a person ac- 
quainted with some scheme of villainy 
against him, and on the watch to prevent 
its being carried into effect. But as it was 
impossible he could always be on the alert 
for this purpose, Donaghue deemed it ab- 
solutely essential to endeavour to secure 
him, should he appear again, since he was 
evidently either afraid or disinclined (and 
the latter seemed to be the case, fi'om the 
manner in which he had tried to allure 
him from his chamber) to reveal what he 
knew, except in some secret place. 

Donaghue, having examined his pistols. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 331 

put on his nightgown, and merely threw 
himself on the bed, leaving a candle, as he 
had latterly been in the habit of doing, 
burning on a table at some little distance 
from it. The couch for the corporal he 
had placed immediately behind the closet- 
door, so that if his mysterious visitant 
should appear, and, as usual, advance into 
the chamber, he hoped, by having him 
stationed there, to have his retreat cut off. 
Of course, that no premature alarm should 
be given, he wished to enjoin the corporal 
to silence ; but in vain he attempted to do 
so; ghosts were an exhaustless topic to 
Cormick; and though Donaghue even 
pretended sleepiness, for the purpose of 
inducing him to be silent, after having re- 
peatedly ordered him, to no effect, to be 
so, he would continue to talk. — " Ah, 
then, your honour !" he suddenly cried, 
after a pause of some minutes, thus disap- 
pointing the hope Donaghue had been 
under of his having at last fallen asleep, 
" does your honour remember poor Ned 
Macguire, my comrade ?" 



332 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" Yes," a little peevishly, replied Dona- 
ghue ; " but what, in the name of wonder, 
has put him, poor fellow ! into your head 
now ?" 

** Why, your honour, what we were 
talking about, speaking of ghosts, brought 
him to my mind, for there is a curious 
story about him and a ghost, the second 
rright of the battle of Waterloo ; but to 
make your honour understand it " 

" I don't want to understand it," said 
Donaghue ; " and I desire, Cormick, you 
will hold your tongue; you are really 
very troublesome to-night, continuing to 
talk in this manner, when I have so often 
told you to be silent." 

" Well, your honour, just let me tell 
you this story, and then I will go to sleep 
in earnest. As I was saying, to make the 
story of the ghost understood, I must in- 
form your honour that Ned had a weak 
side, as who, indeed, is without one, as 
father Murphy often tells us in his ser- 
mons, in order to make us charitable to 
the failings of one another — poor Ned's 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

was having a mighty soft heart towards 
the fair sex; and after falling in love 
Lord knows how often, he fell in love 
again in his own town of Kilkenny — and, 
to be sure, it is he that used to uphold it, 
boasting to his comrades how it is there 
you would see fire without smoke, water 
without mud, and streets paved with mar- 
ble — with a mighty pretty girl there by the 
name of Nelly Keron ; but somehow, with 
all his love, he did not like to marry just 
then, but when he was taking leave of 
her to join his regiment, he bound himself, 
by all the oaths he could think of, never 
to make any one his wife but her, and 
Nelly, in return, said, if he proved false, 
he might be sure of her making away 
with herself, and haunting him." 

" Hush !" cried Donaghue, raising him- 
self on his elbow — " I thought I heard a 
noise." 

" A noise !" repeated the corporal, after 
listening a moment — " tut, your honour! 
no ! or if you did, it was only the rats 
scratching behind this old tapestry. Well, 



834 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

to go on with my story, Ned swore to 
Nelly he would never marry any one but 
her, and, to be sure, being a poor, honest, 
well-intentioned fellow as ever lived, he 
would have kept his word, if nothing had 
tempted him to break it, but it so happen- 
ed, that, in the place where he was quar- 
tered in England, he met with another 
mighty pretty creature of a girl, one Sarah 
Broadhurst, and she drew him on, and on, 
till poor Nelly was almost forgotten ; when, 
how^ever, it came to the point of going 
away, he shewed himself inclined to serve 
her as he had done the other, but faith it 
is in England the girls won't take promises 
for payments, so Miss Sarah said, off or on 
at once — marry, or quit for ever ; and ra- 
ther than lose her, Ned suffered himself 
to be forsworn to poor Nelly." 

" Then there is an end of the story," 
said Donaghue ; " so now go to sleep." 

" An end ! why I have said nothing of 
the ghost yet. Well, as your honour is 
so sleepy, to make a short story of a long 
one, as the saying is, ill news flies apace. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 335 

SO Nelly was not long before she heard of 
what Ned had done, and no sooner did 
she hear it, than what did she do, but walk 
quietly and softly to the river at the foot 
of the castle and drown herself, leaving a 
letter for Ned, reproaching him for his 
perjury, and bidding him remember what 
she told him at parting ; and sure enough 
she kept her word with him, for on the 
second night of the battle of Waterloo, as 
he was talking to one of his comrades, as 
they were resting on their arms, of the 
dismal sights they had seen that day, the 
blood that was spilled, and how many 
-were now lying cold and stiff about them, 
that but the day before were as hearty as 
themselves, and not knowing but that, 
before the next night, it might be the case 
with themselves — as to be sure it was with 
poor Ned — there came up to him a figure 
in a white sheet, with a blue Ian thorn." 

" Have done with this nonsense, Cor- 
mick, I desire," said Donaghue, now out 
of all patience, " or I will positively turn 
you out of the room !" 



336 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" Well, I have done, your honour," and 
he rolled himself up in his great cloak, 
and settled himself to sleep. 

Donaghue had neither wish nor incli- 
nation to follow his example : as he lay 
anxiously on the watch, he endeavoured 
to recollect whether he had ever given, 
even unintentionally, any cause for en- 
mity — of intentionally having done so he 
at once acquitted himself; but he could 
not recall the slightest circumstance to 
mind, that even of this could induce him 
to accuse himself; yet that enmity was 
entertained against him, he could not 
bring himself to doubt, from what had re- 
cently occurred ; and as he yielded to the 
conviction, the extraordinary circumstances 
that had taken place in Spain suddenly re- 
curring to his recollection, he could not 
help believing, from never hut there hav- 
ing had reason to imagine that he had a se- 
cret foe, that whoever was the occasion of 
what had befallen him there, was assuredly 
the contiver of whatever treachery was 
planned against him here. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 337 

This persuasion did not tend, as may 
well be imagined, to lessen his anxiety for 
the discovery he hoped to make, could he 
succeed in securing his mysterious visi- 
tant. In his impatience for an opportunity 
of doing this, he persuaded himself al- 
most, at times, he heard noises ; but still 
he found he had deceived himself, and 
was at length beginning to give up all 
hopes of his appearance that night in his 
chamber, when suddenly, his eye being 
kept fixed on it, he beheld him stealing 
with the greatest caution from the closet. 
— " Hallo ! hallo, corporal !" he cried, in- 
stantly springing from the bed ; and the 
corporal, accustomed to sudden alarms, 
from the life he had led as a soldier, was 
in a moment on his feet ; but he only start- 
ed on them in time to catch a glimpse 
of the figure retreating into the closet, not 
in time, as Donaghue had hoped, to in- 
tercept it. 

** Has he tould your honour — has he 
tould you where his gould is hid ?" de- 

VOL. III. Q 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

manded Cormick, staring wildly at Dona- 
ghue. " I think myself there can be but 
very little doubt but its in the vault under- 
neath the prison, as the safest place ; but 
what signifies guessing, when, to be sure, 
he has tould you about it ?" 

" Who and what are you talking about ?" 
asked Donaghue, decided, by a minute's 
reflection, on not allowing Cormick to yet 
know what he actually thought, since the 
object for which he retained him in his 
chamber had not been accomplished, lest, 
through over anxiety and zeal about him, 
some premature alarm might be given, 
that might be the means of finally pre- 
venting; Avhat he wished. 

" Holy saints! The ghost of squire 
Dennis to be sure ! Hadn't I a glimpse of 
his yellow silk nightgown this instant, as 
he was vanishing away into the closet? 
and don't T know what he came for? don't 
I know that it was to get rest for himself, 
by discovering where his money is hid? 
and don't I know, besides, that it has al- 
ways been believed, by every one about 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 339 

here, that he would yet be the making of 
some one belonging to the castle, by yet 
telling them of it ? and if ever he meant 
to do a kindness, this is the time, when 
there has been so much wrong and rob- 
bery out of doors; and people are yet 
quite young and hearty, and able to spend 
what they get with comfort and satisfac- 
tion to themselves and their friends." 

" Take my advice, Cormick," said Dona- 
ghue, " and return to your couch, for your 
head really seems bewildered, and you 
look, besides, as white as a ghost yourself, 
this instant." For, notwithstanding the 
corporal's delight at the discovery he per- 
suaded himself had taken place, he could 
not help his nerves being a little affected 
by the extraordinary manner in which, as 
he conceived, it had been made. " I am 
ashamed to see a brave fellow, who stood 
undaunted at the whizzing of balls, and 
the flashing of sabres about his head, now 
shaking with fancies that would disgrace 
a nursery-maid." 

q2I 



340 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

"And I didn't see the ghost of squire 
Dennis," said the corporal, in a tone of 
disappointment, " nor hear him halloing 
to me to get up, and help you to dig for 
thegould?" 

" Just as much as you now see mine, 
or hear me telling you to pull down the 
castle ; so try to compose your spirits, by 
a little sleep ; and remember, I charge you, 
not to let any thing that has occurred to- 
night, on any account whatever, transpire, 
for reasons which I shall hereafter explain ; 
but the morning is now breaking, and as 
I really feel fatigued, I wish to get a little 
repose before the hour for rising." 

The first thing that Donaghue did, the 
next morning after breakfast, was to take 
a stroll amongst the cabins in the neigh- 
bourhood, to try whether he could make 
a discovery of any stranger having been 
lately seen in it ; but his inquiries, though 
made with the greatest caution, procured 
him no satisfaction ; and he was very much 
inclined to believe, that he must depend 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 341 

on his nocturnal visitant for the elucida- 
tion of what appeared so mysterious. 

This belief confirmed the resolution he 
had by this time formed, of no more ap- 
pearing to regard him with suspicion. 
Every matter considered, to do so any 
longer would, he conceived, be the height 
of egregious folly, since, if his purposes 
had been evil, in how different a manner 
would he assuredly have acted ! The great 
hazard he had incurred of his life, by the 
manner in which he had obtruded him- 
self on his notice, not only tended to con- 
vince Donaghue that there must be some- 
thing very important to communicate, 
but that he must be a person actuated by 
no common feelings of interest about him ; 
and finally he decided, against his next 
visit, for he made sure of seeing him again, 
on being prepared to follow him from his 
chamber, should he still seem determined 
on not making that the scene for reveal- 
ing any thing to him. 

His mind made up on this point, his 
thoughts gradually reverted to other mat- 



342 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ters, and impelled by anxiety and complai- 
sance, he at length ordered his curricle, 
and drove to the Vale by himself, both 
his companions having taken themselves 
off immediately after breakfast — the doc- 
tor to scold with lady Magennis, over his 
ill luck of the preceding night, and Mel- 
ville to see what might occur from a chance 
meeting with Lavinia. 



END OF VOL. III. 



Printed by J. Darling, Leadenhall-Street, London. 
TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 



Primed by J. Darlmg, Lcadenhall-Street, Loiidoii. 



THE 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE; 

OB, 

SCENES IN THE EMERALD ISLE. 
IN FOUR VOLUMES. 



BY 

REGINA MARIA ROCHE, 

AUTHOR OF 

THE CHILDREN' OF THE ABBEY, VICAR OF LANSDOWN, MAID OF THE 
H.\MIJET, he. 



" Ob Erin, luy cooiUry ! though sad and t'OTEakeii, 

In dreanis I rerbit iLy sea-beaten shore; 

Eot, alas ! in a far foreiga land I awaken, 

Aud sigh for the frieuda who can ir.ttl me no more.** 



VOL. IV. 



•*»Pt»^^<^>*«:f- 



london: 

PRINTED FOB 

A. K. MV. M,^ AND CO. LEADENHALL-STBEET. 
1824. 



2^3 



THE 

TRADITION OF THE CASTLE 



CHAPTER I. 



** The ways of Providence are dark and intricate, 
Puzzled in mazes, and perplex'd with errors ; 
Our understanding traces them in vain, 
L<»st and bewilder'd in the fruitless search; 
Nor sees with how much art the windings run, 
Nor where the regular confusion ends." 

vJN reaching the Vale, Donaghue was 
informed the whole party were out in the 
grounds ; he hesitated a moment, and then 
flinging the reins to Cormick, sprung from 
the curricle, and set out in quest of them. 
Should fortune prove sufficiently propi- 
tious to let him meet Miss Erin by her- 

VOL. IV. B 



2 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

self, he determined, if possible, on leading 
to some explanation with her ; and, in con- 
sequence, looked and listened for her in 
every direction. 

The day was lovely, a summer one, 
without being overpowering; and, as he 
advanced amidst the enchantments of the 
place, a feeling of serenity, not lately ex- 
perienced, stole over his mind. The soft 
verdure of the ground, the fragrance of 
the flowers, that poured forth profuse over 
hill and dale, enamelling it, the freshness 
that every thing breathed, the luxuriance 
of the woods, thronged with sportive birds, 
the sparkling of the running rivulets in 
the sunbeams, formed, altogether, a scene 
of beauty and delight, that had an inde- 
scribable effect upon his feelings. In his 
enjoyment of it, he almost unconsciously 
loitered at times, as if, the moment he 
quitted it, he expected to be plunged a- 
gain into the agitation from which he 
seemed for an instant to have escaped; but 
the idea that was connected with it, asso- 
ciated with all that soothed and enchanted 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 3 

in it, would perhaps have imputed an al- 
most equal charm to any other place. 

He had proceeded a considerable way 
without meeting any one, when, as he was 
slowly approaching a beautifully seques- 
tered cottage, recently erected under the 
direction of Miss Erin, near the channel of 
a stream, that, bursting in a picturesque 
manner through an arch of rock, covered 
over with ivy, seemed impatient, from the 
rapidity of its current, to gain the tranquil 
mazes of a dale at some little distance, 
one of the Miss Magennises, darting 
out of it, came flying towards him, and 
telling him she had not a moment to spare 
to speak to him, as her mother was wait- 
ing for her in another part of the grounds, 
but that, if he washed to see Miss Erin, 
he would find her in the cottage by her- 
self, rapidly passed him without another 
w^ord. 

Delighted at the intimation, Donaghue 
hastened onward, but stopped, irresolute, 
just within the cottage. Exactly opposite 
B 2 



4 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

to him was the entrance to another apart- 
ment, and immediately within this he 
caught a ghmpse of Miss Erin, reading, 
with her back towards him, and, appa- 
rently, so attentively, that, uncertain as he 
was of the reception he might meet with 
from her, he knew not how to venture at 
any thing like an intrusion on her. 

While earnestly watching for some 
movement that might give him a hope of 
being discovered, approaching footsteps 
made him turn round, and, with a sensa- 
tion of surprise that may well be imagined, 
he beheld the very being whom he thought 
he had been watching within a short dis- 
tance of the cottage, unaccompanied by 
any one but lord Altidore, and with whom 
she seemed in earnest conversation. 

Donaghue now earnestly sought to as- 
certain who was the person really in the 
cottage, and a slight alteration in her posi- 
tion giving him an opportunity of obtain- 
ing a glimpse of her face, he discovered it 
was, as he strongly suspected, lady Jane. 
Indignant at the trick that had been play- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 5 

ed him, he rushed from the cottage ; and, 
from knowing he could not have done so 
without being seen by her, turned in the 
direction to meet jNIiss Erin. She evi- 
dently tried to meet him with her usual 
manner; but her smile was so forced, her 
air of pleasure so extremely languid, that 
Donaghue could not help feeling both 
awkward and embarrassed; and his em- 
barrassment, it may be supposed, was not 
lessened, when, just after he had replied 
in the negative, to her interrogatory of 
whether he had found any of their party 
in the cottage, either from a hope that she 
had no intention of entering it, or else a 
feeling that would not let him utter the 
name of lady Jane, her ladyship appeared 
issuing from it. — " So I suppose you 
thought I was lost," she cried, addressing 
herself to Miss Erin ; " but really when I 
left you, to look for the book I had forgot 
in the cottage, I had no idea of being de- 
tained so long in it, by finding " 

" Oh, don't apologize !" said Miss Erin, 
interrupting her; "there's not the slight- 



b TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

est occasion ; our coming this way was 
merely because lord Altidore knew no- 
thing before of this approach to the grotto 
— adieu!" kissing her hand to her — "If 
you and ]VIr. O'Brien," slightly glancing 
at him, " have any wish to join us, you 
will find us there with my mother " 

Donaghue stood for a moment looking 
after her, as resuming, of her own accord^ 
the arm of lord Altidore, she passed on ; 
and might have continued longer doing 
so, but for lady Jane's approaching him ; 
he directly turned av/ay, unable to control 
the feeling of anger, to say nothing of any 
other which she had excited, and hastily 
making his way back to the house, sprung 
into the curricle, with a determination to 
give up, as much as possible, for the re- 
mainder of the time he continued in the 
neighbourhood, his intercourse at the Vale. 
As soon as ever the departure of his 
friends left him at liberty to act as he 
wished, he firmly decided on leaving Al- 
toir-na-Grenie, convinced that nothing but 
his quitting the neighbourhood could, af- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 7 

ter the many embarrassing circumstances 
that had occurred, prove that his asser- 
tions, with regard to lady Jane, were nei- 
ther trifling or insincere. 

But long before the period for reesta- 
blishing hi Qi self in the good opinion of 
those whose esteem was so indispensable to 
him, with what indifference might ^liss 
Erin view the circumstance ! The earnest 
conversation in which she had been en- 
gaged with lord Altidore, the familiarity 
of her manner towards him, both were re- 
garded with the exaggerating eye of jea- 
lousy, as proofs of either a growing pre- 
ference for him, or a wish to dispose her 
heart to the admission of sentiments fa- 
vourable to him, from a conviction, Dona- 
ghue made no doubt, that those she had 
previously given way to for another, were 
such as the unworthiness of the object for 
whom they had been entertained demand- 
ed her conquering. And this was the 
work of lady Jane, destroying him thus in 
her opinion — but complaints, invectives, 
were useless, and indeed degrading ; and 



8 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

he strove to divert his mind from the sense 
of unhappiness that oppressed it, by turn- 
ing his thoughts on the mystery, it ap- 
peared to him, so essential to have deve- 
loped. 

In expectation of the visit he was so 
anxious for, he kept a light burning all 
night in his chamber, his pistols carefully 
loaded, and with his sword beside him; 
and instead of going to bed, merely lay 
down in his morning wrapper beneath the 
counterpane, thus prepared to rise, and 
follow his mysterious visitant, should it 
positively be required. Two successive 
nights passed away without seeing him, 
when, on the third, quite exhausted by 
this mode of acting, he was on the point 
of rising, for the purpose of undressing, 
and actually getting into bed, when a 
rustling noise in the closet checked the 
movement, and the next instant, just as 
he had grasped a pistol, he beheld the 
semblance of his uncle Dennis cautiously 
stealing from it. Donaghue stirred not 
till he saw him at the foot of the bed^ 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 9 

looking in at him through the curtains, 
when, raising himself in it — " What is the 
meaning of all this, my friend ?" he said ; 
" you must be aware that, from your con- 
duct, I should be fully warranted in treat- 
ing you in a very dififerent manner to that 
in which I am now doing ; but something 
like a persuasion that it is not the result 
of any evil design, checks me from having, 
as yet, any recourse to violence ; but, rely 
on it, I will not be longer trifled with ; if, 
therefore, you have any thing to commu- 
nicate, it imports you, for your own sake, 
to no longer delay the disclosure; as, be 
assured, this is the last opportunity you 
will have of revealing it as a friend." 

The figure listened with the most pro- 
found attention till he had done speaking, 
when, uplifting its hands and eyes, it 
seemed calling on Heaven to attest the 
purity of its intentions ; then turning its 
looks again upon him, it motioned him, 
with the most earnest gesticulations, to rise 
and follow to the closet to which it pointed* 
£3 



10 TRADITION OF THE CASTLIT. 

Donaghue, as previously decided, could 
no longer hesitate to comply with this si- 
lent but expressive entreaty ; whatever 
was the secret that was lodged in the breast 
of his visitor, he clearly saw that nothing 
would force it thence but compliance with 
what was required, and his curiosity was 
by this time quite too strongly excited to 
permit any persistance in refusing this; 
accordingly, getting out of bed, he pre- 
pared himself to attend him, by securing 
one pistol and sword within the belt of his 
wrapper, and taking the other in his hand:. 

The figure remained motionless in the 
chamber till it saw him ready to follow, 
when, darting into the closet before him, 
it vanished from his view ; but in an in- 
stant the aperture in the floor through 
which it had disappeared was revealed, by 
the pushing up of a trapdoor, and Dona- 
ghue looking down, beheld a narrow flight 
of stairs, at the bottom of which stood the 
figure, holding up a lamp in one hand, 
and with the other beckoning him to de- 
scend. Donaghue obeyed the motion, and 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 11 

the trapdoor was then pulled down by 
the same means by which it had been 
raised, a long iron rod, fastened to a ring 
in it 

The figure, with the greatest celerity, 
was now preparing to lead the way down 
another flight of steps, when it was check- 
ed by Donaghue's pausing for an instant 
— " Before I proceed," he said, " let me re- 
mind you of what you saw above ; give 
me the slightest reason to believe that I 
have been wrong in the confidence I re- 
posed in you, and that instant," holding 
up the pistol to his view, " is your last." 

The other nodded, as much as to say, if 
he merited punishment, he was satisfied to 
meet with it; and, putting his finger to 
his lips, in token of silence, again beckon- 
ed to him to follow. 

Donaghue no longer hesitated, when, 
after taking what he was convinced was 
nearly half the circuit of the castle, his 
conductor suddenly stopped, and pointing 
to a door, beneath which a glimmering 
light was seen, motioned to him to 



12 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

listen at it. For a moment Donaghue 
could only hear the clamorous voices of 
two men, each striving to be heard above 
the other; at length, he plainly distin- 
guished, in a tone that almost instantly 
struck him he had heard before — " What, 
you ungrateful rascal, do you hesitate at 
such a trifling matter as this, after all I 
have done for you and yours ! Would you 
have a hole for yourself or your family to 
shelter yourselves in, but for my genero- 
sity ?" 

" Why, then, upon my soul and con- 
science, I wish I had never earned such 
generosity, for I don't think I shall ever 
have any luck, or grace, or be happy 
again, after being concerned in the rob- 
bery of the discindant of the great king 
Brien Boru. What signifies what I have 
got for concealing from the young master 
the roguery of your father, since you talk 
so much about it ?" 

" Roguery ! you villain, do you say ?" 
" Pooh, pooh ! what signifies your at- 
tempting to humbug me? Do you think. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. IS 

because I haven't got as much larning as 
yourself (and, God knows, you have made 
a bad use of it), I don't know right from 
WTong as well as another? What else 
but roguery should I call your ould fa- 
ther's making the poor master that's dead 
and gone keep out of the way in England, 
that he might know nothing of what he 
was doing here, or find out that the long 
leases he coaxed him to grant, of almost 
the whole estate, for the sake of raising a 
little money, which he took care enough, 
however, he should never finger, w^ere 
made out to himself, from there being no 
such man as he had them drawn out for 
in the world !" 

" The short and the long of it is — am I 
to understand," asked the other, " that 
you will not assist me any further in this 
business? You are a sensible man, Der- 
mot; if I hadn't thought so, I wouldn't 
have placed the confidence in you I have 
done, because a fool is never to be trusted, 
neither knowing how to keep his own se- 
crets, or those of any other person ; and 



14 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

if I wished it, I see there would be no 
use in trying to deceive, or impose in any 
way upon you. The leases, as you say, 
that my father got the late Mr. O'Brien 
to grant, are not worth a rush, since they 
never could be legally executed, from hav- 
ing been made out for fictitious people; 
and that is the very reason I want to get 
this young man out of the way, for, after 
being led to think I was secure of a fine 
fortune, and the O'Brien one is certainly 
a noble inheritance, would it not be hard 
that I should find myself mistaken ? and 
there is no knowing the moment that 
might be the case, since there are always 
busy people in the world, interfering in 
what does not concern them ; and if once 
young O'Brien began to suspect, to be 
sure he would never rest till he came at 
the truth ; and then, Dermot, where would 
be the thirty acres of good land I promised 
you, whenever I saw him snugly laid be- 
side his father?" 

From the silence of a few minutes that 
ensued, this question seemed to occasion 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 15 

some consideration in the mind of Der- 
mot. — " Well, and may I make myself 
sure, then, of your keeping your word 
with me?" he then demanded; " not but 
I dislike the notion of having any hand in 
taking away the life of the young master, 
the last of his race, as one may say. — But 
perhaps Delaney will do the job, and so 
save me from having any thing to do with 
it, barring my knowing about it, to be 
sure." 

" Perhaps he may ; but if he does not 
accomplish it to-night, 1 shall depend no 
longer on him." 

" Yet he undertook the job readily 
enough," observed the other. 

" Yes ; but what signifies that, if he 
never executes it ? Here he has been keep- 
ing us in expectation every night for these 
three weeks and upwards, and still he 
comes back to us with an idle story of one 
time being obliged to fly, by hearing a 
bell ring, and another from finding O'Bri- 
en's man in the room with his master !" 

" Well, and it may be all true enough 



16 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

what he said ; for sure the other night, 
when I made certain of drawing O'Brien 
to the chapel, where you were ready your- 
self to do his business for him, didn't some 
devilment or other hinder his pursuing 
me?" 

" Ay, devilment indeed you may well 
say ! and only that Barney took an oath, 
that I know he would not dare to break, 
not to betray us, I should almost be tempt- 
ed to think he had given some hint." 

*' Oh ! the sorrow bit of him," interrup- 
ted the other; " and I can't help laughing 
when I think of the way the ould fox took 
to prevent any alarm, in case he was caught 
prowling about the castle, dressing him- 
self up in the ould silk nightgown he 
rummaged out of some of the ould stores 
of the castle, for he knows every hole and 
corner in it, to pass for the ghost of squire 
Dennis, come to discover about his crock 
of money." 

What the surprise of Donaghue was, at 
learning, as he did from these words, to 
whom he was so much indebted, may ea- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 17 

sier be conceived than described, he had 
so little knowledge of this man, and from 
what he had heard, would have deemed 
it so improbable, that he could have been 
the contriver of any scheme of the kind. 
With a start of exclamation, he hastily 
turned his eyes upon his companion, and at 
length obtaining what he had hitherto vain- 
ly essayed doing, a perfect view of his fea- 
tures, recognised in them the haggard ones 
indeed of Barney Delaney, the wretched 
old man for whom his humanity had been 
interested, on discovering him apparently 
on the point of being hurried out of life, 
either through the stupidity or w^ant of 
feeling of his wife. — " Good God !" he soft- 
ly ejaculated, involuntarily extending his 
hand. 

The other received it with a gush of 
tears, and for a moment seemed nearly 
overcome by his emotions; then endea- 
vouring to compose himself, he whispered 
to Donaghue what his further plan was; 
and without further delay, proceeded to 



18 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

admit himself to the room where the two 
villains were. 

Donaghue stood in a direction to allow 
him to see into it, as he opened the door, 
and with feelings more of indignation than 
surprise, from having begun to suspect it 
would prove so, in the person of O'Cal- 
laghan's son he discovered his Spanish ac- 
quaintance, don Callan, a circumstance 
that no longer permitted him to be at a 
loss to account for what had befallen him 
at Seville, the strange peculiarities of this 
gentleman's manner, neither the familia- 
rity of the voice to him he had just heard. 

" Well, you are come at last !" exclaim- 
ed don Callan, or O'Callaghan, on Barney's 
entrance; " if you had delayed much lon- 
ger, I should have left this in quest of 
you. But I hope you are not come back, 
as usual, with a cock and a bull story of 
being frightened here, and scared there, 
but to tell us at last the job is done?" 

" At last !" repeated Barney, dropping 
into one of the old seats that remained 
still in the place, as if utterly exhausted 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 19 

by emotion, ** at last, what I undertook is 
done." 

" God be praised !" impiously exclaimed 
O'Callaghan." 

" Amen !" responded Barney. 

** Well, you are an honest fellow, after 
all, Barney; and depend on't you shan't 
repent this night's business." 

" No, I am not afraid of that," replied 
Barney. 

" But may I indeed believe you ?" 

" I won't say another word," cried Bar- 
ney, " but that if you ever hear another 
word out of the mouth of young O'Brien, 
I give you leave to say I am not the man 
you took me for." 

" And it's done !" cried Dermot, in a 
bewailing tone, and as if awaking from a 
stupefaction. " Oh, well, well, well! this 
is the worst news I ever heard — to think 
that he who was so young and so comely, 
should be made food for w^orms before his 
time ! Now that it's done, wh^t wouldn't 
I give to have it undone! The thirty 
acres of land I have been promised, and 



20 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

thirty and thirty more to the back of them, 
for what good will they do me, when I 
know there's innocent blood crying out 
against me? and that at every turn I take, 
I shall think I see his ghost? and — and 
there ! — there it is already !" he shrieked, in 
all the indescribable agony of guilty terror, 
as, at the instant, his eyes encountered the 
tall and not unghostlike figure of Dona- 
ghue, enveloped as he was in his long 
morning wrapper, rearing itself above the 
head of Barney — " there it is !" and stag- 
gering back a few paces, he dropped in 
convulsions on the floor.- 

" Idiot!" exclaimed O'Callaghan; yet 
as he spoke, his own eye, as if involunta- 
rily, glanced slowly round the chamber, 
and, with a look of indescribable horror, 
he recoiled, as if to take shelter in the 
wall at the apparition it encountered ; but 
almost instantly recovering himself — " We 
are betrayed!" he almost shrieked, and 
was turning to seize a pistol that was 
near him, when Donaghue rushed upon 
him. On finding himself in his grasp, all 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 21 

his courage forsook him, and — " Have 
mercy ! have mercy !" he exclaimed, in 
the most abject tone ; " don't murder me, 
and I'll own " 

" Miserable, degraded WTetch !" cried 
Donaghue, " instantaneous death would 
be too great a mercy, from the horrors it 
would save you ; but it rests not with me 
to inflict the punishment due to your 
crimes. — Delaney, alarm the castle, that 
proper assistance may be obtained for se- 
curing these villains." 

" Stop, stop, Delaney !" cried the trem- 
bling wretch, in agony. " Mr. O'Brien, 
have mercy — have pity ! oh, do not — on 
my bended knees I implore — let me be 
dragged to an ignominious death ! if, on 
no other account, for the sake of my soul 
have compassion ! let me not be hurried 
out of life without having time to repent 
for ray sins !" 

** And what time were you inclined to 
allow me for this ?" demandejOonaghue ; 
" in planning my destruction, what consi- 
deration did you bestow on sending me to 



'^2 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

my dread account, with all my imperfec- 
tions on my head ? No, villain ! it would 
be to rob justice of her right — to commit 
a wrong against society, to let such a 
wretch escape the punishment he merits 
in this life ; so again I say, Delaney " 

" No ! no !" shrieked the wretch, " spare 
me, and on my soul I swear " 

" Wretch !" indignantly exclaimed Do- 
naghue, " do not mock your Creator, by 
swearing by that on which you set no va- 
lue; for had you set any value on your 
immortal soul, would you have dared the 
perpetration of such crimes as you have 
meditated ?" 

" I have been a great — a terrible sinner !" 
cried the other, finding that no subterfuge 
would avail; " but it is in my power to 
make amends for all I did, or meant to do. 
All shall be your own again : the leases, 
the long arrears of rent now due to you, 
restitution, in short, of every thing that 
you were defrauded of through my father, 
shall be made you, if you but relinquish 
your design of giving me up to punish- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 23 

ment. And consider, consider," be add- 
ed, seeing Donaghue, as he imagined, he- 
sitate, " consider, that if you persevere in 
what may be your present intention, in 
exposing the villainy of me and mine to 
public scorn and contempt, so must you 
also the folly and imprudence of your own 
father; for if possessed of common sense 
or feeling, that regard for his family that 
ought to have been the case, could he, or 
would he, have acted in the manner he 
did?" 

Donaghue started at an appeal so in- 
controvertible ; and after a little conside- 
ration, not sorry, perhaps, to have a pre- 
text, in filial reverence, for yielding to 
mercy — " Well," he said, " supposing I 
could prevail on myself to hearken to your 
entreaties, how can I be certain that you 
will fulfil what you have promised?" 

*• Easily. There's a box now hid in the 
place w^here I lodge, containing every pa- 
per requisite for you to ohVdtt possession 
of, together with notes to the amount of 
what I acknowledge myself indebted to 



24 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

you. Say I have nothing further to dread 
from your just indignation, and I am con- 
tent to remain your prisoner here till 
Barney, whom in that case I shall imme- 
diately instruct where to find it, shall have 
delivered it into your hands, and the con- 
tents of it have undergone an examina- 
tion." 

" Well," said Donaghue, after a pause 
of some minutes, " on these conditions I 
consent to let you escape, with a hope that 
the life that is spared may be so passed in 
future, as to render you better prepared 
to resign it into the hands of your Creator 
than you are now." 

0*Callaghan, with all the celerity of an 
overjoyed wretch, now hastened to instruct 
Delaney where the box was to be found, 
giving at the same time to Donaghue the 
key belonging to it ; and Donaghue, hav- 
ing taken the necessary precautions for se- 
curing him, and satisfied himself that the 
other misjjable wretch was recovering, 
quitted the place. 

Day was now breaking, and Delaney 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 25 

w^s not long in executing his commission. 
By the time he returned, ^lelville was 
prepared to witness Donaghue's examina- 
tion of the box he delivered to him. Its 
contents agreed with O'Callaghan's state- 
ment; and Donaghue, satisfied of this, 
forthwith proceeded, accompanied by Mel- 
ville, who almost looked as if he consider- 
ed all he had heard as a fable, so extraor- 
dinary did it appear, and attended by 
Cormick and Delaney, to fulfil his promise 
to him. But his curiosity was too strong- 
ly excited by many things that had oc- 
curred, not to induce him to put some 
questions to him, ere he suffered him to 
depart ; amongst others, w^hat the cause of 
that rancorous enmity to him was, that 
occasioned him to attempt his life ? 

" From you, Mr. O'Brien," replied 
O'Callaghan, coolly, now that personal 
fears were over, having completely recol- 
lected himself, " I should hardly have ex- 
pected such a question, since both reading 
and observation, I should have conceived, 

VOL. IV. c 



26 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

must have taught you that we always hate 
those we are conscious of having injured ; 
your very name was a reproach to me, 
from the feehngs it never failed of awa- 
kening ; and whilst you were in existence, 
I knew not the moment in which I might 
be compelled to restore what I was so 
anxious to retain." 

" But how is it," said Donaghue, " that 
you seemed to have a personal knowledge 
of me, as, from some expressions I recol- 
lect to have dropt from you, appeared 
to be the case, before our meeting on the 
Continent, as, till then, I have no con- 
sciousness of ever seeing you ?" 

" That is very likely, from the circum- 
stances under which you saw me ; but, to 
make you understand matters, I must 
trouble you with a brief outline of my 
story. Ambition and avarice were early 
implanted in my heart ; my father taught 
me, that, without a certain rank, neglect 
and scorn were sure of being our portion, 
and that, without wealth, there could be 
no enjoyment in life. What his plans 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 27 

were for me I knew not, but while I was 
yet a boy, he was invited to send me over 
to a relation in the wine business in Spain, 
with a promise that, if he did, I should 
succeed to whatever this relative was pos- 
sessed of The temptation to accept the 
invitation was too great to permit him to 
refuse it. I went to Spain, and, in the 
course of a few years, found myself, through 
the death of my kinsman, in what certain- 
ly should have been a handsome indepen- 
dence to me ; but I had by this time con- 
tracted a taste for expence and pleasure, 
that, instead of allowing me to turn his 
bequest to any good account, led me to 
spend it in idle wanderings about the Con- 
tinent, where I gradually became acquaint- 
ed and connected with a set of the most 
worthless and depraved characters. 

" With a set of these sharpers, for they 
merited no other denomination, I at length 
repaired to London, to try what the exer- 
cise of my wits would do for me there ; and 
there, through the insinuations of my fa- 
c 2 



28 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ther, whose views on your paternal inhe- 
ritance were by this time disclosed to me, 
I laid myself out to become acquainted 
with yours, for the double purpose of try- 
ing to discover whether he was yet begin- 
ning to have any suspicion of the villainy 
that was practising against him in Ireland, 
or could be allured into any further act of 
imprudence, that might accelerate his 
ruin, or, in other words, drive him to some 
deed of desperation. 

" No wonder you regard me with such 
horror — but 1 will be as brief as possible. 
How I succeeded, under the name of don 
Callan, in introducing myself to your fa- 
ther's notice, and gradually insinuating my- 
self into his confidence, it would be tedious 
to relate ; suffice it to say, I perfectly suc- 
ceeded in my designs; but apprehensive, 
notwithstanding the change from boyhood 
to manhood, some one of the family might 
recognise me, though he did not, I care- 
fully abstained from visiting at his house, 
under one pretext or other, continuing to 
meet him only at the coffee-houses or ta- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 29 

verns he frequented, and thus you had no 
opportunity of seeing me. 

" At length I accomplished my grand 
object, of introducing him to my associ- 
ates but I see, by your changing coun- 
tenance, you anticipate what I am about 
adding.— On the fatal night you followed 
him to the gambling-house, I was indeed, 
as usual, of the party ; and there I saw 
you, under circumstances too agitating to 
allow you to notice any one particularly, 
but which impressed your image upon my 
imagination in such a manner, as would 
have rendered it almost impossible, I be- 
lieve, for you, under any disguise, to have 
escaped my recognition. 

" From what followed there, as this was 
known to be one of my haunts, and my 
person was well known about town, I 
deemed it unsafe to continue in the king- 
dom. Hardly had I returned to the Con- 
tinent, ere I received an account of my 
father's death, with a letter, written some 
short time before it, importing, that upon 
his decease, I would find nearly the whole 



30 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

of the estate of Altoir-na-Grenie vested in 
me, but in such a way as would require 
the greatest caution on my side in making 
good my claim to it. In a word, he so 
alarmed me, with fears of losing what his 
villainy had acquired for me, that the hor- 
rible idea of ridding myself of them by 
your death suggested itself to me. Once 
conceived, I determined never to rest till 
I had carried it into effect. I will not fa- 
tigue you by recapitulating all the me- 
thods I had recourse to for the accomplish- 
ment of this diabolical design; suffice it, 
from that period 1 almost became your 
shadow. But well as I thought all my 
plans laid for your destruction, still 1 found 
them defeated, as if by an invisible power ; 
and surely it was by an invisible power — 
by that Almighty Providence that still 
interposes its protecting shield between 
the arrow of the villain and the heart of 
the virtuous. 

" At last, my patience becoming nearly 
exhausted, I would probably have risked 
something desperate, when the battle of 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 31 

Waterloo took place, and in the hurry and 
confusion of such a scene, I conceived I 
should at length find a favourable oppor- 
tunity for accomplishing my design. How 
I succeeded in obtaining the disguise of a 
trooper, for the purpose of lying in wait 
for this, it matters not to say ; again I was 
disappointed, and following you accord- 
ingly to Paris, there laid the scheme of 
entrapping you to Seville, where I had 
confederates ready to assist me in any plan 
of villainy, and wishing, all along, through 
considerations for my personal safety, ra- 
ther to effect your destruction through 
treachery than violence. 

" Finding you had again escaped m) 
snares, I pursued you hither; but here, 
without assistance, I found it next to im- 
possible to execute my design, and by de- 
grees, therefore, was led to break it to 
Dermot and Delaney, both agents in all 
the villainy of my late father; the one 
through necessity, I believe, and the other 
from resentment at his dismission from the 
castle. By bribes and promises I gradu- 



32 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ally won them over to my purpose; at 
least apparently so, for, whether he was all 
along deceiving me, or his ultimately do- 
ing so was occasioned by some sudden 
compunction of conscience, Delaney him- 
self can better explain than I can." 

The departure of O'Callaghan was no 
longer delayed. Donaghue was indeed 
quite as impatient for it as he was him- 
self, so hateful was the sight of a wretch 
reviving the painful recollections he did, 
and so disgusted was he by the little feel- 
ing of shame which his quick restoration 
to coolness evinced. 

Having allowed him to escape the pu- 
nishment he merited, of course there could 
be no thought of inflicting it on the mise- 
rable being of whose necessities he had 
taken so terrible an advantage. Dermot, 
now restored to himself, with fear and 
trembling threw himself on his mercy, 
and which, after a due admonition, was 
granted, with a promise of future relief, if 
there was reason to believe there was pro- 
per repentance for the past ; what he had 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 33 

overheard from him, at the moment when 
he was led to believe the diabolical scheme 
against him had been carried into effect, 
not having been lost upon Donaghue. 

The scene closed with Delaney's con- 
fessing he knew not how he might finally 
have decided on acting, but for the feel- 
ings of gratitude and compunction awa- 
kened by the accidental visit of Donaghue 
to his cabin. — " From that day," he said, 
" when I had so much reason to think 
your honour was the means of preventing 
my miserable life from being hurried out 
of me, and that I saw what your generous 
heart was, from the relief you directly af- 
forded me, and your offer to serve me, 
spite of the stories that were told against 
me, I felt that I would rather let myself 
be shot through the head, than any longer 
think of any mischief against you." 

" With such feelings for me, it seems 
strange to me, Delaney," said Donaghue, 
" that you should not at once have dis* 
closed the plot against me." 
c 3 



34 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" Oh, your honour, I couldn't, because 
I was sworn !" 

" Sworn !" 

" Yes, your honour, not to open my 
lips about it." 

" And is it possible, that a man of your 
good sense could possibly think yourself 
bound, either by religion or morality, to 
keep an oath of such a description! an 
oath is a solemn appeal to Heaven, to wit- 
ness the purity and sincerity of our inten- 
tions ; and how could you call Heaven to 
witness the violation of its most sacred 
commandments ?" 

" I can't pretend to argue with your 
honour," answered Barney, " but I have 
been always tould that an oath is an oath ; 
that is, that when once you are sworn not 
to tell a thing, it is black perjury to do 
so ; and so I couldn't, no how, tell your 
honour what was plotting against you; 
but since I couldn't open my lips about it, 
I set my brains to work, to think how I'd 
contrive, for all that, to let you know it, 
and so at last I hit upon the plan of dress- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 35 

ing myself up as the ghost of squire Den- 
nis, hoping you'd be tempted, from the 
story you heard about that, to follow me 
to the place where you'd be able to disco- 
ver all by just listening yourself" 

" And you don't call this breaking your 
oath, Delaney ?" 

" No, your honour, since I never open- 
ed my lips about what I was bound to 
conceal." 

" Well, well, I'll take another opportu- 
nity of speaking of the nature of the obli- 
gations of oaths; in the mean time, I hope 
this will be a caution to you how you 
bind yourself to any thing again, without 
first duly weighing the nature of it, since, 
you see, from having done so, with all 
your wish to save me, you might have 
failed of doing so." 

" Then I am sure I should never have 
known peace again in this world," said 
Barney; ** and indeed I must do Nelly 
the justice to say, bad as she is, it was not 
her fault that I didn't tell your honour at 
once, for she knew every thing that was 



36 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

going on, and what friends we'd be ma- 
king of her ladyship, if we proved ourselves 
friends to you." 

" Her ladyship ! who do you mean by 
that?" demanded Donaghue. 

" Why, lady Jane Morley, your ho- 
nour; doesn't your honour know that 
Nelly nursed her? Troth, and she did, 
though my lady, somehow, herself, in go- 
ing to England, seemed to forget it a lit- 
tle ; but since she's come back, Nelly has 
been so much backwards and forwards 
lately with her, she's beginning to do a 
little for us again." 

" Did Nelly," asked Donaghue, struck 
with a sudden idea, " ever mention any 
thing about me to her, do you know?" 

" Why, since I am not sworn to secresy 
now," replied Delaney, a little archly, " to 
tell you the truth, I believe she did. 
Hearing — no offence, I liope, to your ho- 
nour — that there was a liking between her 
ladyship and your honour, she thought 
what a pleasure it would be to my lady to 
hear that you were about getting back your 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 37 

own fine fortune, and so she told her you 
were, but not exactly how, only through 
great discoveries that were about being 
made." 

Here was a light thrown on a subject 
that had hitherto puzzled Donaghue, 
namely, lady Jane's apparently persevering 
attachment to him, as he knew she was 
by no means of a romantic disposition; 
and in ceasing to give her credit for the 
only thing that could have excused the in- 
decorum of her conduct, he became dou- 
bly disgusted by this conduct. But the 
tumult of his mind was too great at pre- 
sent to permit more than a transient 
thought to be bestowed on this ; so sud- 
den, so unexpected had been his restora- 
tion to the fortune of his ancestors, to say 
nothing of the extraordinary means by 
which this restoration had been effected, 
that there were moments when the ardent 
congratulations that were pouring in on 
every side, the loud rejoicings that met 
his ear wherever he turned, were requisite 
to persuade him of the reality of what had 



38 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

happened — what a proof, the sudden re- 
verse he was destined to experience, that 
despair should never find a place in the 
human heart, since we know not the mo- 
ment when the scene may shift, and a 
bright and glorious one succeed to that on 
which we gazed with such gloomy appre- 
hension! 



CHAPTER II. 



" These are the cliarming agonies of love, 
Whose misery delights." 

" Pleasure," says the poet, " never 
comes sincere to man, but is lent by Hea- 
ven upon hard usury." Hardly had Do- 
naghue recovered from the overwhelming 
effect of recent events upon his feelings, 
ere, with all the gratitude of his heart to 
Heaven for his unexpected restoration to 
the means of dispensing happiness and 
comfort around him, a pang assailed it at 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 39 

the thought, that as far as immediately 
concerned his own happiness, the reverse 
in his condition might have been effected 
too late; the report of an attachment be- 
tween Miss Erin and lord Altidore had 
been revived ; and in spite of what he had 
been induced to think were her sentiments 
for him, he knew not how altogether to 
discredit it. But he would not \oncr re- 
main in suspense on such a subject; yet 
how should he summon courage to in- 
quire as to what would be like ascertain- 
ing his fate? His agitation was so great at 
the bare surmise of what he would suffer, 
should it prove as he feared, that it failed 
not of exciting the observation of Melville, 
who, inquiring into the cause, Donaghue 
at length opened his disturbed mind to 
him, disclosing all that he had ever felt 
for Eveleen, or thought about her, with 
the motives for every successive change 
of conduct towards her. 

jNIelviUe evidently listened to him with 
much emotion. — " I wish," said he, when 
he had concluded, ** you had a little sooner 



40 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

been equally explicit ; since, by satisfying 
you that sir William Erin was a very dif- 
ferent character to what lady Jane had 
artfully represented him to be, I should 
probably have prevented all those attempts 
at dissembling, that must have been so 
painful to you ; but I cannot blame you 
for what was occasioned by regard for 
Eveleen ; respect for her would not per- 
mit you to mention her father in any les- 
sening light to another person ; but surely 
your own observation, the generous and 
munificent acts you were continually hear- 
ing of him, should have opened your eyes 
to the falsehood of her ladyship." 

" No," replied Donaghue ; " because I 
attributed these to the pride of patronage. 
In short, prejudice has the effect of throw- 
ing a complete mist over us." 

" Well, don't unnecessarily keep your- 
self on the rack," said Melville ; " the 
sooner you ascertain your fate, the better." 
" Ay, if I thought I should have cou- 
rage to support it, if it proved unfortu- 
nate." 



thadition of the castle. 41 

" Pooh ! this is nonsense ; take my ad- 
vice, and set off for the Vale directly;'* 
and as he spoke he made a movement to- 
wards the bell, as if to order the horses. 

" ^^o, I cannot indeed ; I have not cou- 
rage to attempt ascertaining it in any 

other way than by writing; for You 

may laugh if you please; but positively I 
think if I saw the lips of Eveleen forming 
a negative to my hopes, I should " 

" Die at her feet !" cried Melville. 
" Tragic indeed ! But what says the bard 
of nature, through the lips of his lovely 
Rosalind — * Men have died, and worms 
have eaten them, but not for love !' No, 
no, my dear lad ; all-enchanting as Eve- 
leen is, and deplorable as it will be to be 
disappointed of her, yet if it is a disap- 
pointment you are doomed to, I trust and 
hope you will bear it like — a handsome 
young fellow, with a noble fortune at his 
back, to enable him to enjoy life, and who 
may have his choice, if he pleases, of half 
the fine women in the kingdom," 



42 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" Really, Melville, at times you trifle 
most provokingly ; but " 

" But you are not going to write this, 
it would, to be sure, be treason, not to 
say doubtlessly terribly agitating, letter 
this morning, I presume; for consider lady 
Magennis's ball this evening, given, as she 
assures every one, expressly on your ac- 
count, will require all those spirits that 
may be exhausted by writing it ; let me 
therefore " 

Donaghue would listen to him no lon- 
ger; he hastened to the library, where, lock- 
ing himself in, he sat down to write this, 
as Melville had truly styled it indeed, agi- 
tating letter ; he poured forth his whole 
heart in it — told Eveleen, that, for the 
present, his fate rested with her, since, 
should her answer prove un propitious to 
his wishes, it was his determination to go 
abroad as soon as he had arranged his af- 
fairs, and done what was requisite for the 
comfort of those dependent on him, there 
to remain till such time as he should feel 
reconciled to her loss, and enabled to see 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 4S 

her another's with composure ; finally, he 
concluded by entreating her not to let 
the agonies of suspense be prolonged ; but 
at lady Magennis's, where they were to 
meet that night, to let him, if it was only 
by a look, understand what he was to ex- 
pect. 

Hardly was it dispatched, however, ere 
he repented not having taken Melville's 
advice, in postponing it a little longer, the 
state of agitation into which he was thrown 
by sending it, rendering the idea of the 
evening's entertainment absolutely disa- 
greeable to him. It was gone, however, 
past recall, and he strove to collect himself 
for what might be the result; such how- 
ever was his dread of this, that he delayed 
till the very last moment setting out for 
lady Magennis's, till, in short, the pa- 
tience of his companions was quite ex- 
hausted, Melville's, from knowing Lavi- 
nia was to be of the party, and Rosebud's 
from his eagerness for any thing that pro- 
mised amusement. 

Donaghue eagerly glanced round the 



44 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

room as he entered, but none of the Erin 
party were yet come, and he really felt 
the circumstance as a kind of respite ; but 
at length lady Erin was announced ; she 
was accompanied by lady Jane, Miss Bond, 
and Millicent, but no Miss Erin. Dona- 
ghue, for a moment, felt almost as if every 
thing swam round him. She was not 
coming then ; his unfortunate letter had 
prevented her, either from an unwilling- 
ness to occasion him any pain in such a 
place, or else a wish to consider how she 
might best soften that which she must 
give him. Well, he had entreated that 
the agonies of suspense might not be pro- 
longed, and she certainly had attended to 
the entreaty, for was not her staying away 
from the ball — her thus avoiding an im- 
mediate meeting, a convincing proof that 
he had nothing to hope ? Aware, how- 
ever, that this was no place for giving way 
to his present feelings, he tried to rouse 
himself, to subdue that deadly sickness of 
the heart which hope disappointed occa- 
sions ; and having watched lady Erin to a 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 45 

seat, he at length forced himself to ap- 
proach her, but with a feeling of embar- 
rassment, from which, however, he was 
quickly relieved, by being convinced, 
from her manner,that as yet she knew no- 
thing of his letter. The usual compli- 
ments having passed — " Are we not to 

expect to have the pleasure of seeing 

sir William," cried Donaghue, suddenly 
checking himself, " here to-night?" 

" Oh, yes," replied her ladyship ; " but 
not till it is very late, some gentlemen 
having dropped in, who will keep him till 
it is." 

** And," Donaghue's voice faltered a 
little, and he passed his hand across his 
brow, as if his hair had incommoded him — 
" and Miss Erin," he resumed, " does she 
wait for him, or " 

" Oh, no," interrupted lady Erin ; " she 
is merely waiting for Miss Audley. I ex- 
pect her every moment." 

What a revulsion did the feelings of 
Donaghue undergo at this intimation ! a 
sudden glow pervaded his bosom — his 



46 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

cheek flushed, and he felt, in short, as a 
drowning wretch would, who, when all is 
black despair about him, suddenly beholds 
a glimpse of hope ; yet let him not be too 
sanguine— she might not perhaps have been 
able to have avoided coming, and 

He was interrupted in the reflection by 
lady Erin's touching his arm, and ex- 
claiming — " There she is ! and Miss Aud- 
ley, I see, is hurrying her to the ball- 
room, and I want so much to speak to 
her; do, my dear Donaghue, go and tell 
her I wish to speak to her, before she 
commences dancing." 

Donaghue could not hesitate to obey 
her; but with what agitation did he pro- 
ceed to do so! and how gladly, if he 
could, would he have declined being her 
messenger, for the sake of delaying a mi- 
nute that would decide his fate ! No one, 
to have seen him at this instant approach- 
ing Eveleen, would have imagined, from 
his lingering manner, that he was an im- 
passioned lover approaching his beloved 
mistress. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 47 

She did not immediately perceive him 
on his joining her, from being engaged at 
the instant speaking to a party that had 
come up to her; but when she did, by 
suddenly turning her head, the deep ver- 
milion that instantly overspread her coun- 
tenance, certainly did indicate something 
like emotion. But this might be merely 
owing to finding him beside her, without 
being at all aware of the circumstance; 
and his heart, if possible, beat with still 
greater violence ; for a moment its palpi- 
tation rendered him scarcely able to speak 
— he then proceeded to give her mother's 



message. 



" Wishing to speak to me !" said Eve- 
leen, in a hesitating tone, as if of doubt. 

" Yes," replied Donaghue, " there she 
is; " you may see she is looking this way 
for you." 

" Yes, I perceive," said JSIiss Erin ; and 
she permitted Donaghue to take her hand 
to lead her to her. As he did so, he felt 
it tremble — the emotion its tremor excited 
was not controllable ; he gently drew her 



48 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

back — " Oh ! for a moment," he cried, 
" let me detain you. Eveleen, can you 
not conceive — must you not know what I 
am enduring at this instant ? and can you 
therefore suffer its " 

" My mother will be impatient — see !" 
cried Eveleen. 

" I see nothing — I can see nothing, at 
this instant," interrupted Donaghue, 
"but the cruelty you wdll be guilty of, if 
you trifle another minute with my feel- 
ings Yet, let me ask, did you not re- 
ceive my letter?" 

" A letter ! pshaw !" under an air of 
playfulness, trying to hide her own evi- 
dent agitation ; " I did receive a " 

"Rhapsody of nonsense! Well, be it 
so ; the more incoherent it was, the more 
justice it must have done to the feelings 
under which it was ^vritten, for it is not in 
a moment of excessive agitation we can 
arrange our ideas to the best advantage; it 
must, however, be much worse than I can 
allow it to be," the agitation of the gentle- 
man subsiding in exactly the same degree 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 49 

that that of the lady seemed to increase, 
" if it did not make me perfectly compre- 
hended." 

" Really," cried Eveleen, making a faint, 
and perhaps therefore an ineffectual, effort 
to break away from him, "I cannot allow 
my mother to be any longer kept waiting 
for me." 

" Well, only say that I may hope." 

" Hope !" repeated Eveleen, half avert- 
ing her looks, with a glance of archness ; 
" don't you know what lady Anne says to 
the wicked Richard ? — ' All men, 1 trust, 
live in hope." 

" Well, really," cried Donaghue, laugh- 
ing, and thus betraying that the enchant- 
ing permission he required was no longer 
requisite, " this is what I call wicked tri- 
fling; well, if you won't tell me I may 
hope, say at least " 

But we shall give no more of their con- 
versation ; suffice it, that on joining lady 
Erin — " Well, really, Donaghue," she 
said, " you are the worst messenger I ever 

VOL. IV. D 



50 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

met with ; what, in the name of wonder, 
detained you so long ?" 

" Long, my dear madam !" said Dona- 
ghue, in a tone of surprise. 

" Long, yes ! I have been watching you 
both these — I don't know how many mi- 
nutes, without being able to catch your 
eyes. If I hadn't seen you, Donaghue, in 
the room, I should really have conceived 
that you had run away with Eveleen." 

" Well, my dear madam," said Dona- 
ghue, in a coaxing tone, as he seated him- 
self beside her, while Eveleen took the 
seat at the other side, to hear what she had 
to say to her, " could you have wondered 
at that, when you considered how great 
the temptation to do so?" 

" Oh ! this is very fine talking; but in 
that case, what would a certain lady, I 
w^onder," glancing towards lady Jane, as, 
yielding to her natural bent, she was flirt- 
ing away in another part of the room, 
" have said ?" 

" What lady?" demanded Donaghue. 

"Wdl, really, Donaghue," said her la- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 51 

dyship, a little pettishly, " this is the affec- 
tation that so provokes me ! what lady 
should I mean but one — she who, deny it 
as you may, has been so long the occupant 
of your heart — and does she not look very 
handsome to-night ?" 

" Not handsomer than usual," replied 
Donaghue, coolly, but at the same time 
glancing expressively across her ladyship 
at Eveleen; "nor would it be necessary, 
or rather possible, for her to do so, so love- 
ly has she ever been in my eyes." 

Her ladyship turned hers with quick- 
ness upon him, to see w^hether he was 
speaking ironically. — " Now are you 
laughing, or in earnest ?" she demanded. 

" In earnest; no language can do jus- 
tice to the admiration with which I regard 
the' lovely being who has long, as your la- 
dyship observes, been the occupant of my 
heart." 

" Well, really this is a confession at last," 
said her ladyship, but certainly in a tone 
indicative of surprise at its suddenness, 
" and all is explained, and forgiven." 
D 2 

uBRwt — - "^:i 



52 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" All candidly explained at one side, 
and generously forgiven, I hope, at the 
other." 

" Well, I really am quite pleased to 
hear this ; we may then look forward " 

" My dear mamma," interrupted Eve- 
leen, "this is really so like planning for " 

** My dear Miss Erin," cried Donaghue, 
in his turn interrupting her, " you know 
not the pleasure there is in having a friend 
plan for one. — I guess, my dear madam, 
what you would have said ; but — a lover, 
while he is only a lover, must have fears; 
and except I can make myself assured," 
taking her hand as he spoke, " of the kind 
interposition " 

" Now really this is intolerable," cried 
her ladyship, drawing away her hand an- 
grily from him, " relapsing again into this 
affectation !" 

"Good Heavens, affectation!" exclaimed 
Donaghue, emphatically; " would that 
what I now feel was indeed affected! 
But, no — and it will not be long, my dear- 
est madam, ere you will, I am certain, ac- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 53 

knowledge, that for me to have evinced 
greater confidence, greater security of hap- 
piness, than I now do, would have been 
the height of presumption. — But I see," 
catching the eyes of Eveleen turned ex- 
pressively on him at the moment, ** I must 
seek for another opportunity of explaining 
myself. To-morrow I shall hope to be 
fortunate enough to obtain it ; and then, 
when I shall have opened my heart to 
lady Erin — disclosed all its fears, its wish- 
es, and anxieties, should she indeed deem 
me worthy of that interest in my behalf I 
seriously solicit, I shall consider myself 
the happiest of men." 

" Really you excite my curiosity, Do- 
naghue," said lady Erin, with some little 
degree of emotion — " Eveleen, do you 
comprehend him?" 

" Me, my dear ma'am !" cried Eveleen, 
colouring, and averting her head. 

Whether lady Erin, who certainly did 
not want penetration, would have begun 
to suspect something from the ambiguous 
language of the gentleman, and the em- 



54 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

barrassment of the lady, if the scene had 
been much longer prolonged, we cannot 
pretend to say ; but at this instant lady 
Magennis came forward to inform Dona- 
ghue, who was to open the ball with Miss 
Magennis, that dancing was about com- 
mencing. 

Donaghue bowed, to signify he was 
ready to attend on the lady; yet, not- 
withstanding, lingered for a minute to 
speak toEveleen. — "As usual, I suppose," 
he said, half reproachfully, from certain re- 
collections at the moment, " I am to ask 
in vain — am to hear, if I solicit your hand, 
that you are engaged already for as many 
sets as you shall probably think it agree- 
able to dance !" 

" Well, it is exactly the kind of an- 
swer," said she, laughing, " that you me- 
rit, for having set me down as deliberately 
affronting; however, to shew you that " 

" You can be more gracious than I me- 
rit," said Donaghue, softly ; and seizing her 
hand, " may I indeed find it so ?" 

" Pshaw! nonsense! really," forcibly 



TllADlTION OF THE CASTLE. 55 

withdrawing her hand, " this is quite ab- 
surd; you'll never cease till you attract 
observation, and then " 

" Not expiring yet !" said Melville, in a 
significant tone, as he passed at the instant 
with his partner. 

" There, I told you how it would be !" 
she cried, half laughing, half vexed, at 
what she had overheard — " that you would 
not rest till you had attracted attention 
by your manner ; and see, your partner is 
waiting for you." 

" Don't make me guilty then of the 
rudeness of allowing her to continue doing 
so, but say " 

^ I really don't know that I mentioned 
any set, but rather than be the means of 
keeping the whole room waiting — perhaps 
— if I don't change my mind — the second 
set I may condescend " 

Donaghue kissed her hand with rapture, 
and flew off to Miss Magennis. His bo- 
som's lord sat lightly on its throne, and all 
the time a free and unaccustomed spirit 
lifted him above himself with cheerful 



56 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

thoughts. He was indeed again himself; 
gloom, fear, despondence — all had fled, 
like vapours before the rising sun. Eve- 
leen had given him hope, and lie would 
not for a moment suffer himself to appre- 
hend that sir William or lady Erin would 
crush it. What a blissful termination had 
his troubles experienced, and how much 
would the recollection, the review, of 
them, serve to enhance and heighten com- 
ing happiness ! 

But the morning brought with it so- 
berer feelings. The sudden transition from 
apprehension to hope had been, at first, 
too much for his steadiness ; but the ine- 
briation of sudden delight had passed a- 
way — Eveleen's parents, or at least her fa- 
ther, might see things in a different light 
from what she did ; and he again became 
anxious, and almost unhappy. But a 
short time would now indeed finally ter- 
minate suspense, for, had he been inclined, 
he could not have protracted it, after the 
intimation he had given to lady Erin of 
his intention of waiting on her this mor- 



TRADITIOX OP THE CASTLE. 57 

ning ; and to the Vale, divided between 
hope and fear, he accordingly went. Be- 
fore his arrival, his letter was submitted by 
Eveleen to her mother, and by her to sir 
William, so that all parties were prepared 
for the purport of his visit. 

Avoiding entering into needless parti- 
culars, we shall content ourselves with 
merely observing, that the result of this 
visit was all he wished. Lady Erin's wish 
respecting him and her daughter is alrea- 
dy known ; and now satisfied that he had 
never feigned what he did not feel, that 
his heart had never really felt a preferable 
regard for any woman but Eveleen, she 
could not feel less anxious for its realiza- 
tion than she had once been; while sir 
William, equally satisfied with the expla- 
nations that were given, that there had 
been no wilful deception or dissimulation 
at his side, and that he was quite as free 
from errors as young men in general are, 
if not more so, perhaps — and this was the 
truth indeed, for if he had not been tho- 
D 3 



58 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

roughly persuaded of this, he never would 
have given him his Eveleen — united with 
her in consenting to let him become the 
future guardian of their child's happiness. 

But, with all the explanations that had 
been given, still an awkwardness might 
have been felt in giving this consent, had 
Donaghue deferred, till now, endeavouring 
to clear up the mistake about lady Jane, 
as they might then have still imagined she 
was under some illusion about him. But 
this had not been the case; Donaghue 
was able to refer to the conversation he 
had had with lady Erin in particular on 
the subject, and from this they were now 
aware that they might have seen, some 
time before, that no engagement existed 
between them. 

Still, on many accounts, lady Erin wish- 
ed she had not till now remained at the 
Vale. To quit it, however, was not her 
ladyship's plan. To have done so, at pre- 
sent, would have seemed as if she felt the 
defeat she had now experienced, and which 
her pride would not allow her to endure 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 59 

the thought of; and, in the next, obliged 
her to give up some new schemes she 
thought hkely to make her amends for it. 
The fact was, lady Jane was not by any 
means mistress of the fortune that was ge- 
nerally imagined ; and though her passion 
for Donaghue was ardent, being, to make 
use of her own flippant language, one of 
the handsomest creatures in creation in her 
eyes, yet it certainly was not quite a dis- 
interested one. The old banker, in leav- 
ing her the estate he had done, appeared 
to have left it to her more for the purpose 
of tantalizing, than affording her enjoy- 
ment, since, from the annuities with which 
it was loaded, entailed on generation after 
generation, it certainly could only be con- 
sidered as a nominal one. 

This maliciousness on the part of the 
deceased, however, she took as much pains 
as possible to conceal, aware it was a cir- 
cumstance that, with all her attractions, 
might do her some little injury in the 
fashionable world. But how was she to 
keep up the appearance requisite for its 



60 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

concealment ? Distressed and bewildered, 
she knew not what to do, when all her 
plans on Donaghue were revived, by being 
positively assured, by a friend of his un- 
cle's, that there was not the shghtest doubt 
of his not only finally inheriting every 
thing the general was possessed of, but of 
being shortly put in possession of a hand- 
some independence by him, he was so 
much pleased by his conduct; since Do- 
naghue, she knew, w^as the last man in the 
world to be swayed by mercenary consi- 
derations, and certainly the being, of all 
others, she should prefer, if matters proved 
as they were represented. 

In the full hope of this being the case, 
she laid herself out, as already stated, for 
an invitation to the Vale, where the in- 
timation she received from her nurse, of 
the expected restoration of Donaghue's 
paternal inheritance, did not by any means 
tend to lessen her anxiety for the accom- 
plishment of the object that had brought 
her there. She had repeatedly heard her 
father declare, that he should not by any 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 61 

means be surprised, if the fraud through 
which Donaghue was deprived of this 
should yet be discovered ; and induced by 
this to give credit to the assertion of her 
nurse, she became still more intent and 
earnest in succeeding in her views respect- 
ing him. 

But in vain every allurement was essay- 
ed, and every artifice in her power to have 
recourse to practised, for the purpose of 
effecting them. Donaghue, absorbed by 
his passion for Eveleen, remained insen- 
sible to every advance, and she, at last, 
began to see that her hope, with regard to 
him, was indeed a forloiTi one. Still, how- 
ever, the idea of giving pain to a rival was 
too exquisite not to induce her to try and 
insinuate a very different belief into the 
minds of lady Erin and her daughter ; not 
without a faint hope, that if she could 
pique Eveleen into giving encouragement 
to lord Altidore, she might yet succeed 
herself with Donaghue. 

But in case she was doomed to final dis- 
appointment about him, she began to turn 



62 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

in her mind what was to be done, as, by 
this time, she had involved herself in very- 
considerable embarrassments, through her 
own natural love of expence, and the esta- 
blishment she deemed it requisite to keep 
up, to impose on the world. Lawless was 
gone, and though she had several flatter- 
ers about her, she knew of no serious ad- 
mirer after him. But, by a little manage- 
ment, was not one to be procured? and, 
after some deliberation, and casting her 
eyes about her in every direction, sir Ed- 
ward Surrey was the person she decided 
on spreading her snares for, as more likely 
than any one else she knew to be drawn 
into them. It is true, he was a fool, but 
then he was a baronet, and had an excel- 
lent fortune ; and since she could not get 
the man of her heart, she cared very little 
who she married, provided it was a person 
possessed of the power of supporting her 
in the extravagance she delighted in, and 
who she thought she could manage ; and 
it was partly on his account, and partly to 
prevent its being thought she felt a pang 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 63 

about Donaghue, that she resolved on 
maintaining her ground at the Vale. 

From the moment Donaghue had re- 
gained his inheritance, she anticipated 
what would follow, and accordingly com- 
menced her operations on the baronet, by 
gradually beginning to pay that attention 
to him she had hitherto disdained bestow- 
ing, singling him out for her attendant in 
the walks she suddenly began to have a 
fancy for taking about the domain, and 
now and then asking him to take her a 
drive in his curricle, he really drove so well. 
Sir Edward w^as enchanted ; he certainly 
admired Lavinia a thousand times more, 
and, somehow, thought the conversation 
of poor little Miss Bond, whom he was in 
the habit of parading about, respecting the 
wonders she had seen w^hen she was in 
Paris, quite as agreeable ; but then, not to 
be delighted by the notice of lady Jane — 
the rich, the elegant, and every-way-dis- 
tinguished lady Jane, was quite out of the 
question ; and through his flattered self- 
love and vanity, her ladyship had every 



64 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

reason to believe she should here at least 
succeed. 

Continually on the watch, and keenly 
penetrating the explanation that, in its re- 
sult, had been so propitious to the wishes 
of Donaghue, had hardly taken place, ere 
she discovered this result; and while lady 
Erin, from a feeling of delicacy, in conse- 
quence of all that had passed between them 
respecting him, was puzzling herself how 
to break to her what could not possibly 
for any time be concealed, the acceptance 
of Donaghue's addresses, she herself led 
to the subject, by at once bluntly telling 
her ladyship she was apprized of the fact, 
as well as perfectly aware of her motive 
for hesitating to acquaint her with it. — 
"But while I feel grateful, my dear lady 
Erin," she said, " for your kind and deli- 
cate consideration about my feelings, I am 
happy to inform you, that they are now 
not exactly such as to have been wounded 
by what you had to communicate. I 
have, for some time past, been so tho- 
roughly convinced, from the knowledge I 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 65 

acquired of Donaghue's disposition," (she 
could not deny lierself the gratification of 
speaking invidiously) *• that he is a person 
not to be induced to forgive, where he 
once conceives he has had reason to resent, 
that I have latterly been quite as ready to 
relinquish him, as he could possibly be to 
relinquish me ; as a proof of which, my 
sincerity in declaring that I am neither 
pained nor hurt in any manner by what 
has occurred, it is my determination to re- 
main here till our sweet Eveleen has be- 
come a bride." 

Considering all that had passed, lady 
Erin was not a little surprised at hearing 
her express herself in this manner, on a 
subject that she feared would have been 
the occasion of no little disturbance ; the 
pleasure, however, her perfect philosophy 
afforded her, was certainly a good deal 
damped by the determination she had 
avowed of remaining for the present where 
she was ; on many accounts she felt her 
longer continuance at the Vale would im- 
pose a constraint that would be painfuL 



66 TRADITION OF THE OASTLE. 

Politeness, or hospitality, however, would 
not allow any indication of her real wish- 
es, and which, indeed, must have been 
very plainly intimated, to have induced 
lady Jane to give up what she had deci- 
ded on. 

The approaching marriage at the Vale 
was soon notified to the neighbourhood, 
by the preparations that commenced for 
it. Numerous were the speculations its 
quick announcement put an end to. In 
the first of disappointment it occasioned, 
lady Magennis could not help being vexed 
at the expence and trouble she had been 
at about her recent ball, till she recollected 
it might be the means of silencing some 
invidious reports that had lately begun to 
be circulated about the family affairs. 

Whatever were the feeUngs of lord Al- 
tidore on the occasion, he seemed to have 
them in tolerable subjection, continuing 
to visit as usual at the Vale; yet there 
were moments in which Donaghue fan- 
cied he appeared thoughtful and melan- 
choly, and moments too in whkh Dona- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 67 

ghue also felt, that had he not been an as- 
sured lover, he certainly should not alto- 
gether have liked the friendship that ap- 
peared to subsist between Eveleen and his 
lordship ; for, whether it was that she ad- 
mired his conduct as a discarded lover, or 
had previously conceived a high esteem 
for him, but assuredly so it was, that she 
treated him with the most distinguishing 
attention, insomuch that Donaghue once 
or twice could not help feeling a little 
peevish, on coming to the Vale, and find- 
ing them conversing together by them- 
selves, and once or twice on finding they 
were out walking by themselves ; but the 
very moment after he could have abhorred 
himself for the thought, that, however 
Eveleen might have suffered a mother's 
wishes to have swayed her with regard to 
the rejection of a lover, she would have 
permitted them to influence her alone to 
the acceptance of a lover, without some 
preferable regard for him. But for what 
he so reproached, and almost abhorred 
himself, he tried to excuse himself, by be- 



68 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

lieving that a little selfishness, he chose to 
term it, is inseparable from the feelings of 
a lover. 

But all this time, what was Melville 
about? Melville was as busy as other 
people, in pursuit of what he thought 
would constitute his happiness. To go 
back a little : — on the night of the ball, at 
which Miss Lavinia had the surprise of 
finding him metamorphosed from Denny 
Scanlen into the elegant heir of sir James 
Melville, it had been the wish of lady 
Erin that she should have slept at the 
Vale ; but Lavinia feeling that half the 
pleasure of the ball w^ould be lost if she 
had not the power of talking over the par- 
ticulars of it immediately with Rosetta, 
made some pretext for preventing this ar- 
rangement, but with a promise of dining 
the next day at the Vale. 

Rosetta, quite as anxious to hear some- 
thing about the ball as Lavinia could pos- 
sibly be to tell of it, or rather to hear 
something of lord Altidore, lay impatient- 
ly awake, watching for her return. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 69 

Their rooms opened into each other; 
and Lavinia, instead of passing on to hers, 
stopped in Rosetta's to undress, that she 
might, while doing so, be gratifying her 
curiosity at the same time. The first 
question was involuntarily about lord Al- 
tidore, and her spirits suddenly reanima- 
ted by Lavinia's assuring her, she saw no- 
thing particular, no, nothing assuredly very 
particular, in his manner to JMiss Erin. 

" Well, come," she cried, " now tell 
me who you danced with." 

" Oh, Lord, half the room !" replied 
Lavinia. " You know I was a new star, 
and so attracted general observation." 

" Well, and who did you see to like ?" 

« To like ! Lord, half a hundred ! In 
the first place," a little archly, " there was 
lord — lord Altidore." 

" Pooh ! nonsense !" 

" Nonsense ! and why so, pray ?" 

" Because a — lord Altidore is engaged 
already." 

"Is he? I didn't know that. I thought 
you told me it was all over between you." 



70 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

"Now, Lavinia, this is just going on 
in your usual teazing way. You know I 
mean to Miss Erin." 

" And you tell me so in that tone ! 
Now, Hosetta, if I were to put you to 
the question, I wonder, would your an- 
swer be the same ! However, I shall leave 
it to your Ariel, who, for aught you know, 
may be hopping about your pillow this 
instant, to discover the truth, and " 

" Come, tell me what conquests you 
made ?" interrupted Rosetta. 

"Oh, innumerable! so much so, that 
in a day or two you may expect I shall 
employ you as Portia did her confidant, 
Nerissa, in conning over my lovers, to see 
which I shall discard and which retain." 
fit But, that's true," said Rosetta, " I 
had almost forgot ; what do you think of 
those two beaux that half the girls in the 
neighbourhood are raving about?" 

" What, Donaghue, or O'Brien, or — 
I am sure I don't know which is his name, 
or whether not both ; oh, he is certainly 
an exquisitely handsome creature ! so tall. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 71 

and with such dark eyes, and such daz- 
zling teeth, and such a smile to display 
them — and — I am much mistaken if there 
are not others who think him quite as en- 
chanting as I do." 

" And his friend — what do you think 
of him ? 

" His friend ! really I Do you know, 

Rosetta, that once or twice to-night I felt 
an inclination to love this invisible guar- 
dian of mine, on seeing my dress was one 
of the prettiest in the room, even equal 
to Miss Erin's, though hers was so chaste- 
ly elegant. If the hideous old man, for I 
am sure he is so, or he would have allow- 
ed himself to have been known before this, 
would but continue to act in this manner, 
without ever obtruding himself, I should, 
by degrees, begin to feel a great venera- 
tion for him." 

" Fy, Lavinia ! I am ashamed to hear 
you talk in this manner of a person to 
whom you are under such obligations! 
How have you been educated? — what 
pains, in every instance, have not been 



72 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

taken with you ! — and how are you in- 
troduced into hfe, with every advantage 
that pride and vanity can desire !" 

" Oh ! if you are beginning to scold," 
said Lavinia 

*' Well, stop ; I see you are not quite 
undressed yet, and tell me how you like 
this Melville? I am sure I don't know 
how the subject was brought up; but 
while we were sitting at supper, my fa- 
ther began speaking of him, and saying 
he heard he was a very fine young man, 
highly accomplished, and remarkably 
handsome." 

" Yes, he is well enough," said Lavinia, 
with carelessness. 

" Well enough ! is that all ? Then you 
don't think him by any means equal to 
his friend ?" 

" I didn't say that," cried Lavinia, with 
quickness. 

" Didn't you ? Well, I declare I think 
you did, as plain as you ever said any 
thing; or at least you allowed it to be in- 
ferred." 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 7^ 

" Then I allowed what I didn't mean ; 
for I think him quite as handsome (hand- 
somer no one could be) as this Donaghue." 

" And v/hich really do you like best ?" 

" Which do I like best! Why, if I 
was ^orced to take either the one or the 
other, I — I believe I would take this Mel- 
ville." 

" Forced !" repeated Rosetta ; " really 
you have an extraordinary way of ex- 
pressing yourself, Lavinia ! Forced ! 
Great compulsion indeed 1 should con- 
ceive requisite to induce you to take the 
captivating owner of the stately old castle 
here, or the elegant heir of a baronetcy !" 

" What ! beginning again !" exclaimed 
Lavinia; " oh, then, good night to you 
in earnest !" gathering up her scattered or- 
naments as she spoke, and running into 
her chamber ; but stopping at the door — 
" though you are so cross, I can't be so 
ill-natured as not to wish you ban repos 
and pleasant dreams." 

"And what would be the consequence," 

VOL. IV. E 



74 TRADITIOX OF THE CASTLE. 

said Rosetta, with a sigh, as she re- ad- 
justed her pillow, to settle her head on it, 
" of the wish being fulfilled, but that, 
when I awoke in the morning, I should,, 
like Caliban, cry to sleep, that I might 
dream again?" 

But whether it was owing to pleasant 
dreams or not, we cannot pretend to say, 
but certainly the next morning she ap- 
peared in better spirits than she had been 
in for a considerable time before; and soon 
after breakfast, which, owing to Lavinia's 
being up so late the preceding night, was 
protracted to an unusually late hour this 
morning, proposed a walk to Lavinia, ere 
she set about dressing for her engagement 
at the Vale. 

Lavinia made no objection, and off they 
set, to ramble just as chance directed. 
They had just got far enough to be out of 
sight of the house, and were begun talk- 
ing and laughing over the incidents of the 
ball-room, when Melville, alias, still to 
Rosetta, Mr. Denny Scanlen, very unex- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 75 

pectedly appeared approaching, and re- 
spectfully saluted them. 

The compliment was hardly returned 
by Rosetta, and not at all by Lavinia, and 
who, as they drew close to each other, gave 
the arm of Rosetta a pull, to draw her to 
the other side of the road. E,osetta was 
a little surprised at this, though not dis- 
pleased, for she recollected her father's in- 
junction — an injunction that one or two 
observations had induced her to think it 
would be quite as well to attend to, and 
felt she should have, in consequence, ex- 
perienced some embarrassment, had La- 
vinia taken it into her head to have given 
the young man any encouragement to join 
them. That he would attempt to do so 
without it, she could not suppose ; she was 
therefore both indignant and surprised, 
when, instead of passing them as she ex- 
pected, he wheeled about, and joined 
them. For a moment she thought of ex- 
pressing her displeasure at the freedom ; 
but unwilling, from a feeling of delicacy. 



76 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

to give positive pain, she checked herself, 
and, vrithout appearing to know that he 
was at her side, decidedly turned away 
her head, and began again chatting with 
Lavinia. 

Lavinia, however, had hardly the power 
of replying to her, so still more incensed 
was she herself at what had occurred. 

In this manner they went on a little 
further, without deigning to cast a glance 
at their unfortunate companion, when two 
young ladies belonging to the neighbour- 
hood, hut not exactly to what was deno- 
minated the first class, came flying up to 
them, impatient to hear from Lavinia all 
the particulars of the entertainment of the 
preceding evening, from which the cir- 
cumstance just alluded to had excluded 
them, distinctions of rank being not more 
rigidly observed in what aie considered, 
with regard to these, the most rigid of all 
courts, the German ones, than in Ireland. 
Hardly allowing herself to ask her how 
she was — " Well, and was the ball quite 
as delightful last night as you expected ?" 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLt. 77 

exclaimed the eldest ^liss Leland, eagerly 
addressing herself to Lavinia. 

" Yes ; I found it pleasant enough." 

" And were there many strangers?" 
asked the youngest. " We heard a great 
many were expected." 

" Oh, as to that," said Lavinia, " I 
can't tell you ; for I as yet know so few in 
the neighbourhood, that every face there 
was almost that of a stranger's to me." 

" Weil; but you know some of the 
company," resumed the eldest sister; 
" what heaus had you there?" 

" Beaus ! Oh, beaus upon beaus. Quite 
a superabundance of them." 

" And which amongst them did you 
think the handsomest ?" asked the young- 
est Miss Leland. " Did you see any one 
there to be compared to Mr. O'Brien, of 
Altoir-na-Grenie ? 

" ^Vhy, how do you know any thing 
of Mr. O'Brien ?" demanded her sister. 

" How do I ! Sure he was pointed out 
to me yesterday, as he was passing on 



78 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 

horseback; and I think him the hand- 
somest creature I ever laid my eyes upon." 

" I have heard that the friend he has on 
a visit with him is quite as handsome. 
They were both at the ball last night, to 
be sure;" and so again addressing herself 
to Lavinia, " which do you admire most?" 

" Me! I don't know that I admire ei- 
ther of them." 

" Don't mind her," said Rosetta ; " she 
admires both of them so much, that if 
Mr. O'Brien had not brought his friend 
with him, she certainly would have lost 
her heart to him. If he is vain, he will 
be getting rid of him, when he finds that 
he rivals him in this manner." 

« Then she prefers Mr. Melville?" 

" Oh, decidedly," replied Rosetta, laugh* 
ing ; " if compelled to have one or other, 
she assured me she should make no hesi- 
tation between them." 

" I assure you of such a thing !" cried La- 
vinia, in extreme anger, and drawing away 
her arm. " I am astonished, Rosetta, to 
hear you make such an assertion ! To be 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 79 

sure, I— I know it is but in jest; but then,'* 
colouring violently, " there are some jests 
that are highly unpleasant !" 

" Then really," said Rosetta, in her 
turn somev/hat disconcerted, by this, as 
she conceived, unwarrantable petulance, 
" since you provoke me, Lavinia, I will po- 
sitively deny what I have now said being 
in jest. You positively did tell me." 

" I told you no such thing!"' cried La- 
vinia, abruptly interrupting her, in con- 
sequence of catching the eyes of Melville 
at the instant turned with archness on her; 
" so far from telling you I thought this— 
this Melville any thing that was agreeable, 
I told you I thought him one of the most 
disagreeable; but — but," bursting into a 
laugh, in spite of all her efforts to prevent 
herself, at Rosetta's stare of utter astonish- 
ment at this assertion, " it is all accounted 
for what you've said, by your being nei- 
ther asleep nor awake when 1 was talking 
to you, and so not perfectly understand- 
ing what you heard." 

" Well," said Rosetta, " after this, I 



80 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

shall not be surprised at any thing ! Why, 
Lavinia, you amaze me!" 

" Oh well," said Lavinia, but almost 
convulsed by her efforts to stifle her laugh- 
ter, " wonder is a very pleasant sensation." 

" Poor gentleman !" sighed iMelville, as 
if through deep commiseration ; " how 
unhappy would he be, if he heard this 
young lady's contradiction of having said 
any thing in his favour !" 

The Miss Lelands, who had not before 
noticed him, from his having drawn back 
at their approach, turned their eyes upon 
him with a stare. 

" Something terrible indeed might be 
apprehended from it, were it to reach his 
ears," he resumed ; " it is fortunate, there- 
fore, for him, that he is about quitting the 
neighbourhood." 

Quitting the neighbourhood ! Lavinia 
started, and there was no further occasion 
to struggle with her inclination to risibi- 
lity. 

" You know the gentleman then, sir ?" 
said Miss Leland. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 81 

" Pooh ! nonsense !" exclaimed Rosetta, 
extremely provoked at his effrontery in 
intruding himself amongst them. " No, 
he certainly does not." 

Melville bowed, and Miss Leland open- 
ed her eyes still voider, unable to compre- 
hend the meaning of such implied con- 
tempt to so very elegant a young man, as, 
unblinded by the prejudice of Rosetta, the 
stranger appeared to her to be. — " But I 
should rather think he does !" she said. — 
" Pray, don't you, sir? Don't you know 
Mr. Melville?" 

" This lady says not, ma'am," was the 
reply, " and I never contradict a lady. 
However, I ^vill so far venture to say, 
that I have learned, through what I be- 
lieve is very good authority, that he is 
about quitting the neighbourhood, through 

a " and he glanced with significance and 

reproach at Lavinia, from whose cheeks 
the roses had by this time completely dis- 
appeared, " through a — a something un- 
pleasant that has occurred." 
e3 



82 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" You — you forget," said Lavinia, now 
involuntarily resuming the arm of Roset- 
ta, unable any longer to endure this tri- 
fling, from the alarm into which she was 
thrown, " that I have to dress." 

" Oh, no," replied Rosetta; "it is not 
very late ; however, we'll delay no longer," 
and she bade good-bye to the Miss Le- 
lands, who were proceeding in a different 
direction. 

She had not got many yards, when per- 
ceiving Melville was following, though 
certainly, on many accounts, with no in- 
tention of doing so much further, but 
merely from a wish to try whether he 
could not catch a forgiving glance from 
Lavinia ere he left them, she abruptly 
paused, and turning to him, at once, 
through indignation at what she deemed 
his presuming perseverance, and terror 
lest of his being encountered with them 
by her father, explicitly told him not to 
come any farther out of his way on their 
account, as liis continuing to walk with 
them was not agreeable. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 83 

Melville again afifected to sigh and look 
disconsolate — " I take the hint, madam," 
he said, touching his hat, and, with a bow 
he meant to appear submissive; " but 
what you have now made me sensible was 
intrusive, I hope you will have the good- 
ness to pardon, in consideration," and he 
again strove to catch a glance from Lavi- 
nia, but in vain, irrepressible emotion at 
the instant he sought her eyes making 
her turn aside her head, " that it will not 
be repeated." 

Rosetta coldly bowed, and he turned 
away. Hardly had he left them, ere the 
eyes of Lavinia were turned after him. It 
might be her last glimpse of him. Oh, 
the bursting agony of that thought ! and 
how could she deny it to herself? and one 
word might prevent this — one word stay 
his departure, for his glance in mention- 
ing it had given her to understand that to 
her it was owing ; and why, why should 
she inflict upon herself the misery of not 
preventing it ? and, unconscious almost of 
what she was about, she struggled to free 



84 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

her arm from Rosetta; but Kosetta held 
it fast, and at once affrighted and indig- 
nant at her emotion — " Good God!" she 
cried, " what are you about? You are 
not going to run after that young man ?" 

" Me!" said Lavinia, recalled to recol- 
lection by the question, and the paleness 
of her cheek giving place to a deep suffu^ 
sion ; " no, certainly not. I wonder what 
could make you think such a thing !" 

" Then I really wonder you can, when 
you attempted to pull away your arm in 
such a manner from me." 

" I might have done that, without 
meaning to run after him. But — but say 
what you will, Rosetta, indeed I cannot 
help observing, that you need not have 
been quite — quite so harsh — so abrupt 
with him as you were." 

" When people won't take hints, it is 
requisite to be explicit with them," re- 
plied Rosetta; " but indeed, Lavinia, you 
seem in a most contradictory humour this 
morning ! No one could appear more an- 
gry or indignant when he joined us than 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 85 

you did yourself; and yet now you ai-e 
reproaching me for having made him leave 
us — quite forgetting what my father would 
have said, had he met us with him for our 
companion." 

Lavinia hesitated, feeling a strong in- 
clination to confess the truth to Rosetta ; 
but a dread of embroiling her with her fa- 
ther, by confiding to her a secret he might 
hereafter reproach her for keeping, check- 
ed the impulse, and finally determined her 
on saying nothing to her on the subject of 
Melville. Yet, that now she knew his 
real rank, it may appear extraordinary her 
having any fear of doing so ; but this was 
accounted for, by the many hints that had 
dropt from IMr. Wheatley, as if to caution 
her from forming any attachment, her 
guardian having himself decided on dis- 
posing of her hand. 

That her indignation had been very 
great at the deception practised on her by 
Melville, we have seen — that it had a good 
deal abated, must be equally evident. The 
fact was, that, as the hurry and flutter of 



86 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

spirits, occasioned by the discovery of it, 
subsided, she could hardly, from the cha- 
racter of Melville, allow herself to believe 
that he would have pressed upon her a re- 
quest to be permitted to enter into an ex- 
planation of it, was he not aware that that 
explanation could not be to his injury. 
She had heard romantic stories of men 
wishing to prove the disinterestedness of 
the attachment of the person they were 
attached to, ere they avowed themselves, 
and this might have been the case with 
Melville. Be his motive, however, what 
it might, she certainly should have granted 
him the hearing he requested — the great- 
est criminals were allowed one before they 
were condemned. But the truth could 
no longer be disguised from herself — she 
liked first to triumph a little in the pain 
she saw she inflicted, and so, very proper- 
ly, he was leaving her to her pride, and 
she should never see him more. 

The moment she entered the house she 
flew up to her chamber, where, throwing 
herself on a chair, she sat leaning on a ta- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 87 

ble, with her face covered with her hands, 
in an attitude of utter disconsolation. 
Rosetta followed — " Why, what is the 
matter, my dear girl ?" she cried, on per- 
ceiving her sitting in this manner ; " you 
seemed in a hurry to return home to dress, 
and yet here you are, as if you quite forgot 
any thing further about it ! Lavinia," she 
said, on perceiving tears trickling through 
her fingers, attempting to draw away her 
hand from her face as she spoke, " you 
alarm me ! 1 hope — I trust, with your ad- 
vantages, your prospects in life, you are 
not giving way to — you are not indulging 
in any feeling that may prove inimical to 
them, or disappoint the fond wishes of 
your anxious friends?" 

" No, no ! why should you think — why 
should you suppose," said Lavinia, rising 
as she spoke, and walking to a window — 

" I 1 only felt myself a little fatigued, 

that's all; and see," brushing away her 
tears, ** I am now as well as ever I was ; 
' So, prepare to see by degrees new beau- 
ties rise. 

And keener glories sparkle from my eyes.* 



88 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 

And yet, after all," carelessly twirling a- 
bout a coronet of flowers she was going to 
wear ; but suddenly — " What I would 
give this instant to know who will be at 
the Vale to-day !" 

" Oh ! all is safe then," thought Rosetta, 
internally smiling, " if this is what she is 
anxious about. — Oh, pooh! what signi- 
fies ?" she said — " a pleasant party, you 
may depend on it; but perhaps you are 
desirous, beforehand, to know whether 
this Mr. Melville, whom I so strangely 
mistook what you said about, is to be 
there?" 

Lavinia could not help bursting into a 
laugh at her so exactly hitting on the 
truth, and her spirits somewhat revived, 
set about dressing with alacrity ; a gleam 
of hope had begun to dawn upon her — 
Melville and Donaghue were engaged, she 
knew, at the Vale, and she tried to flatter 
herself, that, however determined he might 
be on an immediate departure, he would 
yet postpone it, for the purpose of keeping 
this engagement. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 89 

But, hardly had she entered the draw- 
ing-room, when this hope was destroyed 
by lady Erin's carelessly exclaiming, as 
. she glanced over a note that was handed 
to her at the instant almost of Lavinia's 
entrance — " Oh, an apology from O'Brien !" 
for this was the very day, it may be recol- 
lected, in which Donaghue, from what 
had occurred in his morning visit there, 
had decided against almost ever again 
going to the Vale, if possible to avoid it. 

So there was an end to all expectation 
of seeing Melville ; his friend had, doubt- 
less, given up his engagement, in conse- 
quence of his being about going ; and La- 
vinia felt herself turn pale at the idea she 
could not avoid giving way to, and, in the 
pain and confusion it excited, involuntarily 
turned away her head from every one, and 
sat, apparently, lost in the contemplation 
of the prospect she beheld from the win- 
dow by which she was sitting; though, 
had she been asked, at the moment, any 
question about it, she certainly would 
have felt herself rather at a loss to have 



90 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

replied whether it consisted of hill and 
dale, wood and water, or of all combined, 
she knew no more at the instant than the 
mole under ground ; neither did she hear 
a word of what was going on in the room, 
being, in short, in one of those agreeable 
reveries at the minute, that, for the time 
being, renders the senses of very little ac- 
count. 

Her deep abstraction, however, was not 
permitted to be of long continuance ; some 
one touched her gently on the shoulder, 
and starting from her kind of trance, she 
beheld sir William at her elbow, and Mel- 
ville (how instantaneous was the change 
her feelings experienced !) standing behind 
him, and earnestly regarding her — so at 
least she thought for the moment. She 
turned round; his eyes were directed to 
something in the park. Well, no matter, 
he was not gone, he was actually in the 
room, and she should yet see whether they 
would not again wander. 

'* Why so thoughtful, fair lady ?" asked 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 91 

sir William ; " I have been watching at 
least these ten minutes for a smile." 

" Ten minutes !" repeated Lavinia, 
laughing, now restored to all her wonted 
gaiety; "what an age! why, it wasn't 
worth watching for one tenth part of the 
time !" 

" If I was a younger — pooh ! I mean 
a single man, I should contradict that as- 
sertion; but that chain that is thrown a- 
bout us in the temple of Hymen is a ter- 
rible restraint upon our gallantry ! And 
you are really sincere in w^hat you say — 
you reall)^ think a smile not worth watch- 
ing a minute for? Ah! how does that 
roguish smile I see you cannot suppress 
contradict that assertion !" 

" Pooh !" said Lavinia ; " this is not 
fair, to be translating one's looks as smiles; 
but, supposing, sir, it w^ere as you insinu- 
ate, don't you know that what is easily 
obtained is not always valued as it ought 
to be?" 

" Assuredly ! and therefore it is my ad- 
vice to all young ladies, to be slow and 



92 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

careful in dispensing their smiles, since re- 
gret is an unpleasant sensation, and unde- 
served condescension cannot fail of exci- 
ting it." 

" Lecturing, sir William !" said lady- 
Jane, approaching, anxious to try whether 
she could not learn from Melville the real 
cause of Donaghue's not coming — " on 
heads, or hearts, pray ?" 

" On both, as, like the tides and the 
moon, I think them connected, the ebbs 
and flows of one being under the influ- 
ence, or at least ought to be, of the other." 

" Heavens, how ridiculous ! I beg your 
pardon, my dear sir William, but really to 
think that the movements of the heart 
could be regulated " 

" In the presence of lady Jane Morley 
would be utterly impossible !" said the ba- 
ronet, gallantly bowing ; " and now, will 
her ladyship do me the honour of setting 
mine palpitating, by accepting my arm to 
the dining- parlour ?" the butler at this in- 
stant having announced dinner. 

Lady Jane could not refuse accepting 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 93 

his arm, but she took it with a very bad 
grace, preventing her as it did from im- 
mediately questioning ^Melville about Do- 
naghue. 

As they were moving away, sir Wil- 
liam, glancing back at IMelville — " Mr. 
jNIelville," he said, " there's a lady," di- 
recting a look to Lavinia. 

Melville gravely bowed, but did not 
move. 

Sir WiUiam, a little surprised — " I say, 
Mr. JMelville," he repeated, '•' Miss Audley 
will do 3^ou the honour " 

Melville, as if it was a thing he could 
not avoid, now approached Lavinia. — " I 
am concerned, ma'am," he said, " there's 
no other gentleman in the way, to prevent 
my offering w4iat I am sure it will be so 
disagreeable to you to accept." 

Lavinia, with all her pretty little airs of 
dissembling, not quite so much au fait in 
the art as Melville, felt herself a good 
deal disconcerted by this speech, and the 
air and tone of gravity with which it 
was uttered; the bright vermilion, with 



94 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE* 

which the joy of seeing him when she 
thought him gone had painted her cheeks, 
faded, and timidly, as well as a little trem- 
blingly, passing her hand under his arm — 
" No, I — I don't know why you should 
think — that is — I am sure I don't consider 
it disagreeable !' 

Melville affected to sigh deeply, and 
turned away his head for an instant, as if 
she was making an effort to deceive him. 
— " Ah ! no, ma'am," he said, " delusion 
is now over — after what passed this mor- 
ning, so fully confirming the apprehen- 
sions of last night!" 

" But — I — I was not entirely to blame 
for what passed this morning," said La- 
vinia, becoming still more alarmed ; " and 
I assure you I was — yes, really I was vex- 
ed that Miss Wheatley " 

" Miss Wheatley ! it is not Miss Wheat- 
ley I am thinking — I am complaining of! 
not of her scornful looks, but of the un- 
kind, the indignant glances that shot from 
those eyes, when I approached with such 
humility, such " 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 95 

" Well, what can I say !" almost sighed 
Lavinia; " really you must acknowledge 
that I had reason to be displeased at find- 
ing that you had passed yourself on me 
for another person, or, of course, wonder 
at my appearing to resent it?" 

** No — nor of your still appearing to do 
so, if I had not entreated you to allow me 
to explain the cause of what appeared so 
extraordinary, or, perhaps to express my- 
self as I ought, in your opinion reprehen- 
sible, since the entreaty, I should have 
supposed, might have argued that it was 
in my power to do so satisfactorily." 

" Well, perhaps it was what I ought 
to have done," said Lavinia ; " but, you 
know, we don't always," and she spoke 
perhaps a little coaxingly, " do what we 
ought; and if you have the — the least 
wish still " 

" You will listen ?" 

" Yes." 

" Then you are the very angel I took 
you for !" cried Melville, in a moment re- 
suming himself, and pressing with glow- 



96 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ing transport to his heart the trembling 
little hand, that all this time he had suf- 
fered to rest upon his arm with as much 
seeming disregard as if a lady's scarf; " in 
the course of the evening we shall have 
an opportunity of conversing without ob- 
servation, and if I do not induce my love- 
ly Lavinia to think she may forgive my 
offence with propriety, I will submit to be 
banished her presence without another 
murmur; though, in being so, all hope of 
earthly happiness must be relinquished!" 

The manner in which the eveninof was 
passed was propitious to the lover's wish 
of opening his heart to the fair object of 
its earthly adoration. After tea the com- 
pany dispersed, in detached parties, about 
the grounds, till they reassembled at 
the grotto, which was illuminated and 
prepared for dancing, and where an elegant 
collation was afterwards served up to them. 

Melville frankly confessed his motive for 
continuing the deception, which a love of 
frolic had first suggested — namely, a wish 
of being assured of her regard, ere he ran 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 97 

the risk of incurring his uncle's displeasure 
by explaining himself. This both grati- 
tude and policy opposed his doing, for sir 
James had been to him as a father from a 
very early period, and his own fortune was 
trifling, compared to what he might inhe- 
rit from him, if he retained his favour. 
To do so, of course, was his earnest wish ; 
but sir James had long since given him to 
understand that he had fixed on a particu- 
lar alliance for him ; and he was not with- 
out an apprehension that his disappointing 
him, with regard to this, might be the 
means of depriving him of what he so 
highly valued. 

The hazard, however, must be incurred, 
and Melville proceeded to assure Lavinia, 
that ere this it would have been the case, 
but that, as he was on the very point of 
addressing his uncle on the subject of his 
attachment to her, he received a letter 
from him, intimating his intention of com- 
ing down almost immediately to the Vale, 
and in consequence of which, he decided 

VOL. IV. F 



98 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

on putting off his intended explanation 
till his arrival, conceiving, if any thing 
could induce him to overcome the resent- 
ment, or forgive the disappointment it 
might occasion him, it would be the sight 
of the lovely object of his attachment. — 
" I will not, however, attempt to dis- 
guise," pursued Melville, " that I greatly 
fear his admitting no excuse for the dis- 
appointment of a plan his heart has been 
so long set upon. Who the person is, 
whom he chose to make choice of for me, 
T never could, by any chance, discover ; so 
anxious, however, has he been for 'me to 
keep myself disengaged till my introduc- 
tion to her, that it has been the means of 
causing me to be almost dragged about, 
both on the Continent and at home, lest 
my long continuance in any one particular 
place should occasion the frustration of his 
plan. 

" ** That I shall greatly grieve at exciting 
jiis displeasure, I cannot deny, loving him 
a^ I do with all the ardent affectiori (tf a 
son ; but the conviction that I do not me- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 99 

rit it, for disappointing so unreasonable a 
plan, will, I make no doubt, in a very 
short time, mitigate the pain it must at 
first cause me. It never, indeed, was my 
intention to have given myself up to his 
disposal as a mere machine, but the com- 
pliment of passive obedience I deemed 
due to him, till after I had seen the lady 
selected for me ; for, as she might, I con- 
sidered, prove a person every way agree- 
able, why needlessly anger him, I argued 
with myself, by avowing what my deter- 
mination was, should this happen not to 
be the case ? 

" But any further dissembling with him 
is now out of the question, and should his 
conduct evince his conceiving, from the 
obligations conferred upon me, that he had 
a right to impose fetters on my mind, and 
restrict that freedom of choice, without 
which we must be miserable, I shall cer- 
tainly endeavour to reconcile myself to 
the result of his displeasure. In that case, 
a great deal of show and splendour must 
F 2 



100 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

certainly be relinquished ; but, with such 
a companion to share the partial retire- 
ment to which I may be driven," and he 
fondly pressed the hand of Lavinia to \m 
lips, " what will there be wanting for real 
happiness? for 

* Happy they, the happiest of their kind, 

Whom gentler stars unite, and in one fate 

Their hearts, their fortunes, and their beings blend.J 

" But let us hope the best, or, at least, 
hope as long as we can ; though the tem- 
per of my uncle is warm, and somewhat 
peremptory, his disposition is generous ; 
and when every thing comes to b^ oonsi- 
dered, and when he comes to see my sweet 
Lavinia, I am inclined at times to flatter 
myself he will not prove implacable in his 
resentment." 

What a similarity, Lavinia observed, 
between their fates — both, in a degree, 
under the control of others, and both des- 
tined for beings they never saw! and she 
explained more fully than he yet under- 
stood them, what she was taught to sup- 
pose were the intentions of her guardian, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 101 

and as much as she knew concerning her- 
self. This indeed was very little, or ra- 
ther nothing; the Wheatleys were the 
only friends she knew, but she had reason 
to conclude, from the education she had 
received, the expence that was lavished on 
her, and the introduction that had been 
obtained for her into society, that, who- 
ever was the person that interested him- 
self about her, he was a person of conse- 
quence and fortune. 

Finally, without puzzling themselves 
with conjectures, they engaged themselves 
as firmly to each other as vows could en- 
gage them — Melville protesting that no 
earthly consideration should induce him 
to give her up, and Lavinia, in her turn, 
declaring that not all the guardians in 
Christendom should prevent her being his. 
For the present, however, it was settled, 
that the greatest caution should be ob- 
served with respect to their mutual senti- 
ments, both on account of sir William and 
Mr. Wheatley, from both being in the con- 



102 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

fidence of the parties they were apprehen- 
sive of offending. 

That Mr. Wheatley would hesitate a 
moment in betraying her, if he had a sus- 
picion of the truth, Lavinia could not 
imagine ; Melville was almost equally per- 
suaded that sir William would do the 
same with regard to him, from his fre- 
quent rallying allusions to be sure they 
appeared, of what he knew his uncle's in- 
tentions were respecting him, and his hope 
that they might not be disappointed. 

What an evening of bliss was this, that 
accounted for every thing that had ren- 
dered her uneasy, to Lavinia — reconciled 
her to her lover, and relieved her from all 
further terror about her guardian! No 
matter what he had planned or intend* 
ed, she was now secure of protection 
from him. The scene around her, the en- 
chanting one, in which this explanation 
took place, served, if possible, to heighten 
her happiness, by the delight which, of it- 
self alone, it was calculated to impart to 
her feelings. The grotto brought to the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 103 

imagination all that had ever been read 
of fairy palaces; the lights were so dis- 
posed, as to give it the appearance of being 
resplendent with sunshine; the soft green 
moss that embossed it in many places, was 
interwoven with violets and primroses, 
forming the ciphers of the young ladies 
assembled there. The alabaster vases were 
filled with glowing flowers; and when 
there was a pause in the dancing, the mu- 
sic that then ceased within was taken up 
l)y invisible musicians without, and gra- 
dually changing into soft and tender airs, 
was diffused through the woods as if by 
enchantment. 

But for the constraint which the lovers 
deemed it prudent to impose on them- 
selves at the Vale, they sought to indem- 
nify themselves elsewhere; this led to a 
want of caution, that rendered the escaping 
Charybdis of very little consequence, by 
casting them upon Scylla. In a word, 
they now and then forgot the equal ne- 
cessity for weariness with regard to Mr. 
Wheatley as to sir William, and the con- 



104 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 

sequence was, their soon being involved 
in a most unpleasant predicament. 



CHAPTER III. 



" Oh, Memory, thou fond deceiver • 

Still importunate and vain ; 
To former joys recurring ever, 

And turning all the past to pain." 

The continual evasions of Lavinia, when 
at home, the confusion she frequently be- 
trayed, when interrogated as to where she 
had been, and her occasional thoughtful- 
ness, so unusual with her, united to two 
or three accidental encounters in the vici- 
nity of the cottage, with the still-supposed 
Mr. Denny Scanlen, began to raise strange 
surmises in the breast of Mr. Wheatley, 
such as determined him on keeping a 
stricter watch than he had ever done be- 
fore on Lavinia; but this was not all— it 
would not be amiss, he thought, to ad- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 105 

monish the young man of what the con- 
sequences of attempting to draw her into 
any indiscretion would inevitably be ; and 
accordingly, having decided on the admo- 
nition, set out in quest of him to O'Con- 
nor's ; but here he could obtain no infor- 
mation about him ; Mrs. O'Connor, exas- 
perated beyond description, at what she 
called his slighting and unnatural conduct, 
in never having called, after the night of 
the entertainment, notwithstanding the 
reception he had met with from her and 
her husband, and their kind offer of a bed 
to him, spoke of him in terms of the high- 
est indignation, declared she knew no- 
thing more about him, than that he was 
still slinging about the neighbourhood, she 
dared to say for nothing good, since, if it 
Was, why should he take such pains to 
hide himself, as it was easy to see he did, 
from no one's being able to find him ? but, 
to their cost perhaps, some one would 
yet discover the tricks he was about ; and, 
in short, expressed herself in such a way, 
fS 



106 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

about her supposed cousin, as sent Mr. 
Wheatley away from her in a state of ex- 
treme agitation ; but notwithstanding 
which, ere he took a step that might prove 
irreparably injurious to Lavinia, he re- 
solved to be first assured there were sufR- 
cient grounds to justify it, and accordingly 
resisted the impulse that would have led 
him directly to address her guardian on 
the subject of what he apprehended. 

As long as she was at the Vale, to which 
she went, and whence she always returned, 
in lady Erin's carriage, he was perfectly 
easy about her, but, except then, equally 
restless and unhappy, insomuch, that 
w^henever she was now at home, he re- 
mitted going out more than he had ever 
done before ; and if he missed her from 
the house, was instantly in quest of her, 
not witliout giving his wife a hint to have 
an eye on lier ; but Lavinia, quite as much 
on the watch to get out as they were to 
prevent her, still contrived, from time to 
time, to effect her escape to the place 
where she was in the habit of meeting 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 107 

Melville, since restricted by the whim of 
Mr. Wheatley from taking any of her 
usual rambles ; this was the arbour in 
the garden, w^hich, from being at the very 
extremity of it, and connected with the 
fields, prevented their being agitated, 
while conversing there, with any appre- 
hensions of a surprise. 

It so happened, however, that the means 
it afforded for a precipitate retreat, if re- 
quisite, at length struck Mr. Wheatley as 
well as it had done them, and made him 
wonder that it had never once occurred to 
him before, on missing Lavinia, to search 
for her there ; of course he remained si- 
lent on the subject, both of what he 
thought, and the stupidity he conceived 
he had been guilty of; but in an evening 
or two after, on suddenly missing Lavinia 
from the parlour, where he had for some 
time been engaged at backgammon with 
a neighbour who had dropped in, and 
learning from Rosetta, who was occupied 
by a book, that she had been for some 
time absent from it, searching for some 



lOS TRADITION OP THE CAlJTli£. 

work, she believed, he made a pretext for 
asking his wife to take his place, aiid forth- 
with proceeded to the arbour. Aware, 
however, that he could not approach it 
from the house without the chance df be* 
ing seen, notwithstanding there being 
some intercepting shrubs and hedges, the 
moon shining very bright, he turned up 
the lane, for the purpose of entering the 
garden from the adjoining field. Cau- 
tiously as he advanced, however, and close 
as he kept to the hedge, he was neverthe- 
less discovered. 

Melville, however, did not atteitipt to 
stir, till he saw him turn into the field ; he 
then, at one spring, cleared the hedge, 
but not without first whispering to Lavi- 
nia not to move, lest her being seen flying 
from the place should be a means of con- 
firming the suspicion that had probably 
brought him there. 

It was with the greatest difficulty La- 
vinia could prevail on herself to follow this 
advice, so great was her dread of encoun- 
tering Mr. Wheatley just at this precise 



TRADitlON i)T THE CAS^TLE. 109 

mstatit, from the cause to Which ghe at 
once Surmised his evidently having come 
in search of her was owing. However, 
sh^ conceived it was the best plan to be 
pursued, and accordingly forcing herself 
to remain, she tried to compose and col- 
lect herself 

The moment Mr. Wheatley had ad- 
mitted himself from the field into the gar- 
den, he darted to the arbour ; but a glance 
sufficed to let him see there was no one in 
it but Lavinia ; but that there had not been 
some one else there, he was not equally sa- 
tisfied, and accordingly looked about him 
in every direction, but to no purpose; but 
that she had merely cotne thei*e for the 
purpose of indulging her meditations, was 
a thing not to be imagined; and what 
really was the fact suddenly striking him 
to be the case, his rage at finding himself 
so completely baffled and outwitted was 
hardly controllable. — " So, Miss Audley," 
he cried, reentering the arbour, which 
for a moment he had quitted to look about 
him, " so, is this the place in which you 



110 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE- 

generally keep your work, for I under- 
stood you quitted the parlour in search of 
some ?" 

" Oh dear, no— no, sir !" replied Lavinia, 
and she affected a laugh at the idea; " how- 
could you suppose so? But I— I was 
seized with such a — a sudden headach, 

that I thought a little air " 

" If you had thought proper to tell Ro- 
setta you were coming here, you might 
have had her company, I dare say; for, I 
make no doubt, she too is sufficiently ro- 
mantic to like an arbour by moonlight." 

" Y-e-s, sir, I dare say I might; but she 
appeared so agreeably engaged with her 
book, that I did not like to disturb her/' 

" How considerate!" replied Mr. Wheat- 
ley, with a sneer ; " and that was your 
only reason for not asking her company ? 
Recollect yourself! you were not prevent- 
ed by the idea that she might have been 
an interruption — a check — a hindrance! 
The fact is. Miss Audley," no longer able 
to smother his passion, " who is it you had 
here with you ?" 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. Ill 

" Who is it I had here with me, sir !" 
cried Lavinia, almost unconsciously repeat- 
ing his words, so great was the terror ex- 
cited by his vehemence ; " why, who do 
you suppose I should have had here with 
me, sir?" 

" No matter, madam, who I suppose — 
I demand an answer to my question." 

** Your question appears a very odd one, 
sir ; but, since you force me to answer it, 
I — I reply, no one." 

" You tell me this ! you deny that any 
one has been sitting in this arbour with 
you ! take care — beware how you commit 
yourself!" and he looked steadily in her 
face, which, unfortunately, the moon shi- 
ning full into the arbour (it was the first 
time Lavinia had ever had an inclination 
to quarrel with the moon) gave him a full 
view of 

" Really, sir- — you — you — are enough 
to agitate any one by these inquisitorial 
questions ! I am sure I see no great use 
in answering them, since you seem not in- 
clined to believe me." 



ll^ TRADITION OF T^HE CASTLfi. 

" And you pemst in wanting to make 
me think you have not been conversing 
with any one here?" 

" I do, indeed !" repHed Lavinia, with 
emphasis, as this actually happened to be 
the case. 

" Degenerate, degraded girl !" exclaim- 
ed Mr. Wheatley, with a burst of passion 
that made Lavinia tremble; " how " 

" Indeed, sir — you — you must excuse 
me," interrupted Lavinia, " but I can stop 
no longer here !" attempting, as she spoke, 
to effect her escape. 

But he opposed it with violence — " No, 
madam !" he cried, " you shall not stir till 
you hear me. Degenerate, degraded girl! 
I repeat; how impossible to give utter- 
ance to the indignation your conduct has 
excited! After all the pains that were 
bestowed on you — the expectations you 
were taught to indulge — to let it be said 
that the one have all been thrown away, 
and the others disregarded ! But I told 
you I was not to be deceived ! I may not 
perhaps have awakened compunction, but 



TUADlTiaK OF tH£ CASTLE. 115 

I think it hardly possible but you must 
feel shame, when you behold this evidence 
of your falsehood !" and, to her utter con- 
fusion, he held up to her view, at the mo- 
ment, one of JNIelville's gloves, which, in 
the hurry of escape, had dropped from 
him, and Mr. Wheatley had had his eye 
on, from the moment of his entering the 
place. ** Now, madam, what can you say 
for yourself — what suppose I must think 
of you T 

But questions were useless ; Lavinia 
was struck dumb, and perhaps motionless, 
for she remained transfixed, as it were, to 
the spot, without even the power of with- 
drawing her eyes from his, till Mr. Wheat- 
ley took her sternly by the arm, to conduct 
her to the house. 

On reentering it, he motioned her to her 
chamber, and remained in the hall till he 
was assured she had obeyed him. But he 
could not, at the moment, have given her 
a command that could have been more a- 
greeable. She was indeed ashamed, con- 
fused, distressed, at having incurred such 



114 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

reproaches as he had uttered. That she 
did not altogether merit them, was cer- 
tainly some consolation ; she knew she 
had not degraded herself by any unworthy 
attachment, but it was a severe mortifica- 
tion to her to think she must remain les- 
sened in his eyes for some time ; and the 
idea of the falsehood, too, she felt herself 
compelled to, was wounding to her feel- 
ings, insincerity of all kind being abhor- 
rent to her principles, as well as contrary 
to her natural disposition. She tried to 
hope, however, that the affair would soon 
blow over, like a transient storm. She 
concluded she should be required to give 
up Mr. Denny Scanlen ; and as this was 
a thing she could most readily promise to 
do, she supposed, when once she had bound 
herself to this effect, she should hear no 
more of what had happened. 

In imagining so, however, she was a lit- 
tle too sanguine. To free himself from 
all further anxiety about her, and prevent 
the possibility of being accused of wilful 
blindness to her imprudence, from inter* 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 115 

ested motives, Mr. Wheatley decided on 
no longer concealing it from the person 
who had intrusted her to his care, and ac- 
cordingly, ere he retired to rest that night, 
addressed a letter to him on the subject of 
it, informing him that he would no longer 
take upon himself any responsibility about 
the young lady. 

The moment his visitor was gone, he 
proceeded to inform his wife and daugh- 
ter, to their utter surprise and distress, of 
what had occurred ; sternly demanding of 
the latter, if she had had any suspicion of 
what was going forward. 

Rosetta, in the most solemn manner, as- 
sured him she had not ; and, as a proof 
that she had no reason for this, mentioned 
what occurred in the last accidental meet- 
ing with the young man, the scorn and 
downright displeasure La\dnia had mani- 
fested on his joining them, forgetting, to 
be sure, to say any thing of the emotion 
she had afterwards betrayed on his leaving 
them, but which assuredly had been so 



116 TRADITION OP THE CASTLE, 

soon got the better of, as not to have made 
any serious impression on her memory. 

" Artifice ! sheer artifice all this T' ex- 
claimed Mr. Wheatley, as he paced up 
and down the room, in a manner that 
evinced the most extreme agitation.-^ 
" Good God! how this girl has lost herself! 
she for whom such fond expectations were 
formed, for whom such happiness was plan- 
ned ! What a shock, what a heart-break» 
will be what I have to communicate a- 
bout her ! But it must be done," he said 
to himself; " nothing could induce me to 
take any longer charge of her, than till I 
can give her up into the hands from which 
I received her.— Tis well for you," he cried, 
Suddenly turning upon his daughter, " that 
you have been able to acquit yourself of 
being her confidant in this disgraceful af- 
fair ; had you not been able to do so — had 
you allowed me to imagine that you en- 
couraged her in her imprudence by con- 
cealing it, knowing, as you have all along 
done, that I have held myself answerable 
for her conduct, I never would have for- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 117 

given you. Should she choose to speak 
to you on the subject of what passed this 
evening, you have my permission to listen 
to her, on condition that it is for the pur- 
pose of admonishing her of the conduct 
she has been guilty of, but on no other ; 
not for the purpose of indulging in the 
whine of sentimental sympathy, and weep- 
ing with her over the terrible cruelty that 
has prevented her running away with a 
handsome young vagabond !" 

" My dear," said his wife, in a tone of 
remonstrance, seeing Rose tta could not re- 
strain her tears, " why do you speak in 
this manner? lam sure our Rosetta has 
given you no cause of complaint." 

" No, thank Heaven, she has not !" ex- 
claimed Mr. Wheatley, with fervour ; and 
recalled to recollection by this remon- 
strance, he took his gentle girl in his arms, 
and — ** Forgive me, my dear child," he 
said, " for having affected you in this 
manner !" and Rosetta felt him fondly 
pressing her to his bosom, and another 
tear than her own bedewing her cheek as 



118 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

he spoke ; " as your mother says, and I 
bless my God for it, I have no cause of 
complaint against you ; I can lay no er- 
ror, no indiscretion to your charge." 

Rosetta made a faint effort, as if to re- 
lease herself from his arms, and a convul- 
sive sob burst from her. 

" But I see," continued Mr. Wheatley, 
" your spirits are overpowered, by your 
distress about Lavinia. I cannot wonder 
at it, from your affection for her. Un- 
happy girl ! what a source of pain to all 
her friends, instead of the happiness she 
was so eminently calculated to be to them ! 
but regret is useless." Then saying he 
would not detain her, as rest might en- 
able her to recompose herself, he again 
kissed her tear-bedewed cheek, and, bid- 
ding her good night, she retired. 

To think of rest without looking in upon 
Lavinia was out of the question; but she 
could not do this till she had a little sub- 
dued the emotion w^ith which she had re- 
paired to her chamber. Censure perhaps 
from her father would not have pained 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 11^ 

her so much as had his fond commenda- 
tions, for there was a consciousness ; but 
still, while she did not intentionally wish 
to deceive him — while her upright heart 
involuntarily shrunk from what she did 
not conceive merited, she could not bring 
herself to confess what must be a means 
of imbittering his tranquillity. She at 
length softly opened Lavinia's door, and 
found her sitting at a table, apparently 
reading, for in reality her thoughts wan- 
dered so, or rather her rnind continued so 
perturbed, that she knew not the subject 
she appeared engrossed by, though she 
had taken up a book, to try and enable her 
to tranquillize herself — " So," she cried, 
the moment she caught the eye of Roset- 
ta, starting up, and throwing aside the 
book, " so there is no interdiction then a- 
gainst your speaking to me !" 

" Ah, Lavinia !" exclaimed Rosetta, 
shaking her head, " how could you pos- 
sibly -" 

" Oh ! rib more ah-ing, or oh-ing, I be- 
seech you, my dear creature, to-night f for, 



120 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

really, after what has passed, I have not 
strength of nerve." 

" Ay, after what passed, indeed, to- 
night! Oh, Lavinia! again I say, bow 
could you possibly allow yourself to be 
drawn into " 

" So your father has been telling his 
story," said Lavinia, interrupting her. 
" Well, one story is good till another is 
told ; but don't look so alarmed — I am 
not going to deny any thing he has been 
saying, only that I am not quite so bad as 
I know he has been representing me ; 
how^ever, appearances were, I acknowledge, 
against me ; and as there is no castle of 
truth here, like madame de Genlis's, to 
thrust us into, why we must be judged by 
them ; but if I promise to be a good girl 
for the future, I hope papa will forgive, 
remembering, both with regard to himself 
and me, that— 'to err, is human— to forgive, 
divine." 

" Really, Lavinia, I am surprised to hear 
you talking in this manner, with almost 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 12l 

your usual giddiness. I really almost ex* 
pected to have found you " 

" Expiring ! — well, and would not that 
have given you a great deal more trouble 
than to have found me as you now do? 
for," throwing her arms round her neck, 
and fondly kissing her, " I know it would 
be a hard thing to turn my Rosetta's heart 
against me !" 

" Well, the fonder, you know, I was 
of you, the greater pain you must suppose 
I should have felt at your being accused 
of any impropriety; and therefore, if you 
had no regard or consideration for your- 
self, out of regard and consideration for 
your friend " 

" Oh, no abstract reasoning, I beseech 
you, my dear girl 1" cried Lavinia ; " you 
know it was a thing I never liked ; and, I 
am sure, just at this instant less than ever: 
but I see — yes, I feel," observing the 
traces of tears on Rosetta's cheek, and how 
pale she looked, " that I must have given 
you pain ; well, need I say that I grieve 

VOL. IV. G 



122 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

at the thought, or what I should suffer if 

I imagined " But suddenly checking 

herself — " I see you want rest, my dear 
girl, and, Heaven knows, so do I, after 
the agitation I have gone through, so I 
won't detain you from it," fearing, if they 
remained much longer together, she might 
betray herself; " and perhaps it may be 
granted me the happiness of yet making 
amends to my friends for the uneasiness, 
trifling and giddy as I may appear, I am 
sensible I must now have given them; 
but assuredly not, in justice to myself I 
must say, through any — any wilful im- 
prudence ; as a proof of which," she, half- 
laughingly, exclaimed, in the words of 
the Roman Vestal — 

" To you, ye uods, I make my last appeal, 
Or clear ray virtues, or ray crimes reveal." 

That the matter would pass over so 
lightly, as it was evident to Rosetta, from 
her manner, she flattered herself, Rosetta 
was decidedly convinced would not be the 
case ; not that she was aware of her father's 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 123 

intention of writing to her guardian, he 
for many reasons choosing to keep that a 
secret, till he knew what the result of it 
would be; but she saw him too thorough- 
ly incensed — that he considered the af- 
fair in too serious a light, to let her sup- 
pose he would pass it over in the manner 
Lavinia seemed to think. 

All Lavinia's courage was requisite to 
enable her to face Mr. Wheatley the en- 
suing morning ; but she knew her remain- 
ing in her room would have an appear- 
ance of sulkiness, and therefore forced her- 
self to make her appearance, as usual, at 
breakfast. 

Mr. Wheatley noticed her neither by 
word or look, and the cheek of Lavinia 
flushed to a deep crimson at this treat- 
ment. His manner occasioned a general 
restraint, and never perhaps were a party 
more impatient to be at liberty again to 
separate than the present. 

The moment this unsocial meal was 
over, Lavinia withdrew to her apartment, 
G 2 



124 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

and Mr. Wheatley immediately set about 
inquiring of his daughter whether any 
thing particular had occurred between 
them ? 

Rosetta told the truth, by replying in 
the negative ; and he then proceeded to 
give orders, that on no account whatever 
any message should be delivered to Lavi- 
nia, or any one admitted to her, even 
though it were from the Vale, it being 
his secret determination not to allow her 
to quit the house, till an answer was re- 
ceived from her guardian. 

That he would not immediately permit 
her to do so again, except to go to the 
Vale, Lavinia made up her mind, but of 
his preventing her visiting there, as usual, 
she had not the slightest suspicion, be- 
lieving his doing so would be in absolute 
opposition to the commands of her guar- 
dian, whom she had many reasons for con- 
ceiving he was strictly bound to obey; 
and though vexed and surprised therefore 
at two days elapsing without any invita- 
tion or message from it, she still had not 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 125 

an idea that this was owing to him. Two 
such horrible days Lavinia had never 
passed ; Mr. Wheatley still continued to 
conduct himself as if he knew not there 
was such a person in the same apartment ; 
and his wife and daughter, fearful any 
kindness they shewed her might be con- 
strued into a rebuke for his harshness, 
hardly noticed her more. 

Well, really if this was not enough to 
drive any one to an act of desperation, she 
knew not what w^as ; but it could not last 
long — he must get tired of it himself; and 
really, terrific as his violence was, she felt 
she would prefer having him rave at her, 
to having him stalking about like a dumb 
necromancer. What he wanted, or why- 
he had not immediately required her to 
give up Denny Scanlen, she could not 
conceive; however, she supposed it would 
come to this at last, and then there would 
be an end of the affair ; and by not seeing 
Melville again, except at the Vale, she 
should avoid getting herself into another 
scrape. 



126 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Sooner than two days Mr. Wheatley 
could not receive an answer to his letter; 
by return of post he received it, full of the 
indignation, grief, and vexation, he had 
anticipated his communication occasioning, 
and desiring, that immediately after its 
receipt, the young lady should be brought 
up to Dublin ; but to obey this peremp- 
tory order was not in the power of Mr. 
Wheatley; the assizes had just commen- 
ced, and till they were over, no convey- 
ance of any description could be procured ; 
he was therefore obliged to write to ex- 
cuse a short delay, but with an assurance 
that he hoped would quiet any uneasiness 
it might create, that till he had delivered 
up his charge, his watchful vigilance over 
her should never be remitted. 

As Lavinia was to know nothing of her 
intended departure, till it was on the very 
point of taking place, nor even then whi- 
ther she was going, Mrs. Wheatley was 
apprized of it, in order that whatever pre- 
parations were necessary for it might be 
made by her; but with a strict command 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 127 

against letting Rosetta know any thing 
about it, lest, through weakness or inad- 
vertence, she should betray it to Lavinia, 
and thus be the means of occasioning him 
additional trouble. 

Mrs. Wheatley promised what was re- 
quired ; but when she came to reflect on 
the additional grief it would be to her 
daughter, the loss of her beloved compa- 
nion, without being allowed to bid her 
farewell, she could not bring herself to 
adhere to this ; in disclosing however to 
Rosetta what she had been so strictly 
commanded to keep secret from her, she 
exacted a promise, with regard to keeping 
it from Lavinia, similar to that which she 
had been herself obliged to give, with re- 
gard to keeping it from her, and which 
Rosetta kept exactly in the same way ; 
for on Lavinia's shortly after entering the 
apartment where she sat, nearly over- 
whelmed by the disclosure, and half play- 
fully, half tenderly, inquiring what was 
the matter, with a burst of impassioned 
grief she threw her arms round her neck. 



128 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

and as she fondly pressed her to her bo- 
som, demanded, in accents scarce articu- 
late, how she could have had the cruelty 
to act in such a manner as to occasion 
what was about happening? 

Lavinia, somewhat startled, or rather 
with a fearful misgiving of what she was 
to hear, inquired what she meant ? 

"Oh, cannot you guess? — must you 
not anticipate?" said Rosetta. " Could 
any thing, almost, do you imagine, dis- 
tress me as I am now distressed, but the 
idea of our being separated ! — of your be- 
ing torn, dragged away from us ! Such 
is the cruel command of your guardian, in 
consequence of the communication made 
him by my father; and as I make no 
doubt it is entirely to his displeasure 
against him, for what has happened, there 
is very little probability I think of his 
ever allowing us to see or hear any thing 
more about you. And how, how can I 
endure to think," wringing her hands, in 
unutterable agony, " of losing you for 
ever !— the being whom I have so long re- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 129 

garded in the light of a sister — the only 
confidant of my sorrowing heart— the dear- 
est friend that was ever given to any one !" 

Lavinia, though nearly overpowered by 
the shock she had sustained, made an ef- 
fort to try and sooth Rosetta. — " Take 
comfort, my dearest girl," she cried, but 
trembling, through agitation, as she 
spoke; " it may not be so bad as you ima- 
gine. Whatever may the cruel intentions 
of this unknown guardian be, we may yet 
be able to contrive some mode of commu- 
nication." 

" Oh, no, no !" cried Rosetta, despair- 
ingly ; " such a thing is next to impos- 
sible ; for as I neither know who he is, or 
where he lives, and cannot hope to obtain 
the information from my father, I have 
no clue by which to trace you — while you, 
on the other hand, will, I dare say, be so 
watched and guarded, as to render it im- 
possible for you to do what you wish." 

Lavinia now, in her turn, wrung her 
hands, and gave way to the most violent 

6S 



130 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

despair; and — " Your father," she said, 
" your father, Rosetta, I have to thank 
for the barbarity of betraying me into the 
power of a person that may be capable of 
what you have suggested, of separating 
me from those I love for ever, and even 
restricting me from the slightest commu- 
nication with them. Oh, Rosetta! but 
on your account, and your mother's, I 
think I never could forgive him !" 

Rosetta, covering her face with her 
handkerchief, wept still more violently; 
but Lavinia, from being weeping herself 
in the same way, could not immediately 
make another effort to console her ; and 
was this the way her Elysian prospects 
were to end — her hopes of happiness to 
terminate, in finding herself in the power 
of a person whose idea had never yet re- 
curred to her mind without inspiring it 
with something of dread, from the fancies 
with which her imagination was haunted 
about him ! But was there no way of pre- 
venting what was intended ? Could she 
but apprize Melville of what was threat- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 131 

ened, she knew he would risk every thing 
to hinder her being torn from him : but 
how was this to be accomplished? Or, 
supposing she could contrive to let him 
know her situation, was there time for 
him to form any plan to rescue her from 
it? She now recollected she had not ask- 
ed Rosetta the time fixed for her depar- 
ture, and was eagerly turning to make the 
inquiry, when, recollecting the necessity 
there was for the greatest caution, even to 
Rosetta, lest a suspicion of what she me- 
ditated might seal her lips, through dread 
of her father, with regard to the informa- 
tion she required from her, she checked 
herself, nor permitted herself to ask the 
question, till, by a few turns about the 
room, she had a little recovered from the 
flutter of spirits into which the sudden 
hope of being able to avoid what was in- 
tended had thrown her. 

" The day after to-morrow is the day, I 
understand, fixed for your departure," said 
the still-weepmg Rosetta, replying to her 
inquiry; " at a very early hour in the 



132 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

morning, my mother has given me to un- 
derstand, a chaise, will be at the door for 
you." 

" The day after to-morrow !" Lavinia 
internally repeated, with a silent ejacula- 
tion of gratitude. Then there was hope, 
for there was an intervening day for some- 
thing to be thought of — something to be 
planned. But every minute was precious ; 
if she could not accomplish seeing Melville 
that night, there might as well not have 
been the day she thought so much about; 
and believing she could induce the girl 
who attended on her and Rosetta to b^ 
the conveyer of a note to him, she became 
all impatience to get to her chamber, for 
the purpose of writing it ; but what pretext 
to make for leaving Rosetta she knew not ; 
at length indisposition was the only one she 
could think of, and accordingly feigning 
a sudden headach, through the agitation 
she had been thrown into, she left her, as 
if to try what lying down for a little while 
might do for removing it, with a solemn 
promise, that up alteration in her maune^» 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 13S 

for the remainder of the time she staid at 
Rosehill, should give Mr. Wheatley any 
cause to suspect the intimation she had 
received. 

The instant she gained her chamber, 
she bolted herself in, that there might be 
no unpleasant surprise, and having finish- 
ed her note, placed herself at the window, 
to watch for the expected messenger, who 
was often passing backwards and forwards. 
The following was the purport of what 
she wrote to Melville : — 



" To Sedley Melville, Esq. 

" I dare say you will hardly be 
able to make out this, I write in such tre- 
pidation ; but you will not be much sur- 
prised at my agitation, when I inform you 
that I have this instant discovered, that 
in consequence of the other night, Mr. 
Wheatley wrote to my guardian, and that 
the result has been, an order to convey 
me immediately to him. The day after 
to.>mQrrow is the one fixed for my depar^ 



134 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ture, which it appears I was to know no- 
thing of till the very moment it was about 
taking place. Should you wish to bid 
me, what, under all circumstances, may 
very likely be a last farewell — since, as I 
neither know to whom I am going, nor 
whither, I cannot give my friends any 
clue, by which they may be enabled to 
obtain any further information concerning 
me — I will, if possible, see you to-night in 
the arbour; but it cannot be at a very 
early hour, as I am literally a prisoner at 
present, and in every way indeed rendered 
most unhappy and miserable. 

" Lest any thing cross should occur to 
prevent the farewell I should be glad to 
receive, accept mine now, and with it, for 
your happiness in life, the sincere wishes 
of " Lavinia. 

« Bosehillr 



We need scarce say what the emotion 
of Melville was at the receipt of this bil- 
let. By this time, indeed, Lavinia had so 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 135 

completely entwined herself round his 
heart, that the idea of losing her was not 
endurable. He briefly answered it, with 
an assurance that he should both wait and 
watch all night, rather than forego the 
hope or chance of seeing her, and conju- 
ring her to compose, and endeavour to 
keep up her spirits, as something must and 
should be devised for preventing what was 
threatened. 

Well, so far all was well ; her billet had 
been safely delivered, and an answer re- 
ceived ; but, watched and restricted as she 
was, how was the appointment she had 
indirectly made with her lover to be kept ? 
that was the question. But for almost 
every thing in life a remedy can be found : 
the window of her chamber was low, and 
immediately beneath it was a garden-seat, 
by means of which she had not the slight- 
est doubt that she should be able both to 
get out and return, without either danger 
or difficulty. 

The remainder of this day passed, like 
the two preceding ones, in gloom and un- 



136 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

social reserve ; and it was evidently a re- 
lief to the party, the arrival of the hour 
that furnished them with a pretext for se- 
parating. Lavinia made her headach — 
not indeed that Rosetta would almost have 
attempted to detain her, so distressed was 
she by her father's conduct towards her — 
an excuse for immediately passing through 
Rosetta's chamber to her own, where, hav- 
ing secured the door, she sat watching, and 
sometimes weeping with apprehension, till 
she was assured Rosetta had been some 
time in bed, when, with the assistance of 
the garden -chair, she adroitly got out of 
the window, and in a few minutes after 
was weeping on the shoulder of her lover. 
— " Tear you from me !" exclaimed Mel- 
ville, holding her to his bosom, as if there 
was an attempt made at the instant to do 
so ; " no, not while I have an arm to hold 
you to my heart!" and he proceeded, 
without further delay, to unfold to La- 
vinia the plan which had suggested itself 
to him, for the prevention of what was 
dreaded. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 137 

Their situation was desperate ; Lavinia 
acknowledged she could see no way to 
hinder this; and, in acknowledging it, 
could of course start no argument against 
it, or make any objections ; and finally an 
elopement was agreed on the next night, 
by which time Melville undertook to have 
every thing ready for their proceeding to 
Scotland. 

To think of keeping secret from Dona- 
ghue what was in agitation, was out of the 
question ; neither his regard for him, nor 
the assistance he required from him in the 
affair, would permit of this; for disliking, 
on many accounts, to intrust his own ser- 
vant with a knowledge of it, he meant to 
take Cormick in his place, and procure the 
attendance of his mother for Lavinia. 
Accordingly, the moment he returned 
from arranging the matter with Lavinia, 
he hastened to impart it to his friend. 
Donaghue heard him with regret, fearful 
of what the consequences might ultimate- 
ly be, of disappointing the expectations his 
uncle had so long cherished. Remon- 



138 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

strance, however, was now useless, nor 
could he bring himself to censure or find 
fault with him for acting as he did, but 
too conscious he would himself have acted 
exactly in the same way, if similarly situ- 
ated. Checking, therefore, all indication of 
what he felt, and trying to hope the best, 
he readily promised what he required. 

The corporal was immediately summon- 
ed, and the necessary communication made 
to him. He undertook disclosing what- 
ever was requisite to his mother, and hav- 
ing her prepared against the time ap- 
pointed, and who, brisk, hale, and hearty, 
was nearly as well qualified as himself to 
be engaged in an adventure. Along the 
coast in this direction were a number of 
small vessels, sufficiently safe and commo- 
dious for so short a trip as that to Scot- 
land, and one of these Cormick was in- 
structed to secure ; and through his active 
exertions, long before the ensuing night, 
every thing was finally prepared, and ready 
for the lovers. 

To guard against the possibility of sus- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 139 

picion, Melville thought it expedient to 
appear to have left the neighbourhood; 
and, accordingly, immediately after break- 
fast the next morning, rode over to the 
Vale, for the purpose of taking a short 
leave, under the pretext of being about 
joining a shooting party at the house of a 
gentleman some miles off, and which in- 
deed he had previously meditated for a 
few days. He contrived to get his own 
man out of the way, by finding an occa- 
sion for sending him to Dublin ; and, af- 
ter riding some miles from the castle, to a 
place where Cormiek had appointed to 
meet him with a disguise, returned through 
by-roads to it. 

Donaghue could not avoid dining at 
the Vale, but he promised to be home suf- 
ficiently early to assist him in getting off 
Lavinia. About half a quarter of a mile 
from Rosehill, there was a little creek, in 
which a boat w^as stationed to receive her; 
and about eleven o'clock, ^vhen the fash- 
ionable world, by dressing, are preparing 
for their nightly vigils, and the unfashion- 



140 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

able, by undressing, to recruit themselves 
after " this day's work, or strengthen them- 
selves for morrow's next design," the 
friends set out for her residence, attended 
by Cormick, the nurse having previously 
been sent on board. 

On reaching the arbour, Melville made 
the concerted signal by shaking the bush- 
es, but for a minute it was not replied to, 
and his heart began to throb with appre- 
hension ; but in the next, timidly emerg- 
ing from it, appeared Lavinia, and he flew 
forward to receive her, at the gate opening 
from the field to the road. For an instant, 
indeed, her courage had faltered ; and not- 
withstanding all her love for Melville, her 
apparent giddiness, the natural delicacy 
of her sex made her wish she had not 
been compelled to such a step. As the 
hour for her flight approached, not all her 
ardent affection for Melville, the idea 
of being about to be united to the being 
whom she loved with all the sincerity of 
her nature, or her final deliverance fi'om 
the power of a person whom she could 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 141 

never think of without a feeling of dread, 
could prevent a thousand timid fears and 
fond regrets, such as more than once made 
her gaze on Rosetta, with a degree of 
emotion that must have created some sus- 
picion, but for its being accounted for by 
what Rosetta had herself told her. 

She was a good deal confused by seeing 
Donaghue; but his gentle manners soon 
reassured her, as much as she could then 
be possibly reassured; and the arrange- 
ments Melville informed her of having 
made, tended still more to recompose her : 
still, however, she remained extremely 
agitated, so much so, as sometimes to have 
seemed to have rendered her lover agitated, 
so that more than once Donaghue deem- 
ed it necessary to offer the support of his 
arm also to her trembling steps. 

At length they reached the romantic, 
and now moon-illuminated creek — for it 
was a night so bright, as perfectly to be 
adapted for an exploit of the kind — where 
the boat was waiting for them. — " Now, 
my Lavinia," cried Melville, attempting 



142 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

to lift her up in his arras, on their coming 
within sight of it, but she checked him 
for an instant, to extend her hand to Do- 
naghue. 

Fervently pressing it to his lips—" Hea- 
ven bless you !" he exclaimed ; " henceforth 
my sister — for Sedley and I have long con- 
sidered one another as brothers. May you 
both be as happy as I wish you ! and if it 
can add the slightest additional satisfaction 
to your feelings, there lives not on the 
earth that man to whom, had I been bless- 
ed with a sister, I would, with such pride 
and pleasure, have given her, as to him." 

Melville's heart was too full to allow 
him to speak ; he wrung the hand of Do- 
naghue in silence, and in another moment 
Lavinia was lifted into the boat. 

Donaghue remained on the spot where 
the lovers had left him till he was assured 
they had gained the vessel, when he began 
to slowly retrace his way back, happy at 
the successful termination of the adven- 
ture; but still, not without a feeling 
of perplexity and confusion, at the idea of 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 143 

the confusion and dismay that would, he 
was aware, be excited, by the discovery 
of Lavinia's elopement. 

He knew the interest which the family 
at the Vale took in her welfare, and felt 
extremely unpleasant at the idea of the 
distress he accordingly anticipated its oc- 
casioning there, as well as elsewhere. But 
this was not all that rendered him uneasy; 
he had by this time acquired a sufficient 
knowledge of sir William's disposition, to 
know that, with all his feeling, there was 
a something of sternness in his disposition, 
calculated to make him deeply resent, and 
not readily forgive ; and if, by any unfor- 
tunate chance, it should be discovered 
that he was any way concerned in what 
occasioned the frustration of the particular 
views entertained for Lavinia, and on 
which sir William so often dwelt, he was 
not without an apprehension of its being 
attended with injurious consequences 
to himself Yet such was his regard — his 
friendship for Melville, that, even if this 
apprehension had sooner occurred, he 



144 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

knew not, or rather felt convinced he 
would not have acted differently from what 
he had done; but though he would have 
run the same risk again for him, yet, as he 
certainly did not wish to suffer by it, he 
resolved to expedite his own marriage as 
much as possible, lest any thing unlucky 
should happen. 

But what he anticipated from the elope- 
ment of Lavinia fell far short of what 
it occasioned — the confusion, almost dis- 
traction of Mr. Wheatley, on the discovery 
of it, and the nearly equal distress of sir 
William, to whom he made an immediate 
communication on the subject, knowing, 
as he did, the cruel shock it would be to 
his friend, the total overthrow to the plans 
that had been so fondly cherished for her 
happiness. 

" Good God !" a hundred times Mr. 
Wheatley exclaimed, as he walked about, 
almost in a state of frenzy, " why — why 
did I suffer any thing to retard or delay 
my departure! or since delay was una- 
voidable, why did I suffer myself to slum- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 145 

ber or sleep, while I had this unfortunate 
— this wretched girl under my care ! Did 
I not promise that, while she remained 
under it, my vigilance should know no 
relaxation ? but how wofully will it now 
appear that I have kept this promise ! Yet 
who could have thought — who could have 
imagined? but there must — there must 
be some treachery in the case !" and no 
sooner had the thought occurred, than 
sternly questioning his wife, he drew from 
her trembling lips a confession of what she 
had revealed to Rosetta, and from tlie 
still jnore agitated, because stilFmore dis- 
tressed, Rosetta, an acknowledgment of 
her having betrayed this to Lavinia. 

" So, this is well 1" said Mr. Wheatley, 
in the tone of stifled passion — that forced 
calmness, that is so horrible, from evincing 
the terrible w^orkings of the soul at the 
moment; " to find myself deceived, im- 
posed upon, betrayed, where I had most a 
right to imagine I might safely repose 
confidence ! but I shall not be unrevenged; 

VOL. IV. H 



146 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

you little knew what you were about," 
for an instant turning his gleaming eyes 
upon the trembling culprits, " when you 
suffered yourselves to act in the manner 
you have done ; but, ere the lapse of many 
more days, you will, or I am much mis- 
taken, be taught to know, like many 
others in the world, that truth and since- 
rity can never be violated with impu- 
nity." 

This dark hint was not wanting to add 
to the terrible distress of poor Rosetta and 
her mother, and completely overwhelmed 
by their feelings, they sought to be alone, 
that, without restraint, they might in- 
dulge together the anguish excited by the 
destruction they had every reason to ima- 
gine Lavinia had drawn on herself, and 
the apprehension suggested by this hint 
of some threatened misfortune. 

The absolute dread which Donaghue 
had of going to the Vale this morning, 
made him delay as long as possible ma- 
king his appearance there. He found the 
family exactly in the state he expected ; 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 147 

and the surprise he was obliged to feign, 
at their communication, was a most pain- 
ful effort to him. 

" Could you have believed it possible, 
Donaghue," asked sir William, suddenly 
pausing from walking about the room in 
the most agitated manner, " that that girl, 
looking so elegant, appearing so much 
every thing one could wish, could so com- 
pletely have lost and thrown herself away 
as she has done? But though her having 
gone off with so low and despicable a fel- 
low as is the one, I understand, she has 
made choice of, must be an aggravation of 
her offence, yet not entirely to this will be 
owing the feelings it will occasion. There 
were plans formed, expectations indulged, 
respecting her, for the disappointment of 
which I know nothing could compensate, 
and which would have prevented her be- 
ing allowed to accept the addresses of 
even a person suitable to her. I grieve — 
I almost dread to think of what will be 
felt, on learning their frustration, the per- 
H 2 



148 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

son SO deeply, so intimately concerned in 
her welfare being one of my very oldest 
and most valued friends. So anxious was 
I to save him from any risk of the cruel 
shock that now awaits him, that, as you 
must recollect, I was continually, half jest- 
ingly, half seriously, hinting at her being 
engaged, thus making it a point of ho- 
nour, that no one should attempt to lay 
themselves out for her. After this inti- 
mation from me, indeed, and my evident 
solicitude to have it attended to, I never 
should have forgiven an attempt of the 
kind, if made by any one I was acquainted" 
with. Neither the person themselves cap- 
able of what I should have considered so 
utter a dereliction from every principle of 
honour, or any one that, in any way, 
could have countenanced, or connived at 
it, would, or could, have been pardoned 
by me, however great my previous regard 
or esteem for them ; and, indeed, in pro- 
portion to these would have been my re- 
sentment — for what you may be tempted 
to pass over in a mere acquaintance, you 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 149 

cannot permit yourself to forgive in the 
friend you have trusted and beheved in." 

Donaorhue involuntarilv turned to a 
window, where, for a few minutes, he re- 
mained hardly conscious of what he was 
about, so terribly agitated and embarras- 
sed was he by this declaration of sir Wil- 
liam. All the fears that had previously 
rendered him so uneasy were now^ con- 
firmed, and he almost trembled to think 
of the obstacles that might be thrown in 
the way of his happiness, should its com- 
pletion be much longer retarded. Yet 
could sir WilUam, should any thing un- 
washed come to his knowledge, be so un- 
feeling, he could not help considering, as 
to attempt to punish him for aiding his 
friend? but after the avowal he liad just 
made of his sentiments, how^ ridiculous to 
have a doubt on the subject ! and with al- 
most a sigh of despair, he thought of the 
length of time that must yet elapse, ere 
the whole of the preparations deemed re- 
quisite for his marriage could be completed. 

He felt it a relief when lady Erin de- 



150 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

sired him to excuse her and Eveleen for a 
short time, as they deemed it but right to 
call at Rosehill, to see whether they 
could do any thing for the alleviation of 
the distress there, while sir William, at 
the request of Mr. Wheatley, sat down to 
communicate to the guardian of Lavinia 
what had happened; but as he walked 
about the grounds by himself, he only 
found himself getting still more perplexed 
and uneasy, from the still greater oppor- 
tunity he had for reflecting on the very 
awkward predicament he stood in. 

Two days elapsed without any thing 
occurring, but such a change in the wea- 
ther as rendered Donaghue still more 
restless and unhappy, by the fears it ex- 
cited for the safety of the lovers, such as 
rendered him anxious in the extreme for 
some tidings from them. But his anxiety 
about them was terminated much sooner 
than he had either hoped or expected, 
though not exactly in the way he wished. 
Just as they got within sight of the wish- 
ed-for haven, as is but too often the case 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 151 

in life, they were driven back by a sudden 
change in the wind, and after being tossed 
about for two days, found themselves, on 
the night of the second, on the coast 
whence they had embarked, and where, 
to prevent the danger of being driven out 
again to sea, while the weather continued 
so unsettled and tempestuous, they landed, 
at almost the hazard of their lives, and di- 
rectly proceeded to the castle. 

As soon as Donaghue had seen them, 
a little recovered and refreshed, after the 
fatigue and danger they had gone through, 
he proceeded to inform ^lelville of an ex- 
press that had that very evening ariived 
from his uncle, requiring his immediate 
presence in town, in consequence of a very 
sudden and severe indisposition with which 
he had been seized. 

The announcement of this mandate 
threw ]Melville into a state of the most 
extreme perplexity and agitation, since 
there was no alternative, but either to in- 
cur the imputation of ingratitude and 
want of feeling, by not immediately obey- 



152 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ing it, or else postpone, for a little longer, 
making another effort to get to Scotland. 
Yet how to propose such a thing to La- 
vinia he knew not; but as something 
must be decided on without delay, he at 
length summoned courage to refer himself 
to her, as the person who, in this case, 
must positively decide. 

Lavinia keenly felt the embarrassing 
awkwardness of her situation ; but the 
irreparable injury she might be the means 
of doing him, by preventing his immedi- 
ate obedience to the summons of his per- 
haps dying uncle, would not permit her 
to oppose any obstacles to his leaving her, 
more especially as she knew it would be 
no longer than was absolutely necessary ; 
and that under the protection to which he 
was resigning her, the protection of a person 
whom he regarded in the light of brother, 
and with a person so respectable as Mrs. 
Cormick, to give a kind of sanction to her 
remaining where she was, she had nothing 
to dread from want of due attention and 
delicacy, neither positive censure, should 



TRADITION OF THE CASTI.E. 15S 

how she was now situated ever transpire. 
Still there was a something in this situa- 
tion revolting to her natural feelings of 
delicacy and sense of propriety, and that 
had she conceived it owing to any volun- 
tary act of imprudence, she would severe- 
ly have reproached herself; but this was 
not the case ; brought up in mystery, she 
had reason to look with suspicion, if not 
dread, on the person at whose will she was 
taught to consider herself, and the natural 
consequence of this was an effort to free 
herself from his control. 

All matters being arranged, and Mel- 
ville, with almost a degree of solemnity, 
having given her up to the care of Dona- 
ghue, not another moment was lost in his 
setting off. Ere he departed, it was settled 
between him and Donaghue, that he should 
call in his way at the house of a friend, 
some miles from Altoir-na-Grenie> for the 
purpose of getting the doctor invited 
there, it being deemed expedient by both^ 
that he should, if possible, be got out of 
h3 



1 54 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. « 

the way at present, his insatiable curiosity 
inclining him too much to be a Marplot, 
to render him a safe inmate in a mansion 
where there was any thing to be kept se- 
cret ; but unfortunately, on calling at his 
friend's, Melville found him absent, nor 
was he expected back for some days, when 
his lady assured him the invitation he re- 
quired should be sent. 

Of course it were superfluous to say 
that Donaghue did all in his power to 
render his fair guest as tranquil and coni- 
fortable as existing circumstances could 
permit her to be. The apartments about 
being fitted up for the immediate use of 
his bride were given up to her ; she was 
well supplied with books ; every moment 
he could spare, without exciting suspicion 
at the Vale, was devoted to her ; and Mrs. 
Cormick was instructed to let her have 
the entire command of her time, a com- 
mand that met with ready obedience, from 
the affection she had conceived for her; 
uhile the corporal felt ready to encounter 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 155 

any danger for her sake, as well as those 
who were so interested in her safety. 

But while Donaghue could not but re- 
joice at every new occasion that afforded 
hira an opportunity of evincing the sin- 
cerity of his friendship for Melville, still 
he could not but feel, that what had now 
occurred had placed him in a situation of 
still greater hazard with regard to sir Wil- 
liam; but this w^as not the only reflection 
that rendered him restless and agitated at 
this juncture. The consideration of the 
happiness of his friend being in his care, 
rendered him so uneasy and anxious, while 
away from the castle, lest of any thing 
unpleasant occurring during his absence, 
as gradually to have the effect of rendering 
his visits much later to, and shorter at the 
Vale, than they used to be, or it was na- 
tural to suppose they would have been, 
the circumstances under which he now 
visited there considered. 

A few days, however, passed away, 
without any notice having been taken of 
this, when one evening, just after tea. 



156 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

that he was decamping, as had lately been 
the case — *' Why what the deuce is the 
matter, Donaghue?" asked sir William, 
turning suddenly on him. " If I were 
Eveleen, I positively should begin to get 
jealous at the violent hurry I have ol>. 
served you to be in these two or three 
last evenings to get off; and then com- 
ing so much later than usual of a morn- 
ing, so much so, as sometimes to keep her 
waiting to take a walk or ride with you. 
Take care, my good fellow — you see I am 
generous to put you on your guard; but 
the next time I call, don't be surprised if 
you find me take a peep behind some of 
your large screens, remembering what 
our friend Joseph Surface has said of such 
articles." 

Donaghue tried to conceal his confusion 
by a laugh ; but the laugh was a forced 
one ; and lady Jane, whose keen eyes were 
on him at the moment, perceived it was, 
and that there was also agitation in his 
looks. She knew not what to think, but 
she determined it should not be her fault 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 157 

if this were long the case ; and what a tri- 
umph, what a glorious triumph would it 
be, if it were discovered that the gentle- 
man was not quite the saint he affected 
to be, and Eveleen should, after all, be 
destined to experience disappointment ! 

Sir William's raillery made Donaghue 
sensible of the error he had been betrayed 
into, by his over anxiety about his fair 
charge. Accordingly he was early at the 
Vale the next day ; and when we say that 
the morning was passed almost uninte- 
ruptedly with Eveleen, and that he ob- 
tained a promise from her, not to be the 
means of creating any unnecessary delay 
to their marriage, need we say it passed de- 
lightfully. But into what confusion was 
he thrown by the doctor, for whom the 
wished for and expected invitation had 
not yet arrived ! He joined the party at 
the Vale a little while before dinner, and 
after laughing and chatting with them for 
a few minutes, suddenly stalking into the 
middle of the apartment, drew something 
from his pocket, and putting his hand be- 



158 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

hind his back with it, asked the ladies 
which amongst them had to complain of 
a recent loss, and what reward would be 
^ven to the fortunate finder of the stray 
article ? 

" Oh, a most liberal one !" they all ex- 
claimed; but at the same time not one 
amongst them could recollect missing any 
thing. 

" Come, come, ransack your memories, 
as you do your workbags," cried Rosebud, 
" when you are at a loss for any thing ; 
for I made up my mind to getting a hand- 
some reward, and I don't like being dis- 
appointed." Still the same answer was 
returned. " What, not a trinket ? nor a 
glove? nor such a pretty little article as 
this ?" suddenly holding up to their view 
a splendid reticule, which that very morn- 
ing Donaghue recollected to have seen on 
the arm of Lavinia, when she was taking 
a turn with him in the king's dining- 
room, a favourite promenade of hers, when 
the doors were closed, to prevent the dan- 
ger of a surprise, and where, unconsciously 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 159 

dropped by her, it was afterwards picked 
up by the doctor, who, under the suppo- 
sition of its belonging to some one of the 
ladies of the Vale, who, with lady Erin, 
were now very often in the habit of call- 
ing at the castle, to superintend and give 
their opinions of the alterations and im- 
provements going on there, had very care- 
fully folded it up in silk paper, and put it 
in his pocket, to return to the fair owner. 

" Ha ! what !" exclaimed sir William, 
with affected surprise. " Where did that 
come from ?" 

Rosebud, not quite certain whether the 
question was in jest or in earnest, very 
gravely answered, by informing him where 
and how he had found it. 

" Suspicious, I protest !" cried sir Wil- 
liam. " I am beginning to think that my 
raillery last night was not quite so mis- 
placed — that there is a way now of ac- 
counting for our being in so great a hurry 
to get away of an evening, as we have 
lately been in." 

** I am sure 'tis fortunate for me, my 



160 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

dear sir, that there is not,*' cried Dona- 
ghue, in a tone of irrepressible peevish- 
. ness ; " for if there were, I have ver}'- 
little doubt but that I should be betray- 
ed to the reprehension I merited. — -My 
dear doctor, where, in the name of won- 
der, were you roving about the castle, 
that you picked up poor nurse Cormick's 
intended present for her little goddaugh- 
ter ?" 

'* Ah ! then does it belong to her ?" 
said the doctor, good-naturedly. ** By this 
time I suppose she's in fine tribulation 
about it," and he was putting it up again, 
when lady Jane, who had all this time 
been watching Donaghue, and saw guilt, 
conscious guilt in the variations of his 
changing countenance, carelessly extend- 
ing her hand, desired to have a nearer 
view of it. 

The doctor was about complying with 
her request, when Donaghue, who saw 
there was something in it, probably the 
letter which Lavinia had that very morn^ 
ing received from Melville, enclosed in 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. l6l 

one to him, and who felt sure that her 
ladyship would not be satisfied without 
examining the inside as well as the out- 
side, suddenly twitched it from him, and 
with a peevish " pish !" that it was not 
worth looking at, crumpled it up, and 
thrust it into his own pocket. 

Conduct so strange could not but ex- 
cite a stare ; for a moment it gave rise to 
an unpleasant sensation in the mind of sir 
William, but it was but for a moment, 
and he then thought no more of it. Not 
so lady Jane — she dwelt on it with a con- 
viction that determined her to be inde- 
fatigable in trying to discover what she 
thought, but, of course, with the greatest 
wariness, lest, in trying to injure others, 
she should eventually only harm herself, 
well aware, that once detected in any thing 
of artifice or deception, and we are ever 
after liable to the suspicion of it. 

Donaghue, not able now to consider 
poor Rosebud in any other light than 
that of an indirect spy, became more anxi- 
ous than ever to get rid of him for the 



162 TRADITION OT THE CASTLI!. 

present; but still no invitation came. 
Why, it may be asked, did not he and 
Melville decide at once on placing confi- 
dence in him ? Would not that have 
been their best plan ? But with all their 
reliance on his good-nature and honour, 
his ardent zeal in the cause of those he 
loved and esteemed, they feared to in- 
trust him on this occasion, from the ease 
with which they were convinced any art- 
ful person could draw a secret from him, 
and he still remained to occasion new em- 
barrassment to his host. 

The next morning, ere Donaghue had 
well sat down to breakfast, lady Erin, 
who, once or twice before, in the same 
way, had surprised him, made her appear- 
ance with the whole party at the Vale. 

Of course he affected all the pleasure 
that, under other circumstances, he must 
assuredly have felt on the occasion, but 
the consciousness of the discovery that 
could at the instant be made in the castle, 
took from him the real feeling of happiness. 

To be obliged to feign what we know 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 165 

we ought to feel, and are expected to feel, 
is, of all things, the most painful. In this 
distressing predicament was Donaghue at 
this moment ; and what but friendship 
could have reconciled him to himself, for 
having allowed himself to be placed in 
one so embarrassing — one that actually 
made hiai wish for the absence instead of 
presence of her whose beaming smiles, 
whose lovely countenance, irradiated with 
pleasure at beholding him, were a tacit 
reproach on his involuntary insincerity 
at the instant ! 

" Well, now that we are here," said 
lady Erin, as they rose from breakfast, " I 
think we may as well look at those apart- 
ments you were speaking of, since you 
have so positively declared nothing shall 
be done to them without the sanction of 
our taste." 

" Assuredly, certainly," said Donaghue, 
but so extremely confused at the sugges- 
tion, that he hardly knew what he was 
saying ; these being the apartments which 
had been given up to Lavinia, and which. 



164 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

from being intended for Eveleen, he had 
determined on having nothing done to 
till she had first seen them, that her own 
immediate taste might be consulted. But 
— ** How unfortunate," he added, as if sud- 
denly recollecting himself, " now I think 
of it, the key of the door which shuts up 
the whole suit has been missing this day 
or two !" 

" Oh, no matter," said lady Erin, " it 
will give us," laughing, " the excessive 
trouble of coming here again." 

The doctor, w^ho all this time had been 
sitting very demurely, listening to what 
was going on, in consequence of feeling 
himself a little offended by the peevish- 
ness of Donaghue about the reticule, now 
suddenly turning to him, demanded — 
" Who had told him that?" 

" What ?" asked Donaghue, but in 
alarm at the question. 

" Why, that the key you wanted was 
lost. Whoever told you so deceived you, 
for this very morning, as I was coming 
down to breakfast, I saw the door to 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 165 

which it belongs lying partly open ; and 
more than that " 

" Oh, you mistake, you mistake, my 
dear friend !" said Donaghue, but colour- 
ing to the very eyes ; and in order to try 
and conceal his confusion, affecting to be 
busy in assisting the ladies on with their 
shawls, a walk being proposed to a part of 
the grounds that was deemed an advan- 
tageous situation for the erection of an 
ornamental building ; '* but I don't won- 
der at it, there being so many doors and 
places alike in this old rambling building." 

Sir William looked steadily at Dona- 
ghue; he saw he was flurried, and again 
the unpleasant sensation of the preceding 
day was experienced ; but, as then, it was 
but transient — he could not give way to 
any mistrustful idea concerning him. Yet, 
as he slowly followed the party, he could 
not help musing on the strange inconsis- 
tencies that often appear in the human 
character, and now^ pausing to look back 
at the windows of the apartments to which 
admission could not be obtained. 



166 THADITION OP THE CASTLE. 

Lady Jane was now confirmed beyond 
a doubt in her persuasion of Donaghue 
being a little more a man of the world 
than his friends at the Vale suspected. 
Were they people of the world, for in- 
stance, like the Magennises, the discovery 
of this she knew would be a matter of 
very little, or rather no concern to them ; 
but as they were, she was convinced the 
very reverse would be the case, and that 
in all probability it would be the means 
of depriving him of all further hope of the 
heiress. 

This persuasion decided her on no fur- 
ther delay in trying to effect it, but. Hea- 
vens ! how stupid they were to render it 
requisite her taking any pains to enlighten 
them on the subject ! How soon would 
people of the world have been led to sus- 
pect from what they had seen ! but no, 
they were too good to suspect ill in others ; 
sir William, indeed, she thought she had 
observed eyeing the gentleman keenly, 
but lady Erin and Eveleen neither appear- 
ed in the least degree struck by what was 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 167 

SO evident an evasion about the apartments, 
his changes of countenance, or a hundred 
other circumstances, that, to her, would 
have been " confirmation strong as proofs of 
holy writ" of there being something wrong, 
something to conceal; and in her con- 
tempt and indignation at what she consi- 
dered their stupidity, she really believed 
she would not take the trouble of forcing 
them to open their eyes, but for the ma- 
licious pleasure she took in the anticipa- 
tion of the pain she was sure the circum- 
stance would occasion ; for, let matters end 
as they would between Donaghue and 
Eveleen, her hope of ever now attaching 
him to her was indeed very languid. 

But as a vague charge would not an- 
swer her purpose, she began to turn in 
her brain how she should herself be able 
to positively discover what she wished to 
discover to others. It was not long ere a 
plan suggested itself to her for the pur- 
pose, and her abigail, who was the person 
she meant to employ, was accordingly 
summoned, properly instructed, and with 



168 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

great pleasure and alacrity undertook the 
business. 

A flirtation had commenced between 
her and the corporal, who, in consequence 
of her appearing to admire him, thought 
he could do no less than return the com- 
pliment by appearing to admire her, and 
it w^as on this that lady Jane built for the 
accomplishment of her project. Feather- 
ston was instructed to try and betray him, 
through surprise, into the required disclo- 
sure, by affecting to have already a know- 
ledge of the affair — a method which, in 
similar instances, her ladyship had before 
found successful. 

The corporal, who was not without a 
pretty tolerable share of vanity, was gene- 
rally loitering about in the way of the la- 
dies of an evening ; and Mrs. Abigail, be- 
ing now on the watch for him, as she gene- 
rally was, indeed, when not particularly 
engaged with her lady, had soon an op- 
portunity of commencing the business she 
had undertaken. After a little chat, as 
usual — " Ah, you men !" she said, in reply 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 169 

to some compliments of the corporal, " who 
is to believe a word you say ? saying one 
thing and thinking another, as my lady 
says; there is not one of you the imma- 
culate characters you go for to want to 
persuade us, poor credulous creatures of 
the softer sex, to believe. Who that looks 
at your master but would take him to be 
half a saint at least ? and yet " 

"Yet what, my dear?" said the corporal. 

" Oh, no matter, I know what I know; 
but come, between ourselves, what does 
he mean to do with somebody, when he's 
obliged to bring somebody dse home to 
the castle?" 

" Somebody !" said the corporal, looking 
a little earnestly at her ; " well, if I know 
who you mean, Mrs. Featherston, may I 
be " 

" Oh ! what," exclaimed the lady — 
" but I wont be so hillhred as to say what ; 
but wull you look me straight in the face 
now, and tell me that you'll take your 
book oath that there's nobody in the castle 

VOL. IV. I 



170 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

that your master cares nothink about the 
folks here knowing of? — No, I see by 
your colouring you couldn't, nor would it 
be any good, for 'tis no matter ; but maybe 
I could give a guess why a certain key 
couldn't be found yesterday, and why '* 

" Why then, how in the name of the 
old one," demanded the corporal, in a tone 
of mingled astonishment and alarm, " did 
you come to know any thing about this 
business?" 

" Oh ! so you are going to confess the 
truth now, because you can't help it, but 
I am not such a blab as to tell you ; a se- 
cret once ^^Tztrusted to my keeping is a 
secret still. But isn't that master of yours 
a sad un after all, now that he's going to 
be married, to be going on with such here 
tricks as these ?" 

" Why, you don't pretend to insinuate," 
said the corporal, " that he has any thing 
to say to the lady that's concealed in the 
castle?" 

" Don't I ?" exclaimed Mrs. Feather- 
ston, with a toss of her head. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 171 

" No, to be sure you don't ! because, if 
you did, you know you would be doing 
him injustice. How the devil you came 
to hear any thing about her is more than 
I can guess, and more than I'd have known 
for the world, because it would make him 
so uneasy on account of his fiiend Mr. 
Melville ; but since you've heard so 
much " 

" His friend Mr. xMelville !" repeated 
the lady, scornfully — " oh yes, very likely 
indeed, that he'd take such pains about 
concealing a mistress of his ! Xo, no, not 
quite so heasely hummed as this, I hassure 
you — that story won't go down !" 

" Why then, if 'tis not true, may I ne- 
ver be married myself," cried the corporal, 
" to the girl I love !" and he cast a very 
significant glance at the lady, though not 
one exactly in unison with the real senti- 
ments of his heart, as there certainly was 
more of profession than sincerity in his 
passion for her. 

** I defy you to make me believe it r* 
said she. 

i2 



172 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

*•' Done !" cried the corporal ; " when I 
explain matters, you'll find you'll say dif- 
ferently ;" and, without further hesitation, 
he proceeded to do so, disclosing every 
particular of the affair between Melville 
and Lavinia, the cause of the elopement, 
the occasion of their reembarking for Scot- 
land being delayed, and the important 
reasons there were for keeping her being 
in the castle concealed from every one, as 
well as his master's having had any hand 
in the business. 

" And you tell me this is all true?" 
said Mrs. Featherston, anxious not to .be 
imposed upon, on account of her lady. 

" Why, I'll swear it !" cried the corporal. 

" Well, do then ; but not by none of 
your i^zrish saints, because I don't know 
nothing about them." 

" Well, I'll — I'll swear by your own 
bright eyes," cried the corporal, " because 
I am sure you know something about 
them, that it is true as that no one can 
see you without admiring you." 

" Well, now I believe you," said the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 173 

flattered abigail, highly pleased by his 
compliments; "but I must be leaving 
you now, for this is about the time my 
lady will be wanting to dress for the party 
the folks here are going to to-night ; so, 
till we meet again, good-bye," extending 
her lily hand to receive its accustomed 
salute at parting, from the completely- 
taken-in Cormick. 

At first lady Jane was disappointed by 
the information she had succeeded in ob- 
taining her, but a moment's reflection suf- 
ficed to convince her, that the discovery 
of his having been concerned in the affair 
about Lavinia, would prove nearly, if not 
as entirely, injurious to Donaghue, with 
regard to sir William, as if what she had 
imagined had been ascertained. 

It was not of this, however, but of the 
still more heinous offence she had believed 
him guilty, that she meant to accuse him. 
With a hope and persuasion that he would 
enter into no vindication of himself, lest 
the explanation of the mistake should be 
a means of betraying the interests of his 



174 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

friend, she believed him perfectly ca- 
pable of such generosity; but should it be 
a stretch beyond him, where Eveleen was 
at stake, she congratulated herself on the 
probability, that in trying to escape Cha- 
rybdis, he would assuredly founder on 
Scylla. She knew sir William's senti- 
ments respecting the affair of Lavinia — 
she had heard his passionate avowal of 
never forgiving any one concerned in aid- 
ing in her elopement; and, act as he 
would, Donaghue had now got himself 
involved, in a way, she flattered herself* 
from which he would vainly try to extri- 
cate himself 

But though she panted to be revenged 
on him for all he had made her suffer, yet> 
as she was convinced the only hope she 
had of ever drawing him towards her a- 
gain, was by preventing his ever knowing 
or suspecting she was in any way concern- 
ed in the injury she was now about doing 
him with sir William, ere she allowed her- 
self to finally carry her plan into effect, 
she resolved on leaving the Vale, trusting. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 175 

by this measure, to escape what she feared. 
Accordingly, she suddenly pretended to 
lady Erin to have received an invitation 
to a lady's house in Dublin, which she 
could not decline without giving offence ; 
but from which, she assured her ladyship, 
she should make it a point of returning 
time enough to be present at the marriage 
of their sweet Eveleen. 

Lady Erin said all that politeness re- 
quired on the occasion, and lady Jane, 
without permitting herself almost to pause, 
set out with her trusty abigail on her 
pretended visit. Her journey to the me- 
tropoHs, however, ended at a small obscure 
town, about fifteen miles from the Vale, 
whence, the following day, a letter to this 
effect was dispatched to sir William by 
post, written by Mrs. Featherston, under 
her guidance, without which indeed its 
malicious aim might have been disap- 
pointed, as Featherston's writing and or- 
thography were both of a description to 
render her literary productions rather 
puzzhng : — 



176 TRADITION OF THE CASTLi!. 

" To Sir William Erin, Bart 

" If sir William Erin has that 
regard for the happiness of his daughter, 
which it is but natural to suppose he has, 
ere he allows the affair between her and 
Mr. Donaghue O'Brien to proceed any- 
further, it might be advisable to make 
some inquiry about the fair friend who 
has, for some time past, condescendingly 
given her company to that gentleman in 
the castle, as such appendages to an esta- 
blishment are not by any means calculated 
for the promotion of domestic happiness. 
The hint is given by an enemy to hypo- 
crisy, and a friend to innocence and truth !" 

This production was received by sir 
William in his library, where he was, a- 
lone, at the moment, the morning after it 
was sent. Such a hint as it contained he 
could not possibly have deemed himself 
excusable for disregarding ; but assuredly 
it would not have produced the striking 
effect upon him it did, but for what had 



TRAOTTION OF THE CASTLE. 177 

recently occurred — the surprise, not un- 
mingled with a dawning of distrust, which 
the recent conduct of Donaghue had ex- 
cited — the affair of the reticule, and the 
mislaid key, with the doctor's positive 
contradiction about the latter, instantly 
recurred to his recollection, or rather the 
confusion, the agitation, they had been the 
means of occasioning; and, without further 
hesitation, he ordered the chariot to be got 
ready, the day being too wet for riding, 
and forthwith proceeded to Altoir-na- 
Grenie, without allowing it to be known 
whither he w^as going. 

The invitation having at length arrived 
for the doctor, he had left it the preceding 
day for a short time, delighted to have 
something new to divert and occupy him 
till the wedding took place ; and, relieved 
fronT all apprehension of a surprise from 
him, and equally divested of all apprehen- 
sion of it from any other person, through 
the wetness of the day, Donaghue had 
invited Lavinia to take a little exercise in 
i3 



178 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the king's dining-room, or great hall, as 
it was now as often called, and where they 
were actually conversing together at the 
moment that he was thunderstruck by 
hearing the voice of sir William approach- 
ing the apartment, the sound of the car- 
riage having been completely drowned in 
the blustering of the wind without. — 
" Fly ! fly !'* exclaimed Donaghue, in al- 
most breathless agitation, to his fair com- 
panion, and opening, as he spoke, the fold- 
ing doors behind the chair of state for her. 

Lavinia obeyed, but, in the hurry of 
her flight, dropt a shawl she had thrown 
over her shoulders, but which the extreme 
confusion he was thrown into not allow- 
ing Donaghue to notice, was almost the 
first thing that caught the keen eye of sir 
William as he entered. — " This is a — a 
very unexpected pleasure indeed, sir," 
said Donaghue, trying to receive him col- 
lectedly ; " I should hardly have thought 
that you would have liked to come out 
such a day." 

" Well, I don't pretend to say I did," 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 179 

said sir William ; " I neither like to ex- 
pose my servants or horses to such a day 
as this; but when one is very anxious a- 

bout any thing But what fine affair is 

this?" suddenly taking up the shawl; 
" why, really, my dear fellow, this, in ad- 
dition to what the doctor picked up the 
other day, is almost sufiicient to excite a 
suspicion that " 

" Oh ! nurse Cormick's shawl," said 
Donaghue, attempting to speak with un- 
concern, and making an effort to take it 
from him ; " she was here receiving some 
orders from me, and " 

But he could not finish the sentence — 
obliged to raise his eyes to sir William's 
as he proceeded, he found his bent upon 
him at the instant, in such a manner as 
made him, he felt, change colour, and in- 
voluntarily turn aside his head. 

Sir \Villiam could hardly command 
himself any longer, so evident an attempt 
— so almost impudent a one he considered 
it — did this appear at impositi<>n. He 
was determined, however, to go coolly 



180 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

through the bushiess; flinging away, 
therefore, the unfortunate shawl, which, 
from its costliness, it was not to be be- 
lieved belonged to an old Irish nurse, or 
at least worn by her trolling about her 
daily concerns, he took out the letter, and, 
unfolding it, laid it before Donaghue on 
the table by which they were standing; 
and — " There," he said, " I should be glad 
you would glance your eye over that let- 
ter, for there is something in it that con- 
cerns you. Only say, on the word of a 
man of honour, that the insinuation it 
contains is false — that there is no such 
person beneath this roof as it alludes to, 
and from this instant I dismiss it from my 
thoughts." 

He turned away as he spoke, with a 
degree of emotion not immediately re- 
pressible — for how much depended on the 
next minute! Donaghue had endeared 
himself to him, and he felt it would be a 
hard struggle to fling him from his regard, 
if called ii pon to do so. 

Donaghue — the nearly - overwhelmed 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 181 

Donaghue, mechanically took up the 
scrawl of Mrs. Featherston; but, for a 
moment, a mist seemed to spread itself 
before his eyes, that prevented his deci- 
phering a line. When, at length, by the 
dint of exertion, he recovered the power 
of vision, in what a predicament did he 
find himself placed — compelled, either to 
rest under an imputation revolting to 
every feeling of truth and delicacy to have 
incurred, or else betray the confidence re- 
posed in him by his friend ! for, to pledge 
his solemn word to a falsehood, was out 
of the question — principle and pride alike 
revolted from that ; yet, what should he 
do? good God! what should be done? 
and he stood unconsciously gazing on the 
letter, as if still perusing it. 

" Well," said sir William, again ap- 
proaching the table, " what am I to infer 
from this silence ?" 

" That I merit not the questionings this 
invidious letter occasions." 

" Then you give me to understand the 
insinuation it contains is false? you assure 



182 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

me of this, on the word of a man of truth 
and honour, that there is no person be- 
neath this roof whom you wish to conceal 
from the knowledge of your friends ?" 

Donaghue shrunk back — " I should 
have hoped — I should have trusted," he 
said, " that no further denial than I have 
already given to the charge, would have 
been required of me ! Anonymous accu- 
sations are of a description that I should 
conceive a mind of liberality and candour 
would pay very little attention to, so very 
questionable must the motive be consi- 
dered for them." 

In a moment recovering his previous 
sternness, through the indignation excited 
by this apparent evasion — " Have done, 
have done with this futile reasoning!" 
haughtily exclaimed sir William ; " it is 
contradiction, not argument, sir," he still 
more imperiously added, " I require from 
you !" 

The proud blood of Donaghue mounted 
up to his very temples, and, for a mo- 
ment, he was obliged to turn away to re- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 188 

collect himself — to recollect that it was 
the father of Eveleen who had addressed 
him in this commanding, this authorita- 
tive manner. 

" Well, sir," exclaimed sir William 
again ; then, after a slight pause — " But 
I am answered," he cried ; " were I to he- 
sitate any longer in thinking so, it would 
seem as if I was soliciting you to false- 
hood. Your silence has answered me, and 
I am glad — I am happy," but, in the hur- 
ried tone of extreme agitation, he added, 
*' to find that you are incapable of entirely 
forgetting yourself — that though, as a lo- 
ver, you have lost yourself, you have not 
entirely lost yourself as a man of honour ! 
Farewell, sir — our acquaintance ends here ! 
Regrets for the past I have ever consider- 
ed a weakness, yet I cannot so entirely 
command myself at this moment, as not 
to express my deep concern that we were 
ever known to each other !" 

" Good God! what are you about? 
What do you mean, sir ?" exclaimed Do- 
naghue, rushing between him and the 



184 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

door. " You do not want to drive me to 
distraction and despair? By all my hopes 
of happiness, both here and hereafter, I am 
not more undeserving of her, whom I will 
not resign, than I was at the moment you 
consented to give her to me !" 

" That I make not the slightest doubt 
of, sir," replied sir William, in a sarcastic 
tone, and with a sneer that suited it; " I 
have not the slightest doubt of your prin- 
ciples and sentiments being then what 
they are now, only not so well known 
then, or appreciated." 

Again Donaghue was obliged to recol- 
lect who it was that was speaking to him, 
to be enabled to command himself. 

" But you will not resign Eveleen Erin, 

you say ! You Were it possible, after 

the gross insult you have offered her, that 
she could forgive-— could ever degrade her- 
self by another thought about you, I 
would, dear as she is to my heart as my 
child, my only child, I would spurn her, 
so help me, Heaven ! with worse than ha- 
tred, with contempt, from my feet. Away, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 185 

sir, and let me pass ! I am not to be de- 
tained here, or in any way trifled with; 
our conference, if much longer prolonged, 
may perhaps end more disagreeably than 
either of us at present apprehend/' 

Donaghue immediately drew aside, and 
opened the door for him. But hardly had 
he seen him drive off, ere he was ready to 
pursue him, for the purpose of explaining 
the truth ; but a moment's reflection check- 
ed this impulse of despair, for what must 
be the result of such an explanation, but 
to have the innocent, the confiding Lavi- 
nia torn from his protection, and the hap- 
piness of his friend destroyed by the eter- 
nal separation that would then probably 
ensue between them. And could he, after 
this, ever face him again ? No, no ; and 
he rejoiced therefore that the timely de- 
parture of sir Wilham prevented his being 
guilty of this involuntary treachery. 

A sense of unmerited injuries is bitter 
and irritating, but still we have a support 
under them, which fails us when con- 
scious of being the cause of injury to others; 



186 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

yet to calmly endure the loss of such hap- 
piness as he was allowed to look forward 
to, to have the brim-full cup dashed from 
his very lips, Eveleen torn as it were from 
his grasp, how, how was he to endure it, 
and retain his reason ! and in all the wild 
extravagance of despair, he threw himself 
on a seat. 

At this moment, while yet every nerve 
was throbbing with the agony of conflict- 
ing feelings, and his brow was almost 
ghastly through the same, the crimson 
curtains behind the throne were parted, 
and the fair face of Lavinia was seen peep- 
ing through them ; and — " I may venture 
in," she said, advancing into the apart- 
ment as she spoke. " Such a fright," she 
continued, " as I was in when I missed 
this!" taking up the shawl; *' but I hope 
he went without noticing it?" 

Donaghue faintly smiled. 

" I scarce thought to have found you 
here," she went on, " concluding sir Wil- 
liam had called for you. But — but," turn- 
ing her eyes full upon Donaghue, " what 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 187 

is the matter? You look as if something 
had happened to distress you. Nothing 
un — unpleasant," and her voice faltered, 
and she turned of a deadly paleness, 
" brought sir William here, I hope ?" 

" No, no, nothing," replied Donaghue, 
a little impatiently. 

Lavinia looked still more earnestly at 
him for a moment, and then — " You are 
deceiving me, I am convinced !" she ex- 
claimed. " Oh, tell me at once what has 
occurred — what it is I have to fear !" 

" Nothing ; I protest most solemnly no- 
thing," said Donaghue — " nothing has oc- 
curred in any way to disquiet you, either 
about yourself or Melville." 

" And can you make the same assu- 
rance with regard to yourself?" asked 
Lavinia anxiously, going to him as she 
spoke, and hanging over him, as he still 
sat resting his arm on the back of a chair 
adjoining the one he occupied, with all 
the fond solicitude of an affectionate sister, 
for in the light of a beloved brother her 
innocent and sensitive heart by this time 



188 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

regarded him. " Can you," she demanded, 
" really assure me that nothing has hap- 
pened to create disquietude on your own 
account ?" 

" Y-e-s; why should you imagine I 
could not?" answered Donaghue, again 
forcing a languid smile. 

*•' Because your looks are so disturbed." 

** Oh, no ; you mistake," said Donaghue, 
rising as he spoke, and endeavouring to 
shake off the air that had alarmed her ; 
" nothing — nothing is the matter with me, 
but a headach — the effect of the heaviness 
of the day, I suppose." 

" And I may believe you ?" she said, 
laying her hand on his arm, and looking 
up in his face. 

Donaghue took her hand, and kissed it ; 
and — " Don't you think you may ?" he 
asked evasively. 

" I hope so," she replied, but evidently 
doubtingly ; " and so I will go now and 
finish my letter to Melville, that it may 
be in time for you to enclose to him, 
before you set off for the Vale." 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 189 

The Vale! Donaghue started. 

" For to suppose the day could keep 
you from it, would be idle, I am sure; 
and as to your headach " 

" Don't delay any longer," cried Dona- 
ghue, " about your letter," unable to en- 
dure the agony of speaking about the 
Vale. 

Lavinia kissed her hand, and vanished, 
but with a doubt, a misgiving on her 
mind, as to his not having been sincere 
w^ith her in this instance, that, on reach- 
ing her apartment, made her communicate 
her apprehensions to Mrs. Cormick, whom 
she found there, of something having hap- 
pened to disturb him. 

The nurse, taking the alarm, instantly 
hastened in quest of the corporal, to in- 
quire whether he knew of any thing that 
was the matter. 

Cormick, whose mind had been misgiv- 
ing him ever since his conversation with 
Mrs. Featherston, startled at the ques- 
tion, inquired what had occasioned it ; and 
on learning, became instantly convinced 



190 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

that something disagreeable had occurred, 
more especially as he was confident he had 
heard sir William speaking in an exalted 
tone, and had remarked it as an extraor- 
dinary thing, his not being attended to 
his carriage by his master. 

Full of dismay, but without imparting 
what he thought to his mother, lest it 
should be a means of creating alarm in the 
mind of Lavinia, he forthwith proceeded 
to the apartment where his master was, 
and whom he found walking about it in 
such agitation as instantly confirmed his 
worst fears. So utterly lost was Donaghue 
at the moment, in the contemplation of 
the predicament in which he found him- 
self, that he did not perceive that any one 
had entered, till Cormick, after various 
devices to try and draw his attention, 
threw down a large book, the noise of 
which startling, made him cast his eyes 
on him, and angrily demand what had 
brought him there? 

" I — I came," said Cormick, appearing 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 191 

to be fidgeting about the reading-table, 
« to— to settle the things." 

" What! at this hour? Begone! nor 
intrude again till I ring for you." 

"Yes, your honour; but I suppose 
your honour won't be for riding to the 
Vale to-day, but going in the carriage, it 
continues to rain so. At what hour shall 
I order it ?" 

Donaghue looked with almost fierce- 
ness at him for a moment, and then turn- 
ed away. 

" I say, your honour, at what hour?" 

" Leave me!" cried Donaghue, in such 
a tone as perhaps he had never before ad- 
dressed him in ; " leave me, nor, at your 
peril, I command, approach again without 
being called." 

" Well, I am going," but he still con- 
tinued loitering at the table, but as if only 
to put every thing into disorder there, 
throwing down the books at one side, and 
as fast as he picked them up there, tum- 
bling them down at another. 

" Do you know what you are about?" 



192 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

demanded Donaghue, hardly able any 
longer to control himself, for this was not 
a moment, the moment of sore vexation, 
for trifling or intrusion. 

" Troth, hardly, I believe," was the re- 

" Cormick," said Donaghue, with for- 
ced calmness, " don't give me cause for 
regret ; for you know how it would pain 
me to say or do any thing to hurt your 
feelings. Leave me, my good fellow; and 
when I want you, I will ring for you ; but 

now " Intolerable agony choked his 

utterance, and striking his forehead with 
his hand, he turned to a window. " Leave 
me," he repeated, after a transient pause, 
" again I order — I command !" 

" No, I can't," cried Cormick. 

" How !" exclaimed Donaghue, turning 
fiercely on him. 

" No ; you may look and do as you 
please," said Cormick, coolly ; " but I can't, 
nor I won't leave you, for you are not fit 
to be left by yourself — don't I see distrac- 
tion in every look? But no wonder, for 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 193 

I guess how it is ; my mind has been mis- 
giving me ever since I was talking with 
that witch, and she told me some one was 
blabbing. I thought there was mischief 
brewing then, and so I am not surprised 
at what has happened now." 

" That witch ! — whom do you allude 
to ? or what is it you mean by these bro- 
ken hints and sentences ?" 

" Why, that painted Jezabel — she that 
thought 1 was in love with her, though, 
God knows, I had as much thoughts of 
her, or the likes of her (for I soon saw 
what she was), as of one of my ould great 
great grandmothers, that's dead a hundred 
years, or more for aught 1 know — Mrs. 
Featherston, lady Jane's woman." 

" Ha! what of her?" exclaimed Dona- 
ghue, starting, as a sudden light seemed 
to flash across his mind; " what of her?" 
in extreme emotion he demanded. 

Cormick, without hesitation, proceeded 
to inform him of his last meeting with 
Mrs. Featherston, and what she had men- 

VOL. IV. K 



194 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

tioned to him, or rather indeed the whole 
of the conversation that had passed be- 
tween them — a conversation that he now 
deeply regretted, from an internal convic- 
tion that it was framed for the artful pur- 
pose of trying to obtain some further in- 
formation through his means. 

Donaghue hardly heard him to a conclu- 
sion, ere, with a wild laugh — " Oh, I now 
see how it is !" he cried ; " I now see all i 
the hand from which the poisoned arrow 
has been discharged that is rankling in my 
heart! That woman, of course, was set 
on by her mistress, to draw you into some 
confession, that might enable her to know 
how to act against me; for whatever 
might be the knowledge she had contri- 
ved to obtain, of what there were so many 
reasons for wishing to conceal, it is evi- 
dent she knew not all she desired, till she 
learned it through you. Her woman's af- 
fecting to be perfectly informed on the 
subject, was all a stratagem, to betray you 
into the disclosure that was required l and 
lady Jane has barbarously taken advantage 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 195 

of the peculiarity of my situation to de- 
stroy me; for well, well she knew, at the 
expence of my friend's happiness, I would 
not, could not, attempt a vindication of 
myself — Devil ! devil !" he cried, through 
his clenched teeth, as he paced the hall, 
with feelings that shook his very frame. 

" Devil !" cried Cormick ; " you may 
well call her that, and the other one too; 
mistress and maid, they are both alike. 
Oh, then, how I wish I'd known, the 
other evening, what my lady was about, 
when she came over me so nately, with 
her smooth English tongue ! But there's 
no coming up to these women for guile 
and deceit; 'tis my belief, if he who 
tempted the first of them was to come 
amongst them now, he'd be no match for 
them; and, to be sure, there wouldn't 
be half the disturbance there is in the 
world, if it wasn't for them ; as I was 
reading in an old play-book the other 
evening, who was it but a woman caused 
the long ten years siege of Troy ? — who 
K 2 



196 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

was it but a woman made Marc Ant(»iy 
lose the world? — who was it, in shorty 
that has been the occasion of all the mis- 
chief that ever was heard of, but a woman? 
— and who, to finish all, was it sold us 
all, but a woman ?" 

" But if there are devils amongst the 
sex, so are there angels !" cried Donaghue ; 
" and was I not assured of one of the 

brightest and loveliest of these But I 

have lost her !" staggering back to a seat 
through agony ; " I have lost her through 
the machinations of that vilest of women ! 
It is useless, Cormick, to try and conceal 
it from you — it must soon be every where 
known — lady Jane has ruined and undone 
me with sir William," and he proceeded 
to acquaint the agitated Cormick with the 
particulars of all that had recently occur- 
red. 

Cormick wrung his hands, in down- 
right agony. — " Oh, to think of this !" he 
cried ; " when we were all so happy and 
comfortable, after squire Dennis keeping 
his word of being the making of some one 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 197 

belonging to the family ; for, to be sure, 
it was all along of him that your honour 
got back your fortune. But it mayn't be 
so bad as your honour thinks Mr. Mel- 
\i\\e must now be coming back soon, and 
then " 

Donaghue again started up, and began 
traversing the hall. No, no, there was no 
hope of that. The letter received from 
him, only that morning, mentioned his 
uncle being still in such a state as to ren- 
der it impossible for him to leave him : 
but something must be done — he could 
not rest under the idea of being thought 
capable of offering so gross an insult to 
his Eveleen, to his own sweet bride, as he 
was now accused of He would write to 
sir William ; he would simply state the 
fact to him, and rely on him, both as a 
man of sense and sensibility, to forgive 
what friendship had occasioned ; and sure- 
ly it was impossible but that he must 
forgive what was both so natural and ex- 
cusable. 

The fever of his mind seemed in a mo- 



198 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ment to abate, at the hope suggested by 
this determination, and hastily placing 
himself at the table, he was in the very 
act of commencing his letter, when the 
reflection of all that was likely to accnie 
from it, made him suddenly check his 
hand. In acknowledging Lavinia was 
under his protection, should he not be be- 
traying her again into the power of her 
guardian ? That she would be forced away, 
the moment it was known where she whs, 
he could not doubt; and how, how, after 
thus appearing voluntarily to give her up, 
could he ever face Melville again ? — " No, 
no, it cannot be," he exclaimed, starting 
up, and dashing away the pen in despair; 
" I cannot, at the expence of my friend's 
happiness, purchase my own. — But, Mel- 
ville, my dear, dear friend, in what a pre- 
dicament have you placed me — but, be- 
tide what will, I swear to be faithful to 
the confidence you have reposed in me !" 

But though this suddenly- conceived 
plan was obliged to be relinquished, was 
there no other to be thought of that might 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 199 

answer i« its stead ? Could he but ob- 
tain an interview with Eveleen, he would 
at once confide to her what he had in- 
tended to disclose to her father, convinced 
that her sentiments, with regard to his 
conduct about INJelville, would indeed be 
very different from his on the subject, and 
consequently, however the intercourse be- 
tween them might be interrupted, or sus- 
pended, till it was safe to come to an open 
explanation, his interests with her would 
suffer no injury. But hov/ was this to be 
managed or accomplished, persuaded, as 
he was, that every precaution would now 
be taken, both by herself, offended as she 
must be, by the conduct imputed to him, 
as well as her father, to prevent any thing 
of the kind ? In short, it appeared next 
to impracticable to have it obtained ; and 
accordingly he decided on writing; but 
no sooner had he done so, than an equal 
difficulty appeared about the conveyance 
of a letter — how or by what means to ac- 
complish getting one delivered to her. 
At length he recollected something like a 



200 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

hint he had received from Cormick's mo- 
ther, of an attachment between him and 
Miss Erin's maid ; and no sooner had it 
recurred to him, than he explained to 
Cormick what he wished to have effected 
through his means. 

Cormick looked very blank and confu- 
sed while listening to him, and at length 
confessed he feared having offended his 
mistress irreconcilably, by the flirtation 
into which he had unfortunately been 
dravv^n with her rival, INIrs. Featherston ; 
but whatever could be done, should be 
done; and Donaghue, without further 
loss of time, sat down to write his letter, 
which, the moment it was finished, Cor- 
mick went off with. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 201 



CHAPTER IV. 



'■r***^*.r 



*' Oh, look upon me, sir. 

And hold your hands in benediction o'er me!" 

In the mean time sir William had return- 
ed home ; the moment he alighted, he re- 
paired to lady Erin's dressing-room, where 
he understood she and Eveleen were 
then sitting by themselves, anxious to get 
through the unpleasant communication 
he had to make as soon as possible, aware 
that the longer a disagreeable business is 
delayed, the more unwilling we are to set 
about it. 

" So you have been out, my dear ?" said 
lady Erin, as he entered. " I had no idea 
of your going out such a day as this." 

" Nor I, but something occurred to 
oblige me." 

His tone was not his usual one; and 
k3 



2t>2 TRADITION Of THE CASTLE. 

both her ladyship and Eveleen, alike struck 
by it, raised their eyes from their work to 
look at him, and in the discomposure of 
his looks clearly saw that something had 
happened to disturb him. 

" I hope, my dear," said lady Erin, 
" you have heard nothing additionally 
distressing about our poor friend in Dub- 
lin?" 

" No, nothing. 'Tis not about him I 
am exactly thinking at the moment, with 
all my regard for him ; it is about some- 
thing that more intimately — more imme- 
diately concerns me, than what has hap^ 
pened to distress him. I have been to 
Altoir-na-Grenie ; an unpleasant letter 
brought me there — I had hoped to have 
had it contradicted; but in the hope I 
was disappointed, and-^and — the result 
is, that there is an end of all farther inter- 
course with O'Brien. There is the letter," 
he added, unfolding and laying it on the 
table before his thunderstruck wife and 
daughter; " when you glance over it, 
you'll hardly wonder, I believe, at what 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 203 

it has led to. — Well?" he exclaimed, after 
he had allowed them time for its perusal. 
" Well, I am indeed shocked, shocked 
beyond language to express !" said lady 
Erin ; " a short time ago, and I could not 
have believed this possible !" 

" Then you do not blame me for what I 
have done," said sir William, " for having 
entirely broken off with him ? — And you, 
my dear girl," turning his anxious looks 
ijpon his daughter, " you neither, I hope ?" 
Eveleen tried to reply, but the effort 
was beyond her strength — the indistinct 
words died away upon her pale lips, and 
with a deep sigh her head fell upon the 
shoulder of her mother. 

Her father lifted her up, and bore her to 
a window, but some time elapsed ere either 
the air or the united efforts of her distressed 
parents succeeded in restoring her, so cruel, 
so terrible was the shock she had sustained. 
" My God !" exclaimed sir William, 
the fondest of fathers, as she lay reclined 
on his breast, " is not this a sight sufR- 



£04 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

cient to excuse me for uttering execrations 
against that young libertine ?" v 

" No, no," cried lady Erin, as her trera^ 
bling hands continued chafing the temples 
of her daughter, " let us still, in the midst 
of resentment, remember Christian charity, 
and pray for the reformation of him who 
has indeed wrung our hearts with sorrow. 
Cost us what pangs he may, I never can 
forget his being the son of my dearest 
friend. Good God, how does the experi- 
ence of each succeeding day tend still 
more powerfully to prove what short- 
sighted mortals we are ! Since this re- 
verse in his fortune, how often have I 
dared to regret, and thus indirectly mur- 
mur, at her removal hence, when I now 
see that she was only taken away from 
the evil to come ! for had she been spared 
to witness it, what an hour of bitterness 
would this have been to her — to see the 
son of her fond affections lost, banished, 
cast off, by the friends whose esteem she 
was so anxious to obtain him, as an ob- 
ject of contempt and reprobation ! Un- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 205 

fortunate young man ! what a proof of the 
responsibility of parents about their off- 
spring! for this terrible dereliction may, 
I conclude, be imputed to the example 
early set by his poor, thoughtless, impru- 
dent father. How justly has it been said, 
that prosperity is the test of virtue ! How 
well, how correctly, how even nobly, may 
it not be said, did this unhappy young 
man conduct himself through the season 
of adversity, but the moment it changed, 
how has he lost himself!" 

On Eveleen's entirely coming to her- 
self, she almost feared encountering the 
glances of her father, lest she should read 
in them censure or reproach for the weak- 
ness she had betrayed; but his tender 
caresses, and endearing expressions, soon 
dissipated this fear. He might appear 
stern, and he was stern to vice and folly ; 
but he knew, and he felt what a young 
and bereaved heart must endure under 
the first shock of disappointed affection, 
and he could not crush the broken reed. — 
" I know, my dearest girl," he cried, " what 



M6 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

you must feel from the shock you have ex- 
perienced, since the rudest shock the hu- 
man heart can experience, is that which 
is inflicted by the discovery of perfidy in 
the object of its regard ; but while I am 
aware of this, I am equally so that proper 
exertions will be made for overcoming it; 
and these are what we never fail in. To 
give up a beloved object is, I know, a 
bitter pang — one that needs our utmost 
strength of mind to enable us to endure; 
but still, is it to be compared to the living 
in a state of constant distrust and anxiety 
with them ? But I will not detain you 
longer. I see it will be a relief to you to 
be by yourself a little; but ere you re- 
tire, give me the satisfaction of saying 
that you do not secretly reproach me for 
what I have done." 

" Reproach !" repeated Eveleen, em- 
phatically, and raising her eyes, from 
which, overpowered by the tenderness of 
her father, tears were now pouring in tor- 
rents ; " oh no ! could I be capable of re- 
proach of the kind, of even a murmur, in 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 207 

what a light sbould I regard myself! No, 
my dear sir, you liave acted just as I would 
myself have acted, if left to my own free 
unbiassed judgment; for to have passed 
over, to have forgiven-^ — '' Her lip qui- 
vered — she kissed her father's hand — press- 
ed her lips for an instant to her mother's 
cheek, tear-dewed like her own, and hasti- 
ly withdrew to her chamber. 

" There," said her father, looking after 
her w^ith mingled pride and affection, 
" there spoke the consistent principles 
and feelings I ever expected to find her 
possessed of, when put to the test — sensi- 
bility to feel, but firmness to resist, what 
must now be considered a weakness and 
an offence to virtue. What a treasure, for 
any one capable of appreciating her worth ! 
and how should we bless the superintend- 
ing Providence that has prevented her 
being thrown away ! That wretched 
young man — I could almost find it in my 
heart to pity him ; for what has he not 
lost in losing her ? Yet no, the man cap- 
able of acting as he has done, with the 



208 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

prospect of a union with such a woman 
as she is, merits nothing but contempt. 

Miss Erin started on entering her dress- 
ing-room; the preparations for her mar- 
riage were by this time far advanced, and 
several bridal dresses, that very morn- 
ing arrived from Dublin, were still lying 
spread out upon the chairs, on which they 
had been laid for her inspection; for a 
minute she involuntarily pressed her hands 
against her eyes, and a fresh gush of sorrow 
burst from her wounded heart — wounded, 
oh, how acutely ! by the very hand that, 
but a few short minutes ago, she had fond- 
ly, credulously, as it now seemed, imagin- 
ed would sooner have planted a dagger in 
its own breast, than allowed evil or injury 
to have approached her ! and was it, could 
it be, that, with his acuteness of feeling, 
his susceptibility to shame and censure, 
the regard which even hereditary pride 
made him feel for the good opinion of the 
world, Donaghue had so entirely forgot, 
so utterly lost himself, as to render his 
home, the very home he was preparing 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 209 

for his bride, the scene of a degrading 
amour? But he had not denied the gross 
imputation, and who then was to discredit 
it? And this was his love for her — this 
the romantic constancy for which she gave 
him credit — this his respect for reputation 
— this his deference for truth and virtue ! 
Good God ! who, to know him, who, to 
converse with him, as she had done, could 
ever have believed him such a dissembler? 
And yet, did she actually believe him one ? 
was there not something in his manner so 
unstudied, an energy, an ardour, an ani- 
mation that, as recalled to recollection, 
checked the idea of his being insincere, 
either in what he had looked, or what he 
had professed ? But her giving him cre- 
dit, as, despite of herself she was tempted 
to do, for sincerity, both in what he avow- 
ed and professed, by no means operated 
to his advantage, but the very contrary ; 
for if, with a heart occupied by such an 
attachment as he professed for her, such a 
respect for virtue, and the esteem of the 
world, he still had^not power to resist 



210 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

temptation, or curb his lawless passions, 
what reliance was to be placed, or what 
confidence reposed in him? and as the 
thought occurred, how did she bless the 
interposition that had prevented her lead- 
ing that life of hardly endurable misery 
that is led by those " who doat, yet doubt 
— suspect, yet strongly love !" It was not in 
his power now to make her feel the pangs 
of jealousy, the tortures of alternate hope 
and fear, of reviving confidence and re- 
newed suspicion ; but as his wife — " Oh, 
good God !" she exclaimed, clasping her 
hands, " when this day commenced, 
would I have believed any one, Dona- 
ghue, that should have told me, long ere 
its close, I should rejoice at all prospect of 
ever becoming your wife being over? 
Unhappy man, if indeed your affection for 
me be w^hat you have persuaded me, what 
misery have you not drawn on yourself! 
from the trance of pleasure, on what a de- 
sert scene must your eyes open ! for hope 
extinguished, what but a desert scene is 
the world, with all its allurements, to the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 211 

afflicted heart ? If it be, as something 
within me tells me it is, may the lesson you 
have now received prove a salutary one 
to you, and teach you not to trifle again 
with your happiness !" 

The uninterrupted indulgence she was 
permitted to give to her feelings, enabled 
her sooner to recover herself than might 
otherwise have been the case ; for sorrow 
must have utterance ere it knows relief. 

At the usual hour of assembling in the 
drawing-room, preparatory to dinner, she 
joined the party there ; and the fond ap- 
proving smiles of her father and mother 
were a reward for her exertions to subdue 
her feelings. But her firmness was again 
put to the test, by the inquiries that, on 
the announcement of dinner, were made 
after Donaghue ; and still more, when, 
on entering the dining-room, she found, 
as usual, a chair placed for him. 

Her father's eye was upon her — he saw 
her change colour, and — " Take that away," 
he said to a servant, glancing at the chair. 

*' So you don't expect Mr. O'Brien then 



212 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

to-day ?" said sir Edward. " I hope it's 
not the rain that is keeping him away ; 
for, upon my life, if it is, if I were you. 
Miss Erin, I should be vastly offended." 

" No, it is not the rain," said sir Wil- 
liam ; " the day being fine or wet would 
have made no difference, with regard to 
his dining here. I did not expect him 
to-day ; nor do I expect him shortly again 
here." 

A general stare was the consequence of 
this observation ; and some inquiries were 
about being hazarded, but which sir Wil- 
liam checked, and a turn was quickly 
given to the conversation. 

But the evening was a wretched one to 
Eveleen ; so still more acute became every 
moment the intense anguish she was en- 
during, that it seemed to her as if the 
shock she had sustained had at first a 
stunning effect upon her senses ; she still, 
however, tried to struggle with her feel- 
ings, but with every nerve throbbing with 
anguish, every idea wandering, to smile 
^and seem to converse as usual became at 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 213 

length too painful an effort to persevere 
in ; and her mother, anxiously watching 
every look, suggested her withdrawing at 
an early hour to her chamber. 

In the mean while, Cormick had been 
exerting all his influence to try and effect 
a reconciliation with his offended mistress; 
imputing, as she did, all his efforts for this 
to his not having her rival now to flirt 
with, with the greatest difficulty he effect- 
ed an interview with her; but nothing 
could have induced her to comply with 
any other request, than the one he had to 
make ; but what her mistress was concern- 
ed in, she could not bring herself to re- 
fuse, and accordingly undertook putting 
the letter in her way, not having courage 
to deliver it directly into her hand. 

The ensuing day was fine ; happy would 
Eveleen and Donaghue have considered 
themselves, had the mental storm of the 
preceding one been succeeded by such a 
calm as had succeeded the storm that had 
rendered it so unpleasant ; but there was 
no assuagement of their anguish or per- 



214 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

turbation; they were disunited— they were 
separated— and how many days must elapse, 
ere that idea could cease to agonize and 
agitate ! 

Sir WiUiam's anxiety was so great about 
his daughter, as to induce him, under the 
pretext furnished him by the fineness of 
the morning, of inviting her to a walk 
before breakfast, to seek her, at an early 
hour, in her dressing-room ; he found her 
there, and though she expressed herself 
pleased at what he proposed, he thought 
there was something of embarrassment in 
her look. Nor was he mistaken ; tears had 
again been flowing ; and a fear of their, at 
length, degrading her in his eyes, made 
her indeed feel embarrassed at so unex- 
pectedly seeing him. 

As sir William was walking about the 
room, while she was tying on her bonnet, 
near the chair from which she had taken 
it, a letter on her dressing-table caught his 
eye ; involuntarily he glanced at the di- 
rection, and perceived it was in the hand- 
writing of Donaghue. A strong feeling 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 215 

of indignation instantly pervaded his mind; 
the embarrassment her manner had evinced 
was now accounted for ; she had been per- 
using this letter, and it was the narrow 
escape she had from being surprised read- 
ing what, she was conscious, she should 
have thrown from her with contem.pt, that 
had given her the appearance of confusion 
he had remarked on his entrance. His 
cheek flushed, and pointing to the letter — 
" I am sorry to find this here," he cried, 
" since it has, I will confess, disappointed 
the hope I entertained of your firmness — 
your " 

Eveleen regarded him for a moment 
with surprise, then hastily advancing to 
the table, and perceiving what it was he 
alluded to, she eagerly caught up the let- 
ter, and turning the other side to him, 
shewed him the seal unbroken. 

" Forgive me," said her father, " I need 
pardon for having allowed myself for a 
moment to doubt— to suspect, that you 
would act otherwise than I expected." 

" Do not pain me, my dear father," 



216 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

said Eveleen, " by speaking in this man- 
ner : you had a right to think what you 
did, from what you saw ; but as the seal 
must prove I know not the contents of 
that letter, so equally, I assure you, I was 
ignorant of there being such a one there." 

" I think we can be at no loss to sur- 
mise who placed it there," said sir Wil- 
liam ; " but there must be a stop put to 
this; I will allow of no tampering with 
any one belonging to me, nor intrusion 
or agitation to your feelings through these 
means," and as he spoke he rang the bell 
with some violence. 

Kate, of course, answered it. He had 
prepared himself for her entrance by ta- 
king up the letter, and the instant she en- 
tered, and saw it in his hand, her looks 
convicted her of being the guilty person. 
— " I see," he cried, regarding her with 
sternness, " there is no occasion to accuse 
you — your looks have done that. That 
you were conscious of committing an im- 
propriety, in taking charge of this letter, 
your not presuming to deliver it openly 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 217 

into the hand of your mistress is a proof. 
A person who wilfully does what is 
wrong, I do not think fit for my service ; 
you will prepare yourself, therefore, im- 
mediately to quit it." 

Kate turned pale, and trembled, and 
cast an imploring look at her mistress. 

" No," replied Miss Erin, " I cannot, 
after such conduct, intercede for you." 

Sir William allowed himself to appear, 
for some minutes, as if he was not to be 
moved ; then again addressing the culprit 
— " On this one condition," he said, " as I 
rather conceive it will please your mis- 
tress to be allowed to retain you, I con- 
sent to pardon your oflfence, that you do 
not suffer yourself to be ever tempted to 
repeat it ; should you do so, or should I 
discover that you hold any intercourse 
whatever with any one belonging to Al- 
toir-na-Grenie, from that moment make 
up your mind to being not only dismissed 
from my service, but for ever thrown off 
by my family." 

VOJL. IV. L 



218 TRADITION OF THE CASTLF. 

Kate fell on her knees, to thank him for 
his goodness in forgiving her, and to make 
the promise he required. She knew she 
was doing wrong, she confessed, in taking 
charge of the letter ; but what could she 
do? she demanded — what could she do, 
when the person she took it from went 
on his knees to make her take it, and said 
it might be the death of his master if she 
i-efused? boaofons ,ilDfid 

This incident did not tend to recomi- 
pose the mind of Eveleen. Donaghue 
then was suffering what she conceived; 
and, spite of resentment, she could not 
help commiserating his imagined wretch- 
edness. ^.dBfldriw no (r»f>^^ 

Cormick, at an early hour, was Tiover- 
ing about the Vale, to learn what had re- 
sulted from the letter. A length of time 
elapsed ere he succeeded in learning any 
thing on the subject ; at length, through 
the medium of one of the men, Kate con- 
trived to have a message conveyed to him, 
acquainting him with what had occurred, 
aad her positive determination, in ccmse- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 219 

quence, of having no further communica* 
tion with him. 

In utter discon sola tion Cormick took 
the way homewards, ahnost feehng as if 
he wanted courage to face his master with 
such tidings as he had to communicate. 
The pain, however, of actually being the 
person to inflict pain on him was spared, 
by the letter being returned ere he got 
back, enclosed in a blank cover, directed 
by sir William, together with a parcel 
containing some costly presents, which 
had lately been presented to Eveleen, and 
some notes addressed to her, for, with the 
fond artifice of love, to have something to 
feast on when absent from her, Donaghue 
had, from time to time, made pretexts for 
writing billets to her, requiring answers. 

Foiled in the stratagem about the 
letter, he could think of no other plan 
than now trying to see her himself; but 
how was this to be accomphshed, he 
again demanded, guarded as she would be 
both by her own caution and her father's? 
L 2 



220 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

he cared not, he had got desperate, and 
attempt it, at all hazards, he was deter- 
mined he would. 

Eveleen, apprehensive of some rashness 
— some madness of the kind, kept herself 
almost a close prisoner, restricting herself 
from her accustomed walks and rambles, 
except accompanied ; though, to have now 
indulged herself in them alone would 
have been a luxury ; but every nerve 
shook with agitation, at the bare idea of 
encountering him again, till time, at least, 
should have subdued the regrets that each 
now felt, at the abrupt termination of eve- 
ry thing between them — the unexpected 
dissolution of an attachment so nearly on 
the ^oint of being cemented indissolubly. 
In vain she reflected on his conduct — no- 
thing could divest her of the idea of his 
affection for her being ardent and sincere, 
nor could all the resentn^ent inspired by 
that conduct prevent a pang of anguish, 
whenever the thought occurred, of what, 
in consequence, be must be now feeling — 
his despair— his desolation. She had her 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 221 

dearest connexions — her nearest friends 
about her, to sooth — to support — to bear 
her up under tl-e trial ; but he, unfortunate 
— he, at this moment, of dire and conflict- 
ing feelings, had not a being to speak 
peace to his distracted soul — to argue 
with — to calm or console him. But though 
her heart even melted, at moments, with 
pity for him — though many of the tears 
that now often, unconsciously, dropped 
from her bright eyes were caused by the 
affecting picture which her imagination 
drew of his distress, a wish for a reconci^ 
liation never once occurred ; on the con- 
trary, though even her own unshackled 
mistress, nothing she felt could induce her 
ever to renew those ties that had existed 
between them, since, after what had oc- 
curred, it was impossible her confidence 
in him could ever be restored ; yet long, 
long, she feared, her memory would lin- 
ger over his many amiable qualities — lin- 
ger over them with fond and deep regret, 
that they had not been accompanied by 
greater firmness and consistency. 



222 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

At length, his patience utterly exhaust- 
ed, Donaghue, after having vainly watch- 
ed and lain in wait for her some days 
about her well-known haunts, ventured 
one evening to approach the house at dusk. 
After reconnoitring in every direction, he 
entered the conservatory, which termi- 
nated one wing of the building, knowing 
it was a place Eveleen was sometimes 
fond of walking or sitting in at this hour, 
listening to the buzz of voices in the apart- 
ments it communicated with, or, perhaps, 
the sound of music. The extreme length 
of the place prevented his being able to 
ascertain whether there was any one in 
it till he had advanced some way into it, 
when he clearly perceived a female, in 
white, sitting in a pensive attitude, with 
her back towards him. It was Eveleen — 
Eveleen herself, he instantly felt convin- 
ced, and all sight of caution lost in the 
overpowering transports of his soul at 
again finding himself in her presence, he 
rushed forward, and ere she bad power ta 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 223 

make an effort for escaping, was at her 
feet, embracing her knees. 

So secure had she thought herself where 
tihe was, that the surprise of seeing him 
operated, for a moment, hke a shock upon 
her feelings. — " Good God !" she then ex- 
<jlaimed, endeavouring to force herself 
from his grasp, " how, after what has 
passed, could you venture to appear here ? 
how have the cruelty " 

" Do not talk to me of cruelty," said 
Donaghue, impatiently interrupting her, 
*' it is I only who have a right to speak — 
-to complain of it — I, who have been so 
'Scorned — so defamed — so driven to the 
very verge of despair and madness ; but 
this precious — ^this blessed moment com- 
pensates for all!" he exclaimed, press- 
ing her hands, with the almost convulsive 
-grasp of passion, to his lips and breast. 

Worked up to the highest pitch of in- 
dignation by this conduct — conduct so 
presumptuous, after what had occurred — 
*' Leave me ! unhand me !" said Eveleen, 
^ or you will provoke me to a measure I 



224 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

could, OB many accounts, wish to avoid. 
You have intruded on me, under the idea 
of my being passive under the intrusion, 
but you are mistaken. I need but a very 
slight exertion of my voice to make my- 
self heard, you must be aware, in the ad- 
joining apartments — do not drive me to 
such an expedient to compel you to retire." 

" Cruel, unkind Eveleen! you have 
then united with your barbarous father in 
condemning me unheard." 

" Unheard !" she repeated, with scorn, 
while she felt her blood mounting tumul- 
tuously to her cheeks ; " did he not gene- 
rously leave to yourself but I disdain 

myself, for being betrayed into any thing 
like an argument with you! Release me, 
sir, I insist ! I will not be detained ! it can 
answer no other purpose than to occasion ^ 
additional indignation. You may regret — 
you may repent— I dare say I should be ac* 
cused of weakness for believing it very 
probable that you do ; but neither sorrow "^ 
nor repentance can restore lost confidence*; 
and no earthly consideration could induce 



TRADITION OF THE CASTI.E. 225 

me to give my hand to a man, on whose 
principles and steadiness I could not place 
reliance." 

" And can you think that, if I were the 
degraded being you have been led to ima- 
gine, I could ever voluntarily have sought 
to meet your eyes again ? no, by those de- 
lightful hopes, which this propitious mo- 
ment has revived ! your own anxiety to 
shun me would not have been greater 
then than would mine to have avoided 
you : but I seem to forget the purpose for 
which I have come ; for a moment con« 
sent to listen to me calmly." 

" No, no !" exclaimed Eveleen, in an 
absolute agony of terror, " there is my fa- 
ther's voice approaching ! leave me ! leave 
me, if you do not wish to see me expire 
with terror !" 

" For an instant — only for an instant, 
hearken to me," said Donaghue, striving 
to retain her struggling hands — " one 
word almost will suffice." 

" Oh, Heavens, what cruel persistance !" 
L 3 



226 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

cried the still more terribly agitated Eve- 
leen. " Good God ! how can you see me 
in this state of agony, and not relieve me 
from it?" 

" Tell me then," said Donaghue, who 
now really distinguished the voice of sir 
William, " where — how I can see you to- 
morrow, if, indeed, it be impossible to 
steal one minute for me to-night ?" 

" Detain me another minute," said Miss 
Erin, " and I never can forgive you. You 
see the agitation I am in, and yet you un- 
feelingly disregard it." 

" There then," said Donaghue, in a 
proud, resentful tone, letting go her hand ; 
" but remember, Eveleen, if your heart 
retains the slightest interest for me, you 
may yet feel a pang at the recollection of 
this moment." 

But Eveleen appeared not to hear him ; 
she sprang forward, apparently intent only 
on preventing the approach of her father, 
lest he should not retire with sufficient 
quickness to hinder himself from being 
seen. This was the case indeed. She 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 227 

knew sir William's deep resentment of 
his conduct, and she trembled, therefore, 
to think of what might be the result of 
the discovery of his having obtruded on 
her, such was the indignation she was 
well aware it would occasion. 

To relieve herself from this tormenting 
dread, she thought of writing to Dona- 
ghue, to solicit, as an obligation, his not 
attempting any thing of the kind again ; 
but the advantage that might be taken of 
the circumstance, or rather the interpreta- 
tion to which it was liable, prevented her ; 
and all she could finally decide on was, 
keeping a stricter guard over herself than 
before, and avoiding every place to which 
there was a possibility of his obtaining 
admission. 

Hardly had Donaghue left the conser- 
vatory, ere he felt enraged with himself 
for having allowed himself to be induced, 
by the impulse of offended pride, to re- 
lease her, ere he had forced her to hearken 
to him; yet, from the terrible state of 
agitation she was in, but very little benefit. 



228 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

after all, would have accrued to him from 
the circumstance, he was inclined to believe. 
Well, what was now to be done? writing 
was out of the question ; and put com- 
pletely on her guard,, as she now was, 
there was very little chance of obtaining 
another opportunity of conversing with 
her. Something, however, must be thought 
of, for he saw her irritation was deep 
against him ; and there was no knowing to 
what resentment like her's might lead— 
the resentment of wounded affection and 
exasperated pride ; and at length, as the 
only method he could think of for accomr 
plishing what he wished, he decided on 
making it appear that he had quitted the 
neighbourhood. 

This plan was immediately carried into 
effect, and so well managed, that not a 
doubt was entertained at the Vale of his 
positive departure from the castle;; it 
seemed indeed, to Eveleen, the natural 
result of the repulse he had met with 
from her. 
/I Well, he had resigned her; there was 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. SS9 

rrow, indeed, a final conclusion to the af- 
fair between them ; but was she not aware 
of this before? and why then did her heart 
feel such a pang at the first intimation of 
his departure? But the weakness was 
but a transient one; she quickly recover- 
ed, or rather recollected herself sufficient- 
ly to rejoice that he was gone, relieving 
her, as did the circumstance, from the ne^ 
cessity of imposing a very painful restraint 
a*>y longer on herself, as well as from the 
apprehensions she must have continued to 
be agitated by, while he remained in the 
neighbourhood, of some mal a propos 
meeting between him and her father. 

But to profit by having so far thrown 
her off her guard, as to induce her to walk 
out again by herself, it was requisite for 
Donaghue to adopt some disguise, lest a 
premature discovery of the imposition he 
had practised should cause the complete 
frustration of his aim; and, with the as- 
sistance of Cormick, this was done. There 
were some new embellishments making 
about the grotto; the person chiefly em- 



230 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ployed in them was a young man of Cor- 
mick's acquaintance, and matters were so 
managed, that Donaghue personated him, 
without any apprehension of being sur- 
prised by any of the other men employed 
in the grounds. But for a whole day he 
kept watch, without even catching a 
glimpse of Eveleen. Early on the second, 
however, he saw her coming towards the 
grotto by herself His heart throbbed, 
and his very hands trembled with emo- 
tion ; but it was requisite he should re- 
strain himself till she had entered the 
grotto ; and accordingly, stooping down as 
she approached, he affected to be most 
busily employed about some shrubs that 
were to be removed, to allow of a new 
channel being made for a stream of water, 
so as to form a cascade. Hardly, how- 
ever, had Eveleen passed him, when glan- 
cing back, she thought she saw him about 
taking up a shrub she wished to remain, 
from the picturesque effect it would have, 
she conceived, on the edge of the stream. 
^— **No, no, that is not to be touched,'* 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 231 

she said ; and she turned back to see what 
further directions she might hke to give. 
" Do you understand me ?" she said, look- 
ing at the supposed labourer, to shew him 
particularly what she meant — " these 
things are to remain where they are ;" but 
she could not even catch his eyes, he still 
continued busily employed, as if he had 
neither heard or seen her. 

" I say, my friend," cried Eveleen, a lit- 
tle surprised, " do you comprehend me ? 
or will you suspend your work for a mi- 
nute, that you may be enabled to do so ?" 

Further evasion the fictitious workman 
saw was useless ; he dropped the spade, 
and ere Eveleen could well believe her as- 
tonished senses, she found herself clasped 
to his bosom ; but terror and indignation 
soon enabled her to free herself from him, 
but her retreat was completely intercept- 
ed. — " This is intolerable !" she exclaimed ; 
" this cruel persecution — it is unmanly — 
ungenerous — to persevere in what you 
are aware occasions me such agitation ! — to 



2!32 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

have recourse too, to the meanness of de- 
ception, and of such a disguise !" 

" Do not upbraid me," said Donaghue, 
with perhaps a slight sensation of indigna- 
tion, himself, at the moment, ** for what 
you yourself have occasioned ; it is you, 
that, by your cruel obstinacy, in refusing 
to grant me a moment's conversation '* 

" For what should I have granted it?" 
said Eveleen ; ** is it to draw upon myself 
the reproaches of my friends and con- 
nexions ? but don't mistake me," she add- 
ed, seeing the eyes of Donaghue sudden- 
ly sparkle, " their influence was not want- 
ing, I assure you, to make me act as I have 
done." 

" Well, I am sure," said Donaghue, 
half smiling, " I have no reason to advo- 
cate your feeling or humanity towards me. 
However, I am very much mistaken if^ 
ere we part, I do not make that unkind 
bosom feel some little degree of regret 
and compunction for its inexorableness 
towards me;" and with what might well 
indeed be termed new-flushed hopes, he 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 233 

was on the very point of commencing his 
explanation, when Eveleen, with a faint 
cry of terror, uttered the name of her fa- 
ther, and following the direction of her 
eyes, he saw him approaching with lord 
Altidore. 

" Fly ! fly !" said Eveleen, " if you have 
any pity for me ! I tremble at the thought 
of your being found here! to. vindicate 
myself, I must acknowledge the truth, 
and what may not the indignation of my 
father be, at finding me thus persecuted 
by you! why— why," impatiently she 
added, perceiving he hesitated, " do you 
delay ? Oh, if not for my sake, at least 
for your own, do not let yourself be sur- 
prised here in that degrading disguise !" 

" Cruel, unfeeling Eveleen !" exclaimed 
Donaghue, in a tone of passionate resent- 
ment, " to again reproach me for what 
you have yourself occasioned." But there 
was no time for more ; sir William and 
lord Altidore were now close at hand, and 
he could not bear, indeed, that they should 
see him lessened to the necessity of dis- 



234 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

guise and artifice. A glance of involun- 
tary reproach escaped him ; and turning 
away with quickness, he was soon out of 
sight. But in what a state of emotion did 
he return home ! foiled in every effort to 
come to an explanation with Eveleen, he 
began to believe he was indeed fated to 
lose her, and need we say there was almost 
distraction in the thought. 
wHj Though there was an end, or, at least, a 
suspension of all further intercourse be- 
tween Cormick and his mistress, he yet 
found means of learning every thing that 
was going on at the Vale, and it was ac- 
cordingly ascertained that lord Altidore 
now visited there even more constantly 
than before — that let her be denied to who 
^he would, Miss Erin was never denied to 
him ; and that, in short, there were quite 
sufficient grounds to justify the report, 
that now again began to be revived in the 
neighbourhood, of the renewal of his ad- 
dresses in that quarter; and Donaghue, 
giving way to the apprehensions suggest- 
ed by what he heard, no longer hesitated 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 235 

to write to Melville, on the subject of his 
coming back, but without venturing to 
exactly explain the cause of his heighten- 
ed anxiety for it, lest it should be the 
means of leading to some abrupt disclo- 
sure to his uncle, that might irreparably 
injure him. 

All this time Lavinia remained in utter 
ignorance of the general distress and dis- 
turbance she had been the means of occa- 
sioning, Donaghue having given it in 
strict command that she should not be ac- 
<][uainted with any thing that could agi- 
tate her; nor did she want any thing ad- 
ditional to add to her uneasiness, so awk- 
ward did she feel her situation, and so un- 
happy was she, at the thought of what 
the Wheatleys must be suffering on her 
account, and the injury which her conduct 
might, perhaps, do Mr. Wheatley with 
her guardian. 

The state of agitation in which sir Wil- 
liam found his daughter, on joining her 
near the grotto, united to the sudden dis- 
appearance of the man he had seen her 



236 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

speaking with on his approach, excited a 
suspicion in his mind, that induced him 
to question her on the subject of what he 
had observed, the moment he had an op- 
portunity for the purpose. That it was 
Donao-hue himself he had seen in the dis- 
guise of a labourer, he had not the slight- 
est conception, but that it was some one 
belonging to him, employed to deliver a 
letter or message to her, he had hardly a 
doubt, from the state in which he found 
her. Eveleen having stipulated that he 
should not resent what she told him, ac- 
knowledged the truth ; and on his further 
inquiring, related what hiad occurred in 
the conservatory. 

Sir William was greatly vexed by what 
he heard. He saw that she had not nerves 
to bear the kind of shock which these sur- 
prises and intrusions occasioned her ; and 
yet how were they to be prevented? ar- 
gument or remonstrance would have very 
little effect, he feared, with a young man 
rendered desperate by the loss of a beloved 
mistress ; for, from all that had occurred, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 237 

he could not help being led to believe, 
like Eveleen herself, that however Dona- 
ghue might have dissembled in other in- 
stances, he certainly had not dissembled 
with respect to the passion he had pro- 
fessed for her, since, what but genuine re- 
gard, situated as he now was, with regard 
to worldly matters, could render him thus 
miserable for a reconciliation ? 

At last, the only plan he could devise 
for the purpose, was her quitting the Vale 
for a few weeks, till either Donaghue 
should have left the castle, which they con- 
cluded was now his intention, or else 
should be convinced of the uselessness of 
any longer persecuting her. 

Neither she nor her mother made any 
objection to the project ; on the contrary, 
both conceived nothing could be more ad- 
visable ; and all that remained to be con- 
sidered was, the place she should go to. 
Sir William at first thought of taking her 
to her uncle's, but when he came to reflect 
on the giddy imprudent disposition of 
Mrs. Erin, he relinquished this idea ; and 
at last it was settled with lord Altidore, 



238 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

who was now high in the confidence of 
all the family, and on the eve, indeed, of 
being rendered happy through Eveleen's 
means, that his aunt, a very amiable and 
pleasant old lady, residing about seventeen 
miles from the Vale, should be prepared to 
receive her ; it was also settled, that nei- 
ther when, nor where she was going should 
be made known, lest of any intimation 
reaching the ears of Donaghue, that might 
occasion him to set a watch to discover, 
and that the journey should be taken in a 
hired carriage, without the attendance of 
any of their own servants. 

But all these precautions were rendered 
unavailing, through the secret intelligence 
Cormick contrived to obtain for his mas- 
ter. His friend was the person employed 
to engage the chaise which was to convey 
Eveleen, under the protection of her fa- 
ther, from the Vale ; and due notice being 
given of the circumstance, Donaghue, at 
a proper hour, was on the watch, prepared 
to follow the carriage, full of hope that he 
should find her leaving the Vale a favour- 
able circumstance for him, sinc^- the agi- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 23^ 

tation of spirits into which she was thrown^ 
by encountering him there, on account of 
her father, could hardly be the case else- 
where, as sir William, he understood, was 
expected back immediately after leaving 
her wherever she was going. 

Muffled up, or rather disguised in a 
horseman's great-coat, for which a misty 
day luckily furnished a pretext, Donaghue 
slowly followed the chaise on horseback, 
not without a feeling, every now and then, 
of disquietude for the safety of those with- 
in, so. wretched was the vehicle, so miser- 
able the animals that were harnessed to it, 
and so terrible the road it had to pass over. 
Nothing that could be called a road could 
possibly be worse, indeed, rent and torn as 
it was, in every direction, and every here 
and there shelving down the sides of the 
frightful mountains it lay over, 
i^i Sir William, who had never traversed 
it before, was a good deal disconcerted 
"when he found what kind of one it was ; 
however, hoping every moment it would 
improve— w^orse it could not possibly get 



240 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

— a hope in which he was encouraged by 
the drivers, he allowed himself to proceed 
in it, rather than turn about and take a 
much better one certainly, but an infinitely 
more circuitous one, to the old lady's ha- 
bitation. 

At length, his patience completely ex- 
hausted, he was on the very point of or- 
dering the postilions to face about, when 
a sudden jerk overturned the crazy vehi- 
cle, within a yard or two of a horrible pre- 
cipice — so close, indeed, to it, that a cry of 
horror escaped from Donaghue, as he saw 
it overturning. In a moment he was off 
his horse, and had extricated himself from 
the cumbrous coat. Sir William and 
Eveleen were quickly extricated by him 
from their perilous situation, apparently 
uninjured ; but no sooner had the latter 
cast her eyes on the frightful abyss, down 
which they had so narrowly escaped being 
precipitated, than her head grew dizzy, 
and she fainted. 

Donaghue caught her in his arms. Sir 
Wilham attempted to take her from them; 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 241 

but, opposing the effort, Donaghue carried 
her to a small public-house near the spot. 
It was some time before she shewed any 
signs of retuniing animation ; and while 
she remained in a state of insensibility, 
her father lost sight of every thing but his 
immediate consideration about her; but 
when at length she began to revive, dis- 
missing the people who had been busied 
in restoring her, he again made an effort 
to take her from the arms of Donaghue — -. 
but again it was resisted. — " No, no !'* he 
cried, unconscious of what he was saying, 
and putting out his hand, to keep back sir 
William — for never again might he be al- 
lowed to hold her to his heart, never again 
to gaze upon that countenance, so lovely, 
so interesting ! 

" You must let me take her from you,'* 
said sir William ; " her spirits will not al- 
low of any further agitation at present ;" 
and as he spoke he forced her from him, 
and conveying her into an adjoining room, 
committed her to the care of the woman 

VOL. IV. M 



242 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

of the house. Then returning to Dona*- 
ghue — " Since we have so unexpectedly 
met, Mr. O'Brien," he said, " ere we part, 
I must be allowed to avail myself of th^ 
opportunity it has afforded for speaking t^ 
you on a particular subject. That it is not 
to chance we are indebted for the service 
you have just rendered us, I have eveiy 
reason to believe; but the feelings that 
might have been excited by the conviction 
are repressed by what has just occurred. 
It is not at the very moment that a man 
is sensible he has just escaped from the 
verge of death, that he can turn with ia* 
dignation upon his fellow man ; but I 
must observe, that should you continue to 
persevere in your present conduct, you 
will reduce me to the unpleasant alternat 
tive, of either living in my own house,^ in 
a state of constant distrust and suspicion, 
or else of quitting the neighbourhood^ 
since it is evident, that to the treachery of 
some one belonging to me, you owe you^ 
knowledge of our movements; as a man of 
feeling, therefore, and a gentleman, I must 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 243 

request and expect you to desist from what 
will occasion so ver}^ unpleasant a result. 
The uselessness too of it would, I should 
hope, induce you to pay attention to my 
request ; for if you hope that any altera- 
tion can be effected, in either my daugh- 
ter's sentiments or mine, you indeed de- 
lude yourself, and may very fairly be com- 
pared to him, who walketh in a vain sha- 
dow, and disquieteth himself in vain." 

" You talk of repressing your feelings, 
sir," said Donaghue, indignantly, " but 
could any utterance you could give to 
them wound me like this coolness — calm- 
ness, in speaking on a subject that, as you 
well know, rends my very soul? If I have 
descended to any conduct unworthy of me, 
have I not been driven to it ?" 
' " As how?" asked sir William ; " I w^as 
ready to listen, I avowed myself so, to any 
thing you could advance in your vindica- 
tion ; and, after this, what have you to 
complain of ?" 

^^ Donaghue could not reply — ** What in- 
taijuT 1 . M 2 



244 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 

deed !*' and he walked about the room irt 
the most distressing agitation. But why 
not avail himself of this opportunity for 
revealing the truth ? Sir William's mind 
seemed softened by what had happened, 
and a more propitious moment, therefore^, 
might perhaps never be obtained for the 
explanation ; but the consequence that 
must result from it — the inevitable cer- 
tainty of Lavinia's being torn from his pro- 
tection, and given up to her guardian ! No, 
he could not so betray the happiness of 
his friend. Yet, to remain in this state of 
agonizing incertitude about lord Altidore 
— it was not endurable, and suddenly step- 
ping before sir William — " One question 
I entreat sir William to answer," he said, 
" and I take my leave — Is there any 
truth " He paused—emotion for a mo- 
ment overpowered his utterance — " any 
truth in the report that again prevails 

about — about lord Altidore and " He 

could not finish the sentence — he could 
not bring himself to unite their names to- 
gether. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 245 

Sir William looked at him steadily for 
some minutes, as if considering. Then, 
emphatically — " There is !" he replied ; 
•* at this very moment, preparations are 
making for the marriage of lord Altidore." 

Donaghiie turned pale as death ; some- 
thing he attempted to say, but he knew 
not what ; his sight failed him, and stag- 
gering back to catch at a chair for support, 
he would have fallen, but for sir William. 

" I grieve, I grieve," said sir 'William, 
*' to see this ; but surely it is what you 
should have been prepared for ! You 
could not have expected " 

" Nothing, nothing considerate for my 
feeling's !" said Donaghue, disengaging his 
arm from sir William, and throwing him- 
self on a chair. '• But it may not be too 
late," he suddenly exclaimed to himself, 
" to prevent this destruction of my happi- 
ness! Persuasion amounting almost to 
compulsion, I am convinced, could alone 
occasion Eveleen so soon to think of an- 
other. Melville must no longer remain in 
ignorance of the predicament in which he 



246 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

has placed me; and Lavinia once given up 
to him, nothing further remains to hinder 
me from doing myself justice." Not a 
minute was to be lost — he rushed from the 
house, and seeking his horse, was not long 
in reaching the castle. ''"^ '• 
^ Hardly had he entered it> when a letter 
was put into his hand by Cormick ; under 
the idea of its being from Melville, he was 
eagerly tearing it open, when Cormick, 
laying his hand on his arm, asked him first 
to look at the direction. JnuoooG, 

Donaghue, with a vacant stare at hiro, 
so bewildered was his mind, turned the 
letter. — *^ Well," he said, « what is the 
meaning of this ? this letter is not for me 
— it is directed to lord Rosenellis, whoever 

" You haven't far to seek for hin>," said 
Cormick ; " that letter is for yourself. It 
was brought half-an-hour ago by general 
O'Donaghue's servant ; and he told me all 
about your being made a lord, through 
the interest of his maste]^i'%8fn J lot iuo;^ 

Donaghue again cast a look at hifti, ^ 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 247 

if he did not perfectly comprehend him j 
then tearing open the letter, he read as 
follows : 



** That man is born to disappoint- 
ment, the experience of each succeeding 
day but tends still more forcibly to con- 
vince him. Pleased with your conduct, 
while suffering under a reverse of fortune, 
I felt impatient to return home on your 
account. What my intentions were, it 
matters not to say ; suffice it, that on the 
perusal of the letter I found awaiting me, 
from you, at my agent's in London, they 
were changed into a determination of ex- 
erting the interest which long services had 
allowed me to possess, for the revival, in 
your person, of a title that has long lain 
dormant in our family. The gazette of 
last week announced the accomplishment 
of this business ; and as nothing else had 
detained me in London, I immediately 
set out for this, amusing my imagination 
all the way with the bridal festivities I 



MS TRADITION OF THE CASTLF, 

should just, I expected, be in time to wit- 
ness. But hardly had I drawn near the 
end of my journey, ere I found I need not 
have been afraid of not being in time for 
these. What a tale, in short, was I des- 
tined to hear from the person I encounter- 
ed ! but I shall make no eomn>ent on it — 
sermonizing is not my forte ; it induced 
me, however, to immediately decide on 
postponing my intended visit to you a lit- 
tle longer, as I could not suppose that any 
interruption to the agreeable reflections 
you had been procuring for yourself, could 
just now be agreeable. Unfortunate young 
man ! I can no otherwise account for your 
conduct, than by admitting a belief that 
folly and indiscretion are sometimes here- 
ditary. Like too many others in the world, 
when too late to retrieve it, you will pro- 
bably become sensible of the happiness you 
have lost, through your own means. I 
pity you—but the man he pities, is not the 
man that can be esteemed by '-^ — i^ 

" C. 0'D0NAGtor!K^ 





TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 249 

But a short time ago, and such a letter, 
its sneer, its sarcasm, and its irony, must 
have stung the heart of Donaghue; but a 
short time, and its announcement would 
have perhaps gratified him ; but now both 
were alike disregarded. He had no time 
to bestow a thought on aught but the im- 
mediate situation he was in, and, uncon- 
scious of what he was about, he threw it 
aside, in a manner that certainly would not 
have had a conciliating effect upon the ge- 
neral, had he witnessed it, in order to 
write an explanatory letter to Melville, 
with which Cormick was to be dispatched. 

Cormick rode as if for his life, neither 
suffering himself to pause for rest or re- 
freshment, till he got to the end of his 
journey ; when he found Melville just re- 
turned from a short excursion with his un- 
cle, and in a state of great agitation, 
through the perusal of Donaghue's prece- 
ding letter, which he had only then receiv- 
ed — an agitation which the letter now pre- 
sented by Cormick did not by any mean$ 
m3 



250 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

tend to lessen. The former had admitted 
of some hesitation, but the latter put an 
end to any thing further of the kind ; and, 
directly repairing to sir James, he inform- 
ed him, that the sudden illness of Dona- 
ghue, now announced to him as lord 
Rosenellis, rendered it so absolutely indis- 
pensable his setting off, forthwith, for Ai- 
toir-na-Grenie, that he hoped he would 
have the goodness to excuse his leaving 
him for a short time. 

" Assuredly," was the reply, " were it 
necessar}" you should do so; but as I have 
for some time been meditating a visit to 
the Vale, I may as well take the opportu- 
nity of accompanying you. You look 
vexed, from a fear that I may not be able 
to travel as expeditiously as you wish — I 
think I shall ; if not, you shall not be re- 
tarded on my account." 

This promise satisfied Melville; and the 
requisite orders were issued for every thing 
to be got ready for their immediate depar- 
ture. They travelled with such expedi- 
tion as to reach the Vale about the middle 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 251 

of the ensuing day, sir James never once 
flagging by the way, or evincing any wish 
for stopping. 

Melville had decided on not quitting 
the Vale, till he had fully disclosed to sir 
William every particular requisite to be 
known on Donaghue's account ; but whe- 
ther he should enter upon this disclosure 
before his uncle or not, required a little 
more time for deliberation. At length, 
anxious to be out of suspense with regard 
to what he had to apprehend from his dis- 
pleasure, on learning that his long-che- 
rished plan must be relinquished, he de- 
cided on the former, and accordingly, 
there being no one else present but the 
two baronets, entered upon the subject 
after a slight preface. 

The surprise of his auditors, as he pro- 
ceeded, appeared really too great for ex- 
pression ; from the emotion betrayed by his 
uncle, his own certainly was not lessened. 
— " So," said sir William, when he had 
concluded, " a pretty romantic tale this is 
of yours indeed ! And you are really that 



252 TRADITION OF THE CASTLK. 

terrible Mr. Denny Scanlen that we were 
all so shocked at the idea of our pretty lit- 
tle Hebe having thrown herself away up- 
on ! It is bad enough, to be sure," laugh- 
ing, " as it is ; but, since not quite so bad 
as at first imagined, I believe I must, 
from the pleasure experienced at the 
thought, allow myself to be prevailed on 
to pardon the part which your friend took 
in the affair." 

"But, alas, sir!" said Melville, anxious- 
ly, " of what use will your pardon be, if 
there's any truth iti the report about Miss 
Erin and lord Altidore ?" 

" Pooh ! did you really give any credit 
to it, knowing Eveleen as you do ? how 
could you possibly suppose that, so recent- 
ly engaged to one lover, she could possibly 
think of attaching herself to another? I 
thought none but an apprehensive lover 
could have given credit to any thing so 
improbable, from her character ; and, find- 
ing your friend had done so, I certainly 
todc advantage of the circumstance to an- 
swer bim evasively, trusting the error ifc 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 255 

thus confirmed would be a means of put- 
ting an end to conduct that was produc- 
tive of very painful agitation to all parties. 
I did not, however, say what was incorrect 
about lord Altidore; his lordship is really 
going to be married, though certainly not 
to my daughter. More about him, how- 
ever, anon; we must bring our own story 
to a conclusion, ere we enter upon another 
person's ; but I'll not delay you any longer 
from hastening to your friend ; though I 
can punish, I don't like to torture. I shall 
expect to see you return with him, and 
should myself accompany you, but that 1 
wish to prepare lady Erin and my daugh- 
ter for seeing him here again." 

" Well, sir, friendship has wings, as well 
as love, and on its pinions, I assure you, 
I shall quickly fly to him; but that I 
should not appear too romantically uncon- 
cerned about myself, allow me, ere I de- 
part, to express my hope, that as I have 
completely committed myself to you, no 
advantage will be taken of the circum- 
stance to separate Miss Audley from me." 



254t TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" The young lady's situation is really a 
very delicate and embarrassing one," said 
sir William ; " however, as I presume she 
will not be permitted to remain much 
longer in it, I pledge you my word, that 
I will not interfere in the business, or in 
any way, directly or indirectly, be acces-^ 
sary to doing what I see you are appre- 
hensive of — betraying her into the power 
of this terrible guardian of hers." 

" And is he really a very terrible kind 
of being, sir ?" asked Melville, a little anx- 
iously ; " Lavinia, I know, holds him in 
great dread. And now that we are on 
the topic, I should like to know whether 
he really has any legal tie over her ?" 

" I am not at liberty to satisfy you," re- 
plied sir William ; " but I make no doubt, 
that, in due time, you will learn all you 
desire." ^ 

" And now, my good young sir," said 
sir James, fancying he saw him making a 
movement towards the door, " that yoa 
have told your story, pray who is to inter- 
cede for you with me ? You will presume, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 255 

I suppose, to deny that I have very great 
reason to be angry with you, since you 
cannot deny being acquainted with my 
plans for you, and therefore cannot plead 
ignorance of them as an excuse for letting 
this chit of a girl tempt you to disappoint 
them ! Ay, you may laugh, sir — I see you 
can hardly refrain from doing so, at the 
very unexpected manner in which I am 
expressing myself; but it is not because I 
am not raving, that I am not displeased, 

and you shall find but, till I can better 

collect myself, I shall refrain from giving 
further utterance to my sentiments on 
your conduct ;" and rising as he spoke, he 
withdrew from the room. 

Melville, who really, from his manner, 
had been at first inclined to imagine that 
he was not very much disconcerted, since, 
when so, he was seldom very collected in 
the expression of his displeasure, now be- 
gan to fear he had been mistaken. His 
mind, however, was still much relieved by 
the explanation he had come to with him. 



256 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

and, without further delay, he proceeded 
to his friend. 

Cormick had preceded him, so that his 
arrival was announced ere he made his 
appearance. — " Actually come ?" said Do- 
naghue ; then, to himself — " I shall soon 
know my fate." 

" Actually, your honour — that is, your 
honour — my lord, I mean !" replied Cor- 
mick. 

Donaghue gave him an angry glance — 
" This is no time for trifling, Cormick," he 
said ; " you see I am agitated." 

" Yes, your honour — that is, my lord, 
again I mean; but if one never begins, 
how will they ever be able to accustom 
themselves?" 

Donaghue ordered him to retire, unable 
to endure even observation now, agitated 
as he was in every nerve, from the assu- 
rance that a very few minutes would now 
put him out of suspense about all he 
hoped or feared. 

At length the voice of Melville met his 
ear, and — " My dear fellow," he cried, as 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 257 

he rushed into the room, and caught his 
extended hand, *' here I am, to implore 
forgiveness for all the pain and confusion 

I have been the cause of But, heyday! 

nervous, I protest ! Why, who would ever 
believe this hand had performed such gal- 
lant exploits as you stand recorded in the 
annals of fame for! it is really more like 
the trembling hand of a sensitive little 
being of the other sex — and, by-the-bye 
— but, no, I won't even ask a question a- 
bout her, till I have told you to discard 
your dolefuls, and set off for the Vale, 
where your liege lady is by this time pre- 
pared to receive your renewed vows ; for, 
in carrying her off from you, papa, finding 
he was running the risk of losing her in 
another way, by breaking her neck, very 
wisely brought her back, so that no delay 
will attend this most happy reconciliation." 
"And you really are serious, Melville?" 
said lord Rosenellis, as we must now begin 
to call him, as he rested his hand on his 
shoulder. 
*^" Serious, my dear fellow ! is it on such 



258 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

a subject you think I could possibly jest? 
No, no — * those only jest at wounds who 
never felt a scar !' and so," laying his hand 
upon his heart, " you need not suspect me, 
I believe. But now, with your lordship's 
permission — and, by-the-bye, it is quite 
time I should congratulate you on this 
new accession of dignity — 1 will, while 
you are preparing, retire to announce my 
return elsewhere, and prepare my sweet 

Lavinia " and while speaking, he was 

moving towards the door; but, ere he 
reached it, it was thrown open, and nurse 
Gormick rushed in, with a countenance 
quite as pale and wo-begone as his who 
drew poor Priam's curtain at the dead of 
night, to announce that Lavinia had just 
been carried off by Mr. Wheatley, who, 
in the name of her father, had come to de- 
mand her, and by representing to her, the 
nurse, who was the person he had called 
for, the serious consequences that might 
result from not complying with this de- 
mand immediately, had frightened her in- 
to doing so. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 259 

■* 1^ Then it's all over with me !" said Mel- 
ville, turning of a deadly paleness, and 
throwing himself on a chair ; " since the 
guardian is changed into a father, there is 
no hope of his authority being resisted." 

" Come, come, my dear fellow," said 
his friend, now in his turn becoming a 
comforter, " I will not let you despair; 
you know the intimacy that subsists be- 
tween sir William and this guardian, or 
father, or whatever he is, of Lavinia, and 
I think we need not doubt having all his 
interest at our side. The carriage will be 
ready in a minute, so let us not delay ; 
and if the worst comes to the worst, why 
I'll even run a risk for you again, and the 
deuce is in it, if, through one means or 
other, we do not bring all to a happy con- 
clusion !" 

What the shock sustained by Lavinia 
was, when she beheld Mr. Wheatley, may 
readily be conceived, and her augmented 
taror, on being apprized by him of the 
U^it in which she was henceforth to re- 
gard her guardian. A carriage was in 



260 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

waiting for her at a little distance from 
the castle, but, without his assistance, she 
could not have reached it. 

The moment she entered the cottage, 
she looked eagerly about for Mrs. Wheat- 
ley or Rosetta, but neither appeared. — 
" Collect yourself," said Mr. Wheatley, 
understanding her looks, and making her 
take a seat ; " you will see no one till you 
have first seen your father ; he is-^ — " 

" Oh, not yet — not yet !" cried Lavi- 
nia, anticipating what he had been about 
saying — " oh, not yet — do not ask me to 
see him ! I have not courage to do so, till 
I first know what kind of person — what 
kind of reception I am likely to meet 
from him; if a harsh one, I shall " (• 

She was interrupted by the door of the 
adjoining parlour gently opening; she 
looked eagerly towards it, and had a 
glimpse of a stranger. Life seemed to 
forsake her at the moment, she guessed it 
was her father she saw, and emotion over- 
powered her senses. When she recover- 
ed, she found some one supporting her ; 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 26l 

she wanted courage to see who it was. 
The idea of the looks she expected to en- 
counter, of the scene that awaited her, was 
terrific to her imagination ; but she must 
collect herself — there was no escape from 
what she dreaded — and she accordingly 
ventured to take a peep. 

Vyhat a change did her feelings instant- 
ly undergo ! instead of the stern, threat- 
ening, denouncing, countenance she pic- 
tured to herself she should behold, she met 
one all kindness and feeling. In the sud- 
den transport of relieved apprehension, she 
burst from the arms that enfolded her, 
and throwing herself at the feet of her fa- 
ther, rapturously embraced him. 

Mr. Wheatley retired. We shall not 
dwell on the scene that ensued; suffice it, 
Lavinia found that she had, in her father, a 
parent deserving indeed of the name of one. 
His reasons for having her educated apart 
from him, and kept in ignorance of their 
affinity, were explained. Some tears were 
the result; but there is seldom any human 
joy without some little alloy. Ardent in 



262 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

her feelings, she could refuse nothing to a 
parent who proved himself so different a 
being to what she apprehended, and who 
so fully satisfied her that she had long 
been his first earthly concern; and, in 
short, the conference ended with her 
plighting her word to him that she would 
never change her name, in consequence of 
his declaration that he knew not how he 
should ever be able to endure a separation 
from her. 

She obtained permission, however, to 
acquaint Melville with this, and a note 
was accordingly dispatched to the Vale, 
informing him that one more interview 
was permitted. He received it just as he 
was quitting the carriage that brought 
him there with lord Rosenellis. — " One 
more interview !** he repeated, as he fol- 
lowed to the drawing-room ; " what is to 
be done, my dear sir," to sir William, in 
a despairing tone, " except you intercede, 

or my uncle could be induced " rirnJc 

tK^* His interference would certainly be 
of more consequence than mine," replied 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 263 

'sir William ; " but to obtain it, how are 
we to reconcile him to the disappointment 
of his own plans ? but we will see what 
is to be done. In the mean time, do you 
repair to Rosehill, as you have been de- 
sired, and who knows but your uncle may 
be induced to give you a meeting there?" 

" Well, sir," said Melville, as he was 
about hastening back to the carriage from 
which he had just alighted, " I leave my 
cause in your hands, satisfied you will 
make every exertion to serve me." 

Lavinia received him alone. At the 
first glance he was inclined to flatter him- 
self, from her appearing so much more 
composed than he had expected to find 
her, that there was some revocation of the 
cruel sentence she had informed him of; 
but on his fearfully inquiring whether 
there was any thing to hope, she shook 
her head. 

"And can nothing move this cruel, this 
obdurate father of yours ?" said Melville. 
3(f* You must not speak of him in such 
t^rms," said Lavinia ; " you know not how 



264 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

very much the reverse of cruel or unkind 
he has proved himself to be." 

" What ! when he has decided on our 
separation-— when he has decided on giving 
you to another, notwithstanding your af- 
fections being engaged?" 

" He has decided on no such thing," 
replied Lavinia. 

" How ? What am I to infer from 
your note then ?" 

"The fact is simply this," said Lavinia; 
" his affection for me is so great, that he 
cannot bring himself to part with me, 
and so I have been induced to plight my 
word to him that I never will change my 
name." 

" Never change your name!" repeated 
Melville, recoihng through mingled in- 
dignation and alarm. 

" Never!" said Lavinia, putting her 
handkerchief to her face, and turning aside 
her head. 

" Good God ! and do you call this af- 
fection ?" exclaimed Melville. " No, it is 
selfishness — odious, revolting selfishness; 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 265 

and if you have, indeed, unwarily been 
drawn in to make a promise, it was so un- 
natural, so unreasonable to desire, I will 
hope and believe that you cannot think of 
adhering to it." 

" You may reproach me as you please," 
said Lavinia, " but a promise so solemnly 
given I cannot think of breaking; I will, 
however, so far promise to you, that if, on 
an introduction to my father, you can pre- 
vail on him, by your arguments and en- 
treaties, to release me from it, I shall per- 
haps not prove myself unwilling to profit 
by the concession.*' 

*' When or how may I expect to be in- 
troduced to him?" demanded Melville; 
" I really cannot endure a much longer 
continuance of my present suspense : but 
should he prove inexorable, what — what 
then, my Lavinia," taking her hand, and 
fondly pressing it to his bosom, " is to be 
done? Am I then to be driven to des- 
pair?" 

" I hope not ; I am sure I do not know, ' 
said Lavinia. 

VOL. IV. N 



266 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" But do not you know whether you 
will adhere to your promise or not ?" 

" I have ah'eady said But who is 

that? there is a gentleman approaching." 

" My uncle," said Melville, in a tone of 
reviving confidence, as he flew to admit 
him, convinced, from his following him to 
the cottao^e, that sir William had succeed- 
ed in his arguments with him. — " How 
good ! how kind !" he ci'ied, as he ushered 
him into the parlour, " to allow sir Wil- 
liam to succeed for me !" 

" Sir William !" repeated sir James, a 
little indignantly ; " and pray, sir, is it to 
sir William's influence alone any indul- 
gence I may be inclined to shew you is to 
be ascribed ?" 

" Oh no, sir ! Though do not mistake 
me," said Melville; "to your own gene- 
rous heart ultimately I know; but the 
services of a friend are sometimes not 
amiss in the first instance." 

He then introduced him to Lavinia, 
>vhorose, evidently agitated at his entrance. 
Sir James went up to her, and saluted 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 267 

her. — " A fair excuse indeed," he said, 
" for disobedience ; do not be offended, 
young lady, but I did form certain plans 
for this young gentleman, but which, from 
this moment, I shall cease to feel any fur- 
ther anxiety about." 

" You are very kind, very good, sir, I 
am sure, to speak in this manner," said 
Lavinia ; " since I heaixi of Mr. Melville's 
uncle, it has been my wish to have the 
good fortune to please him if ever we met." 

" He must be a very strange being," re- 
pUed the old gentleman, gallantly, " who 
could look at you without being pleased 
with you." 

" Oh, what happiness would all this 
have given me a short time ago!" said 
Melville; "but now! — But would you, 
could you believe it possible, sir, that this 
cruel, this terrible father of my Lavinia 

" I cannot, indeed, let you speak of my 
father in such terms, Mr. Melville," inter- 
rupted Lavinia. 

b. N 2 



268 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" I can speak of him iii no other," said 
Melville. — " Could you think — -could you 
believe it possible, sir," again addressing 
himself to his uncle, " that he has had the 
unreasonableness, the inhumanity I will 
call it, to extort a promise from her never 
to change her name ?" 

" Really ! well certainly it appears ra- 
ther an extraordinary circumstance, for 
most parents are solicitous for the happy 
establishment of their children in life; but 
w^iat reason can he assign for it ?" 

" Oh, none, none !" said Melville, speak- 
ing for Lavinia; " he can assign none for 
it, that can in any way excuse or justify 
it — to the most unnatural selfishness it is 
owing." 

•' Well, I should rather hope some other 
motive might be adduced for it, for sir 
AVilliam Erin, of whose judgment I have 
a high opinion, does not altogether think 
unfavourably of him." 

" And has he given y^ou any reason to 
imagine, my dear sir," demanded Melville, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 269 

•* that he could be induced to alter any 
determination he had formed T 

" Why, on that head I will not flatter 
you," said sir James. 

ffY-^*, What is to be done then ?" said Mel- 
ville, in a tone of despair ; " for I cannot 
ask or expect your interference, if persua- 
-ded it would be unavailing." 

Sir James sat musing for some minutes 
— " Why, really I don't well know what 
to say," he replied ; " desperate cases have 
always been allowed to require desperate 
remedies ; so really I know not what to 
advise, but that as the carriage in which 
you came is at the door, and the coast ap- 
pears clear, you carry her off without fur- 
ther ceremony." 

■u " Ah, my dear sir, if I could believe 
you serious in this advice, and Miss Aud- 
ley would consent, be assured 1 should not 
be backward in following it." 

" Well, I am serious, I assure you." 

»1 " Excuse me, my dear uncle," said Mel- 

-tiille, a little resentfully, " but really this 

is not a time for jesting with me — you 



270 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

know not what I am suffering at this very 
moment." 

" I beg your pardon, I can easily con- 
ceive, if under an apprehension of losing 
this young lady; and, as a proof, have 
suggested a plan for relieving you from 
this apprehension." 

" What ! is it to attempt to carry her 
off in the broad face of day ?" 

" Why not? a favourable opportunity 
should never be lost, on any occasion. But 
if you have not courage for the attempt, 
suppose I make it for you ? — what say you 
to my running away with her for you ?" 

" AVhat am I to think of this?" said 
Melville, looking earnestly at him ; " there 
is something in all this I do not compre- 
hend — I see significant glances exchanged 
between you and Miss Audley — I see nei- 
ther in any degree appeanng to participate 
in the uneasiness under which I am suffer- 
ing, though I am aware neither are in- 
different about my feelings — what am I 
to think, to infer from this ?" » " 

" Hand this young lady into the ear- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 271 

riage," said sir James ; " and when we have 
got her safe there between us, your curio- 
sity may perhaps be gratified," 

With increasing surprise Melville turn- 
ed his eyes on Lavinia. The smile with 
which she met them completed his per- 
plexity. 

" Well, after this, call yourself an im- 
passioned lover !" said sir James ; " with 
an opportunity for carrying oflf your mis- 
tress, and yet not avail yourself of it ! — But 
come, ma'am," presenting his hand to La- 
vinia, " what he neglects to make use of, 
let me profit by." 

He led her to the carriage, ^lelville, in 
utter amazement, followed, and they drove 
off. While proceeding to the Vale, we 
shall explain all that is necessary to be 
known. 

Sir James Melville was a man of dissi- 
pated habits, though esteemed by his own 
sex a man of honour and integrity, and a 
ridiculer of marriage. When somewhat 
advanced in life, a beautiful cottage-girl 
struck his fancy, and all those arts that 



272! TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

had so often before proved successful, were 
again had recourse to, for the purpose of 
effecting her ruin ; but she was proof to 
all the temptations that fortune enabled 
hina to throw in her way ; and at length, 
rather than give her up, he resolved on mar- 
rying her. So long as they considered his 
views dishonourable, her parents treated 
him with disdain, and watched over her 
with unremitting vigilance ; but no sooner 
did they understand the alteration they had 
undergone, than they became his zealous 
advocates ; but in vain for some time they 
exerted themselves for him ; she had con- 
ceived a dislike to him not to be sur- 
mounted, and nothing but force at length 
induced her to become his. 

But though sir James had then too little 
command over himself to be able to give 
her up, he was perfectly aware of the ri- 
dicule which so disproportion ed a marriage 
in every respect must occasion, after being 
so long a contemner of matrimony, and 
so often arrogantly descanting on the nu- 
merous qualifications that, if ever he did 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 273 

change his state, could alone induce him 
to do so: and in order as much as possible 
to prevent what he dreaded, he resolved on 
not acknowledging his marriage, till his 
lady was in some degree fitted for the rank 
to which he had raised her. 

To remove her from her connexions was 
a material step. He accordingly took her 
over to England, where a house was taken 
for her in the vicinity of the metropolis, 
under a feigned name, and masters of the 
first eminence in every branch of polite 
education engaged to attend her. Sir 
James still figured as a single man in the 
circles of fashion ; and fond as he was of 
his beautiful wife, any thing like domestic 
life was still too little relished by him, not 
to occasion his absences, if not very long, 
to be at least very frequent, from her. 

This conduct exposed her to dangers he 
little dreamed of The pursuits in which 
he had her engaged he fancied would com- 
pletely occupy her mind ; but he forgot 
that from her early habits it was more 
n3 



274 TRADITION OF THE CAS1>i;^. 

likely they would be regarded with dis- 
taste than pleasure ; this was the case, and 
she often sought relief from what was tire- 
some and fatiguing, because bewildering, 
in stolen rambles about the village where 
she lived. i' 

These rambles exposed her to the obser- 
vation of a handsome young libertine of 
rank in the neighbourhood. How he con- 
trived to introduce himself to her, or im- 
prove those opportunities which this in- 
troduction afforded him to her destruction, 
it matters not to say — suffice it, the sensi- 
bility which sir James had failed of exci- 
ting, he but too fatally awakened. The 
connexion was continued for months, with- 
out the slightest suspicion of it ; at length, 
through some untoward circumstance, it 
was betrayed, and lady Melville, apprized 
of its disclosure to her husband, fled in 
terror and dismay to her seducer, for pro- 
tection from his rage and reproaches, with 
no other regret, at the moment indeed, 
than what resulted from leaving her infant 
daughter behind her. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 275 

How bitterly did sir James now regret 
having ever been tempted to change his 
original determination against matrimony ! 
however, it was some consolation that the 
folly he had committed still remained un- 
known. He finally decided on never ac- 
knowledging this disastrous union, and, of 
course, on bringing up his daughter in 
utter ignorance of her birth, to whom in- 
deed he had conceived a sudden dislike, 
from a strong suspicion of her not being 
his. 

Years passed away — the parents of lady 
Melville were dead, and there was no one 
to perplex or trouble sir James with in- 
quiries either about her or her child. At 
length she, in her turn, became forsaken, 
and in the bitter agony of finding herself 
so, was at length awakened to a full con- 
viction of her guilt. Grief and remorse 
brought on a rapid decline; and, convin- 
ced she had not long to Hve, she now de- 
termined on making that exertion for her 
child she had hitherto forborne through 
shame and fear. She had heard of sir 



^76 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE: 

James's determination ; and aware of what 
it was owing to, could not think of going- 
out of the world without endeavouring to 
have justice done her. She accordingly 
summoned resolution to write to sir James 
on the subject, but in vain letter after 
letter was addressed to him — they were all 
returned unopened. She at length con- 
fided her story to the clergyman who was 
in constant attendance on her, and obtain- 
ing his interference, sir James was at last 
induced to consent to one interview — the 
result was, every suspicion prejudicial to 
the interests of his daughter being remo- 
ved from his mind. The dying state in 
which he found the wretched penitent 
would not permit him to doubt her solemn 
asseverations ; but his determination of 
still concealing his marriage remained un- 
altered, nor did he feel the slightest wish 
or inclination to do more for his daughter 
than he had at first intended. 

Lady 3Ielville died shortly after this in- 
terview. Some months after her decease, 
happening to be in that part of the coun- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 277 

try to which Lavinia had been sent, but 
without its being known to whom she be- 
longed, a sudden impulse, which he called 
curiosity, induced him to call and see her. 
She was then between three and four years 
old, a little angel in beauty, and so play- 
ful, so caressing, it was impossible to see 
her without being interested and delight- 
ed with her. In short, from that moment 
nature began to assert herself in his heart, 
and he felt regret at what he had done, for 
after so long concealing his marriage, there 
was an awkwardness in avowing it, now 
he could not get over; besides, in the 
first impulse of the resentment that had 
decided him on discarding or disowning 
his daughter, he had adopted his nephew, 
and after allowing the boy to consider 
himself as his heir, he knew not how to 
disappoint the expectations he had raised. 
Yet how could he bear to have his own 
sweet girl deprived of her just inheritance? 
At length a way occurred of reconciling 
all matters — this was by uniting the two 
cousins. The project was no sooner con- 



278 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ceiyed than it occasioned a complete change 
with regard to his original plan about 
Lavinia. He still decided on having her 
brought up in utter ignorance of her birth, 
but no longer in the obscurity he had at 
first intended. For the rank in which he 
now destined her, it was requisite she 
should receive a suitable education ; and 
all that remained for further consideration 
was, to whose care he should intrust her. 
This he was not long in deciding on — Mr. 
Wheatley, his agent in Ireland, soon oc- 
curred to his thoughts, as a person to whom 
he might safely do so, not merely from 
the opinion he entertained of his princi- 
ples, but from some certain circumstances 
that had so far put him in his power, as 
to render it an object to him to prove 
faithful to any trust he might repose 
in him. To him accordingly the se- 
cret of his marriage was disclosed, and all 
his plans and intentions with regard to 
Lavinia and her cousin. Mr. Wheatley was 
grateful for his confidence, and received 
the charge committed to him with all the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 279 

requisite assurances of secresy and vigi- 
lance. A house was taken for him and 
his family at Bath, where sir James chose 
she should be educated, that she might 
have a home on the spot, and Lavinia 
was placed at one of the first seminaries 
there. 

In due time master Sedley received a 
hint of the necessity of guarding himself 
from any entanglement, by being inform- 
ed by his uncle of his having already pro- 
jected an alliance for him; and as she 
grew up, Mr. Wheatley was instructed to 
give Miss Lavinia a hint to the same ef- 
feet, lest any attempt should be made to 
engage her affections. That any one 
would, however, have an opportunity for 
making the attempt, he deemed very un- 
likely, it being his strict command that 
she should never be taken into public, nor 
allowed to visit any where, except under 
the immediate care and control of Mr. 
Wheatley. One of his reasons indeed for 
not yet acknowledging her, was a fear 
that it might occasion the frustration of 



£80 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

his plan, for, as his heiress, he was well 
aware of the competitors there would be 
for her favour ; and so great was his affec- 
tion for Melville, that he could not bear 
to think of his being disappointed of the 
fortune he had allowed him to look for- 
ward to, or indeed of the fortune and title 
being disunited. A fear of exciting a sus- 
picion in the mind of Mrs. Wheatley of 
the truth, on whose discretion he could 
not bring himself to place the same reli- 
ance he did on her husband's, made him 
resist the longing inclination he felt from 
time to time to visit Bath, for the purpose 
of seeing his darling girl, for whom he 
gradually conceived the most doting fond- 
ness, insomuch as to be even more anxious 
for the gratification of her whims than she 
was herself. 

The pains he took to prevent any dis- 
appointment to his plan, through Mel- 
ville's means, are already known ; on one 
pretext or other, he was continually con- 
triving to drag him about from place to 
place, trusting, by keeping him in this 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 281 

unsettled state, he should prevent the dan- 
ger of his forming any attachment inimi- 
cal to his views. 

The time was approaching for an ex- 
planation, when Melville begged to be 
permitted to devote some time to his 
friend ; and it instantly struck sir James, 
that this would be a good opportunity for 
ascertaining what effect this explanation 
was likely to produce, by availing himself 
of it, to introduce Lavinia to him. 

Whatever was requisite for the purpose 
was immediately done — a residence pro- 
cured for Mr. Wheatley — and a letter writ- 
ten to sir William Erin, one of his oldest 
friends, and in his complete confidence, 
apprizing him of w hat he wished, and en- 
treating him to obtain the notice and pro- 
tection of lady and Miss Erin for his dear 
girl. 

The result is already known; but no 
language could do justice to w^hat was ex- 
perienced by sir James, when led to be- 
lieve she had completely thrown herself 
away. The shock given to his feehngs by 



282 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the news of her elopement, brought on a 
spasmodic attack, that had nearly proved 
fatal. Under the persuasion that he was 
dying, Sedley was summoned. Before 
his arrival, however, he was pronounced 
out of danger; and he then hesitated, from 
shame and regret, to make the disclosure 
he had at first intended ; tlms, as it proved, 
by delaying it, prolonging his own misery, 
and the anxiety and uneasiness of those 
for whom he was most interested. Some- 
times he blamed himself alone for what 
had happened, sometimes Mr. Wheatley ; 
now conceiving that if he had at once ac- 
knowledged Lavinia, the pride of birth 
would have prevented her so disgracing 
herself; then again, that if Mr. Wheatley 
had been properly vigilant, she never 
could have had an opportunity for acting 
as she did. That such would be his idea, 
Mr. Wheatley had little doubt, and the 
conviction was no small aggravation of his 
unhappiness at what had occurred. 

Mr. Wheatley was the son of an emi- 
nent merchant; he was on the point of 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 283 

rnarriage with the eldest daughter of sir 
PhiHp Raymond, when the sudden failure 
of his father occasioned an interdiction to 
be put to his marriage by the haughty 
and avaricious baronet — an interdiction, 
however, that the young people were ei- 
ther too thoughtless, or too much attached, 
or perhaps both, to regard, and the con- 
sequence was a stolen marriage, under the 
full persuasion, that though their union 
would not be permitted, yet, when once 
it had taken place, it would be pardoned. 
In yielding to such a one, however, 
they did not thoroughly know sir Philip ; 
in the first transports of his rage, at find- 
ing his daughter had deceived, or rather 
disobeyed him, he took a solemn vow ne- 
ver to forgive her, or be induced by any 
means to do any thing either for her or any 
family she might have; and with his own 
father unable to assist him, Mr. Wheatley, 
through his implacabihty, would probably 
have been reduced to the greatest distress, 
but that sir Jathes Melville, with whom 
he had formed an intimacy in his more 



284 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

prosperous days, stepped forward to serve 
him, with an offer of his agency! 

For what had rescued him from the ex- 
tremity of actual distress, Mr. Wheatley 
could not but be grateful; but he had 
been brought up with pride and ambition, 
and to remain satisfied with a situation 
that placed him in a subordinate rank to a 
man he had long considered himself on an 
equality with, was not to be thought of 
Amongst those he flattered himself still 
interested about him, was a gentleman 
high in office ; he addressed an application 
to him, and received, in reply, an assu- 
rance that he might rely on his best exer- 
tions for obtaining him a situation worthy 
of him. 

Encouraged by this assurance, Mr. 
Wheatley suffered himself to be drawn 
into expences far exceeding his income, 
and by no means becoming his then level 
rank in life ; but he could not resist his 
wish to disappoint the malice of sir Philip, 
by letting him see he still had the power, 
in spite of him, of living in a manner con- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 285 

sonant to his inclination, trusting, that 
before he should be called upon by sir 
James for any particular settlement of ac- 
counts, he should be able to restore what- 
ever beypnd his own immediate salary he 
had made use of; but in this hope he was 
disappointed ; after being kept on, day af- 
ter day, in lingering expectation of its ful- 
filment, till patience at length became ut- 
terly exhausted, and wrought up to frenzy 
at the idea of the detection that must en- 
sue, the ingratitude and baseness he should 
stand convicted of, he resolved on the 
crime of self-destruction, to avoid the 
shame and reproaches he conceived he 
so justly merited. How this terrible re- 
solve came to be discovered in time, it 
matters not to say — his wretched wife got 
a friend to watch over him, and addressed 
a letter to sir James, then in England, ex- 
planatory of all that had occurred. 

Though highly and justly incensed at 
finding such a return had been made for 
his friendship, still sir James could not re- 
sist the feelings that urged him to say 



286 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

something consolatory to this miserable 
pair ; accordingly he replied to Mrs. Wheat- 
ley in soothing terms, desiring her hus- 
band might be informed it was his wish 
he should still continue to act for him, till 
he heard further from him. 

It was just at this juncture that his 
plans and intentions with regard to his 
daughter had undergone a change, in con- 
sequence of the project of uniting her to 
her cousin being conceived ; and still en- 
tertaining a high opinion of poor Wheat- 
ley's principles, notwithstanding what had 
happened, the expectations he had been 
allowed to entertain in some degree ex- 
cusing this, he decided, as already seen, 
on giving her up to his care, naturally be- 
lieving his anxiety to reestablish himself 
in his confidence would lead to all that 
vigilance about her he required. How 
matters were managed, so as to prevent 
Mrs. Wheatley from having a suspicion of 
the truth, it would be tedious as well as 
unnecessary to detail. 

At parting, sir James informed Wheat- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 287 

ley, that should he discharge the trust re- 
posed in him in the manner he wished 
and expected, the income he had then set- 
tled on him, should be secured as a per- 
petuity to him and his family ; but if, on 

the contrar}' -But it was unnecessary 

to finish the sentence. 

The intimation was not lost on the per- 
son it was addressed to, and continued to 
haunt his tortured imagination, from the 
moment of Lavinia's elopement, as the 
day was now gone by for looking else- 
where for friendship or patronage. His 
father-in-law was by this time dead, and 
had descended to the grave without ever 
giving Mrs. Wheatley any reason to ima- 
gine he had relented towards her, a cir- 
cumstance that would have occasioned her 
no little affliction, but for the involuntary 
resentment that was excited by the un- 
just distinction he had made between her 
and her sister, whom, for a similar of- 
fence, he had pardoned, merely because 
his pride was more gratified by the con- 
nexion she had formed than by his other 



288 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

daughter's, thus proving that it was not 
the crime of disobedience he punished, but 
the disappointnaent it occasioned. 

The brother of the late lord Altidore, a 
young man of very dissipated habits and 
inconsiderable fortune for his rank in life, 
proposed for the youngest Miss Raymond, 
and was rejected by sir Philip. This, 
however, had not the effect of inducing 
the young lady to give up her lover ; they 
were married in private, but with a de- 
termination to keep the circumstance a se- 
cret, till either a favourable opportunity 
should occur for acknowledging it to her 
father, or the bridegroom's affairs should 
be sufficiently retrieved to allow of his 
formincr an establishment suitable to their 
rank, without his assistance. She was not 
only a wife, but a mother, some time pre- 
vious to her sister's marriage, but still con- 
tinued to conceal her own, and might have 
done so much longer, but for the unex- 
pected death of her brother-in-law, which, 
putting her husband in possession of the 
family title and estate, rendered her re- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. J289 

gardless any longer of the consequences 
that might result from avowing it; but 
as she had anticipated, from her know- 
ledge of her father's disposition, there was 
no longer any reason to apprehend any 
thing unpleasant from this. The result 
proved she was correct in this surmise; 
the pride of sir Philip was too highly gra- 
tified by the rank to which her disobedi- 
ence had been the means of elevating her, 
to be able to evince any displeasure at that 
disobedience; and finally, on her death 
and lord Altidore's, which happened with- 
in a very short period of each other, he 
took her two children under his care, with 
an avowed determination of leaving them 
the whole of his property. 

Mrs. Wheatley could not but think this 
a most unjust determination, since her 
offence had certainly not been a more hei- 
nous one than her sister's; but it was at- 
tended with mortifying circumstances to 
sir Philip, that would not permit him to 
forgive it, or even the children of her sis- 

VOL. IV. o 



290 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ter to know they had such a relation. 
What she was, Mrs. Wheatley could 
not entirely forget, and ardently, in con- 
sequence, wished her daughter to partici- 
pate in the advantages bestowed on Lavi- 
nia; but this Mr. Wheatley would by 
no means permit— as their expectations 
were widely different, so he conceived 
should their education. An expensive 
and fashionable seminary was not a place 
adapted for keeping her ideas from soar- 
ing ; and the evils accruing from their be- 
ing too elevated for our station, his own 
experience rendered him fully aware of; 
in short, suffering had rendered him wise. 
From the moment of his extrication from 
the situation in which aiming beyond his 
means had placed him, he determined on 
avoiding all society for the future, calcu- 
lated to lead him again into a similar er- 
ror, and not only to keep his daughter 
from it, but to positively restrict her from 
knowing to whom she was connected, lest 
it should be a means of inspiring her with 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 291 

vain or conceited notions. But though 
he could not be induced to gratify her 
mother's ambitious wish, he was too re- 
fined and well educated himself, not to 
bestow on her a polite as well as useful 
education ; and in every respect she grew 
up all he could desire, amiable in her dis- 
position, sufficiently accomplished to be a 
most pleasing companion, and vying in 
beauty with her dear Lavinia, whom she 
always regarded in the light of a sister. 
That, notwithstanding all his precautions, 
however, she had obtained some know- 
ledge of lord Altidore, must be obvious 
from what has occurred. We shall give 
her story, however, in her own words. 

In a walk one day to Rosehill, attended 
merely by a servant, Miss Erin encoun- 
tered lord Altidore, and was accompanied 
by him the remainder of the way. All 
the family were out but Rosetta. On be- 
ing introduced into the parlour where she 
was sitting, she was coming forward to 
receive Miss Erin, when a glimpse of lord 
o 2 



292 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Altidore behind her arrested her steps;, 
and, faintly uttering his name, she tot- 
tered back, and sunk, nearly lifeless, on a 
seat. 

Both hastened to her assistance. It was 
some time before she revived. As soon 
as lord Altidore saw her recovering, he 
bowed, with a look of great embarrassment, 
to Miss Erin, and precipitately withdrew, 
evidently much agitated. 

Rosetta's eyes sought him the mo- 
ment she recovered. On finding him 
gone, she attempted to address Eveleen ; 
but for some minutes tears impeded her 
utterance; then a little collecting herself, 
after apologizing for the trouble she had 
occasioned her — " You must doubtless, 
my dear ma'am," she said, " be surprised 
at what you have witnessed ; but if you 
will grant me your attention for a little 
while, I hope I shall be able to explain it, 
in a way that will prevent its being any 
injury to lord Altidore; for that his un> 
expected sight was the cause of my being 
so overcome, I am aware it would be use- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 293 

less to deny. I should grieve to be the 
means of doing him a prejudice in the 
mind of any one, but more especially in a 
person's about whom I know he feels so 
deep an interest," and again, spite of her 
evident efforts to suppress them, tears 
gushed from her. 

" 1 will not deny," said Miss Erin, " that 
my curiosity is excited ; " neither that, had 
I ever made up my mind, which, how- 
ever, I never did, to give any positive en- 
couragement to the attentions of lord Al- 
tidore, the recent scene would certainly 
have prevented me till explained. Be it ex- 
plained, however, as it may, I am pretty 
well convinced my sentiments will remain 
just the same they are at present for him, 
and almost equally inclined to believe that 
he has for some time ceased to desire any 
alteration in them, from seeing there v/as 
but very little chance of its being effected. 
I do justice to his merits ; but our affec- 
tions are not at our command ; and I have 
too good an opinion of the good sense of 
lord Altidore, and think, besides, he pos- 



294 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

sesses too much pride, to suppose he would 
allow himself to be devoted to a person 
who never gave him much reason to sup- 
pose she could make a suitable return for 
his regard." 

Rosetta shook her head, as if incredu- 
lous of this. Yet certainly what Miss 
Erin said had the effect that was intended, 
that of soothing her, and if ever she had 
any hope about lord Altidore, of reviving 
it. After a little hesitation, she asked 
Miss Erin if she had any disinclination to 
accompany her to the garden, where they 
would be more out of the way of being 
interrupted than where they then were. 

Miss Erin replied in the negative, and 
to the arbour they accordingly proceeded. 

Rosetta prefaced her story with an ac- 
count of her parents, their early expecta- 
tions in life, and the circumstances to which 
were owing the disappointment of those 
expectations. — " But with all which I re- 
mained unacquainted, till I was grown 
up," she continued, " my father, from the 
wisest reasons, choosing I should remain 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 295 

in ignorance of my having any connexions 
more exalted than myself. His constant 
aim was to guard me from pride and 
vanity, and various restrictions were the 
consequence, but which I was then too 
happy to murmur at. 

" Our house was delicrhtfullv situated 
in the vicinity of Bath, so as to allow us 
at once to have the enjoyments of the 
country, with a little of the bustle and 
gaiety of a large town ; and one way or 
other, I always had so much to occupy 
my time, and agreeably diversify it at 
home, as never to breathe a sigh after 
amusement elsewhere. But certainly, the 
truly happy time was when the vacations 
permitted Miss Audley to be at home, as, 
exclusive of the delight derived from hav- 
ing her immediately with me, there was 
always then, if the season or weather al- 
lowed it, some pleasant excursion or other 
planning for her amusement. 

" But very few, I believe, are permitted 
to advance far in life, without meeting 
with something to cross or perplex them. 



296 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

I was about seventeen, when an old friend 
of my mother came to Bath ; they met 
by accident, and this meeting occasioned 
the renewal of all their former intimacy. 
My father rather regretted the circum- 
stance, from a fear of her betraying what 
he had taken such pains to have concealed 
from me. He gave her a hint on the sub- 
ject ; how she attended to it, I shall shortly 
shew. 

'•' Mrs. Brabazon was one of those rest- 
less characters that must be employed; 
having but few resources in her own mind, 
and very little to occupy her about her 
own affairs, she was always busying her- 
self about those of others, certainly, how- 
ever, not without a good-natured wish to 
be of service. She was quite enraged on 
learning that my grandfather was not yet 
reconciled to my mother, and suggested a 
thousand plans in consequence, not one of 
which, however, were acceded to, from a 
conviction that they could answer no other 
purpose, than that of reviving feelings that 
were by this time subdued. To conceive 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 297 

a project, however, and relinquish it, was 
not in the nature of Mrs. Brabazon. One 
way or other, she determined on endea- 
vouring to bring about a reconciliation be- 
tween my grandfather and mother, and 
since not allowed to do so openly, resolved 
on doing so privately ; not altogether dis- 
pleased, perhaps, at the ill success of her 
first suggestions, since it afforded her an 
opportunity for busying herself still more 
than she perhaps could otherwise have 
done ; and besides, the greater the difficul- 
ty in accomplishing what she undertook, 
the greater would finally be her merit. 
To effect what she was so solicitous for, 
however, it was requisite she should have 
an interview with my grandfather, and 
accordingly she proceeded to Cheltenham, 
where he then was, but of which my pa- 
rents were ignorant, years having elapsed 
since they had known any thing about 
his movements. By this time far advanced 
in life, feehngs of compunction had began 
to be awakened in the mind of sir Philip, 
o 3 



298 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

for his conduct to his eldest daughter, but 
which the consideration of the solemn 
manner in which he had bound himself 
never to notice her again, prevented her 
deriving any benefit from. They certain- 
ly had the effect, however, of rendering 
him more accessible than he would other- 
wise have been to the arguments and 
representations of Mrs. Brabazon, who, 
being a blunt speaker, and long acquainted 
with him, was not backward in saying 
what she thought of his conduct. 

" The result was, his agreeing to let 
me be introduced to him, provided our 
affinity was, for the present, concealed 
from me, and my parents knew nothing 
of the circumstance, under the idea that 
my cousin, lord Altidore, who was then 
with him, might perhaps take a fancy to 
me, and thus afford him, by sanctioning 
our union, an opportunity of indirectly 
making amends to my mother for the in- 
justice he was now sensible he had been 
guilty of to her. 

" Mrs. Brabazon undertook to manage 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 299 

every thing ; the more difficult and intri- 
cate any thing was, indeed, the more she 
dehghted in it. The moment she return- 
ed from her secret visit to Cheltenham, 
she announced her intention of passing 
some time there, and gave me the invita- 
tion that had been planned between her 
and my grandfather to accompany her 
there. 

" My father hesitated about permitting 
me ; but his objections were at length 
overruled by my mother, who could not 
help thinking he restricted me too much, 
and wishing to see me introduced a little 
into life ; and the wished-for consent was 
accordingly at length obtained. 

" Hardly was I seated beside Mrs. Bra- 
bazon in the carriage that was to convey 
us thither, than she set about relating all 
I have related to you, conceiving it re- 
quisite I should be acquainted with these 
particulars, for the better regulation of my 
conduct. What my surprise, my emo- 
tions were at her disclosure, may easily be 
imagined. When I had a little recovered 



300 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

from its effects upon me, however, I could 
not help wishing she had not made it, 
feeling almost convinced it would operate 
as an unpleasant restraint upon my feel- 
ings. What she had said, however, could 
not be unsaid ; and in a state of extreme 
agitation, I found myself set down, at the 
termination of our journey, at my grand- 
father's residence, where it had been set- 
tled we were to take up our abode. 

" In consequence of the state in which 
she saw me at the moment, Mrs. Braba- 
zon began to regret her communication to 
me, or, at least, to wish she had delayed 
it till after my introduction to sir Philip. 
Fortunately for his confidence in her, 
however, his own at the instant was too 
great to permit him to notice mine ; and 
all passed off without any suspicion at his 
side of my knowing more than he wished. 

" I have already mentioned that lord 
Altidore was then with him ; his sister 
also, the wife of general Southwell, had 
lately arrived at Cheltenham, to remain 
with her grandfather till the return of the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 301 

general from abroad with his regiment, 
and whom I soon understood she had 
married, more for the sake of becoming 
her own mistress, than from any attach- 
ment to him, there being a very great 
disparity in their ages. 

" It is requisite I should be explicit 
with you, my dear madam ; I will there- 
fore confess, that I had not long known 
lord Altidore, ere I felt a wish that the 
idea or hope under which I had been 
invited to Cheltenham might not be dis- 
appointed. I soon began to imagine he 
did not view me with absolute indiffe- 
rence ; nor, as I afterwards ascertained, 
was I mistaken in the surmise ; but igno- 
rance of my real pretensions, united to a 
wish to sound the sentiments of sir Philip 
on the subject, ere he unresistingly gave 
way to an attachment for me, often occa- 
sioned a restriction and interruption in 
those attentions that at length induced a 
belief, on my side, that he was apprized of 
the plan which Mrs. Brabazon had dis- 
closed to me, and that these variations I 



302 THADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

perceived in his manner were owing to a 
struggle between pride and inclination 
about acquiescing in it. 

" In vain Mrs. Brabazon assured me to 
the contrary. Those capable of violating 
confidence in one instance, we are apt to 
believe capable of violating it in another ; 
and that she had done so, she had herself 
confessed to me. In vain she assured me, 
that if I would only be guided by her, 
only allow it to be seen I did not prefer 
any other person to lord Altidore, every 
thing would turn out as I could wish, as 
my grandfather only wanted to be assured 
that the scheme of our union would not 
be unpleasing to either, to speak explicitly 
to him on the subject. I would neither 
give credit to her assertions, nor pay at- 
tention to her advice. My pride took the 
alarm, from believing there was a struggle 
in lord Altidore's mind about me ; and, in 
consequence, I decided on acting in such 
a manner as should either deceive him 
with regard to my feelings, or so alarm 
his own, as to force him to put me out of 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 303 

suspense about them. Opportunities for 
coquetting are never wanting in such 
places as I was then at. I had hitherto 
been shy and bashful in my manner, both 
from natural diffidence, and the timidity 
in general attendant on a first introduc- 
tion into life ; but I now forced myself to 
act contrary to my real feelings, and give 
just a sufficient degree of laughing en- 
couragement to the gay triflers of the 
place, to draw a host of them about me. 

Amongst them was lord S , a young 

nobleman, as, I dare say, you know, of 
high celebrity in the fashionable world. 
He only seemed to require a little en- 
couragement to distinguish me by his 
attentions; every day they became still 
more particular; and Mrs. Brabazon at 
last began to remonstrate with me on the 
subject, pointing out the consequences 
that could hardly fail of accruing from ap- 
pearing to encourage him. But I derided 
her remonstrances. I was literally wise 
in my own conceit, and determined on 
persevering in what I conceived would 



304 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

either be the means of having my own 
feelings spared, or compelling the speedy 
disclosure of lord Altidore's. I blush when 
I review this part of my conduct ; it was 
a departure from the ingenuousness and 
simplicity in which I had been brought 
up; but I have been severely, though 
only properly punished for it. While I 

imagined I was rendering lord S 

subservient to my designs, he, in reality, 
was rendering me subservient to his. 

*' I know I may place the greatest reli- 
ance on your honour, else I could not bring 
myself to proceed in what must so terribly 

criminate another. Lord S was an 

encouraged admirer of Mrs. Southwell ; it 
was entirely on her account he had come 
to Cheltenham ; but, doubly watched and 
guarded as she was, the general having 
expressly commanded her remaining un- 
der the protection of her grandfather and 
brother, until his return from abroad, 
they knew they could not be too cautious 
in the manner in which they carried on 
their correspondence. The idea of ma- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 305 

king me a pretext for being continually at 
the house, or hovering about it, quickly 
suggested itself to them ; but the little en- 
couragement I at first gave to his particu- 
larities, made them for some time despair 
of succeeding in their plan ; but at length 
they had the gratification of seeing me un- 
consciously forwarding their design. 

" The encouragement I by degrees suf- 
fered myself to give lord S , had the 

effect of rendering his visits to the house 
at last placed to my account; and thus sus- 
picion averted from the right person, 
they allowed themselves a greater latitude 
than perhaps might otherwise have been 
the case. The chief scene of their stolen 
interviews was a summer-house in the 
garden, in consequence of knowing it was 
a place I much frequented, and that, if 

lord S should therefore be discovered 

there, or visiting it at improper hours, the 
circumstance would naturally be imputed 
to me. 

" This at length was the case. His vi- 
sits to it were discovered by some of the 



306 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

domestics, and betrayed to lord Altidore. 
After a struggle, as he confessed to me, 
between pride and resentment, be reproach- 
ed me on the subject. I warmly repelled 
the justice of the accusation ; and the hap- 
piest result might have been the conse- 
quence of this half disclosure of his senti- 
ments for me, but for an unexpected in- 
terruption to our conversation. 

" Musing on the prospect of happiness, 
that I now began to fancy was opening to 
my view, I was sauntering in the even- 
ing in the shrubbery, at the end of the 
garden, when I suddenly beheld lord 

S stealing through the trees. As 

anxious now to avoid and shun him, as I 
had ever before been to meet or encourage 
him, since I had no doubt the confirma- 
tion of the suspicion now excited about 
him would be the means of subverting 
every hope I now cherished, I instinc- 
tively shrunk within the summer-house, 
to which I was close at the moment, and 
bolted myself in, but without being aware 
of there being another entrance to it ; but 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 307 

hardly had I secured myself within it, 
when I was rendered conscious of this, by 
hearing the voice of lord S , address- 
ing himself, in the most passionate terms, 
to Mrs. Southwell, who was already wait- 
ing for him in the outer apartment. 

" Their conversation quickly unfolded 
to me all I have disclosed to you ; and at 
once alarmed and indignant by the disco- 
very I made, I determined immediately 
to betake me from Cheltenham, as the 
only means of extricating myself from the 
terrible predicament in which I saw my 
folly had placed me ; but I was destined 
to meet with the full punishment my im- 
prudence merited. Lord Altidore, missing 
me in the drawing-room, had followed, to 
seek me in the garden, for the purpose of 
renewing the conversation that was broken 
off in the morning. He caught sight of 
me just at the moment that I was taking 
refuge in the summer-house, and which, 
almost at the same moment, he beheld lord 
S — — entering from a different path. To 
doubt, after this, what I had so solemnly 



308 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

denied in the morning, he justly conceived 
would be ridiculous indeed ; and irritated 
at the imposition I had, as it appeared, 
endeavoured to practise on him, returned 
to the house, with a determination of quit- 
ting the place immediately, in order to 
avoid any further intercourse with me. 
At first he decided on silence on the sub- 
ject ; but a feeling of generous anxiety for 
my welfare induced him to give up this 
intention, and speak to Mrs. Brabazon on 

the subject of lord S , believing, from 

the well known character of his lordship, 
the interference of a friend absolutely es- 
sential for me. Mrs. Brabazon was all 
consternation at what she heard ; and, 
under the hope of there being some mis- 
take in it, tried to dissuade him from 
leaving Cheltenham so directly, but in 
vain ; and ere I returned to the house, he 
was gone. What I felt on learning his 
departure, or rather, the cause of it, may 
easier be conceived than described. Yet, 
had I not the power of vindicating my- 
self? — But no, for how could I attempt 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 309 

what might be the means of endangering 
his life, or else of subjecting me to the 
odious imputation of being capable of 
basely slandering another ? and that Mrs. 
Southwell would do every thing, for her 
own sake, for the purpose of inducing the 
belief of this, was hardly to be doubted. 

" To be brief, I resolved on submitting 
to what I had incurred through my own 
conduct, rather than, by making an effort 
to clear myself from it, involve myself 
perhaps in still greater un happiness than 
I already experienced ; but with what an- 
guish, what difficulty, convinced as I was, 
that, by appearing to acknowledge the 
justness of the suspicion, I was depriving 
myself of the esteem I so highly valued ! 
The reproaches of Mrs. Brabazon were not 
wanting to add to my misery, so much 
did she resent the disappointment of what 
she had taken such pains to plan ; and, re- 
stored to my parents, she protested she 
would trouble herself no more about me. 
As impatient now to get rid of me, since 
there was an end of any further projects 



SIO TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

for me, as she had before been to obtain 
me for her companion, the next day was 
fixed for our departure from Cheltenham, 
without any opposition from my grand- 
father, who, under the persuasion that I 
had either ill-treated his favourite, or else 
failed of inspiring him with any interest, 
soon lost the little he himself had experi- 
enced for me. 

" Mrs. Brabazon kept her word ; from 
the time of my return to Bath, I never 
heard from her; nor, except by chance, of 
lord Altidore, till our coming to this 
neighbourhood, when " 

Here she paused, blushed deeply, and 
appeared extremely agitated. — " I guess 
what you would say," cried Miss Erin — 
" you heard of his particularity to me; 
but you heard, I am convinced, more 
than ever was the case, of an attachment 
between us, which, in reality, never had 
existence, but in the imaginations of those 
who reported it ; and I now joy to think 
lord Altidore is free as ever to renew his 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 311 

VOWS to lier who has the best right to 
have them plighted to her." 

"Ah, my dear ma'am !" sighed Rosetta, 
" such a thing is not to be imagined ! his 
being still at liberty to tender his addres- 
ses where he pleases, can be of little conse- 
quence to me, since, with such an impres- 
sion on his mind against me, it is not to 
be supposed I could ever occupy another 
thought." 

" Certainly, if that impression was al- 
lowed to remain," replied Miss Erin ; 
" but that must not be ; some method 
must be devised for preventing your hap- 
piness being completely sacrificed to your 
generosity." 

"Ah! impossible!" said Rosetta; "I 
see no method by which I could attempt 
the vindication so essential to me, but at 
a hazard I tremble to think of." 

" We must hope the reverse," replied 
Miss Erin. " If Mrs. Southwell possesses 
the slightest generosity, she will not refuse 
to do you that justice you have a right to 
demand from her." 



312 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" She should not," said Rosetta; " yet 
that she will criminate herself for my sake, 
I can hardly flatter myself. No, no, my 
dear madam, I know your kind motive 
for trying to inspirit me with hope ; but 
what is likely to prove delusive, I will not 
voluntarily yield to, convinced, as I am, 
that I should be unable to bear the renew- 
al of the agitation it must excite. When 
we have made up our mind to any certain 
loss or deprivation, we at least experience 
composure, and that I will not risk by 
again giving way to expectation. But I 
have trespassed too long upon your atten- 
tion ; I have nothing further to add, than, 
from the time of my return to Bath, a 
deep and consuming melancholy has prey- 
ed upon my health and peace ; but not so 
entirely from any disappointment I expe- 
rienced, as the conviction of the light in 
which I should be regarded by my pa- 
rents, if aware of the manner in which I 
acted; tormented by this, their tender- 
ness — their fond caresses, have often failed 
of soothing my feelings; for to be able to 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 313 

derive real comfort and happiness from 
the affection of our friends, it is requisite 
we should feel conscious of truly meriting 
it." 

Eveleen could not dissent from the truth 
of this observation ; if praise undeserved is 
censure in disguise, she was well, aware 
the fond caresses of confiding friends must 
be a source of torture to the secretly up- 
braiding heart; she, however, said every 
thing she could to sooth the fair afflicted, 
nor left her till she was a little restored 
to composure. 

As she was slowly retracing her way 
back, musing upon what she had been 
listening to, and the extreme difficulty, 
she feared, would attend any attempt for 
the vindication of Rosetta, she was abrupt- 
ly joined by lord Altidore again. He look- 
ed all agitation; and Eveleen, not well 
knowing what he might like to acknow- 
ledge, felt utterly at a loss how to address 
him ; but from the embarrassment she ex- 
perienced he soon relieved her.—" I see I 

VOL. IV. r 



314 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Startled you," he said, " by the abruptness 
with which I joined you, but the agitation 
of my mind must be my excuse for this. 
You will not wonder at the emotions I ex- 
perience when I inform you, that I have 
overheard the whole of what you have 
been listening to. The anxiety I was in 
about the fair being whom you have ho- 
noured with your notice, would not permit 
me to retreat from the cottage till I had 
seen you again. While waiting for you 
in its vicinity, you entered the arbour with 
her, behind which I was sheltered, and 
without actually intending to listen, I was 
involuntarily ri vetted to the spot. What 
my feelings were at the recital I thus over- 
heard, may easier be conceived than de- 
scribed. To learn a relationsliip 1 had be- 
fore no idea of, naturally filled me witli 
surprise; and if the perfect vindication of 
a being that had been so interesting to me 
occasioned delight, yet how was that em- 
poisoned by the reflection of its being ef- 
fected at the expence of so near and dear 
a relative as a sister ! true, on the feeling 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 315 

and generosity of Miss Erin I knew I 
might rely for secrecy on the terrible sub- 
ject; but how gaUing — how afflicting to 
think, there should be any thing in the 
conduct of one so nearly connected to 
me, to render the exertion of these requi- 
site ! But I see I pain, 1 embarrass you," 
said lord Altidore; " let me, therefore, only 
briefly add, that had I obeyed the impulse 
of my feelings, I should, at once, have dis- 
covered myself; but what had previously 
occurred in the cottage rendered me fear- 
ful of yielding to them. I hasten home, 
however, to explain myself to my fair and 
newly-discovered relative, and trust the 
ample justice I now do her in my own 
mind, will be considered a sufficient atone- 
ment and reparation for the wrong before 
done her." 

Here was an unexpected termination, 
indeed, to the difficulties which Eveleen 
had before anticipated, in the way of Ro- 
setta*s happiness ! But Rosetta could not 
be brought so immediately to acquiesce in 
the wishes of her lover as was expected ; 



Sl6 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

she was aware of the confidence it was na- 
tural for him to repose in the word of his 
sister, and that, should she therefore 
choose to deny what she had been accused 
of, the renewal of jealousy and distrust 
might be the consequence; and therefore 
finally decided, after some struggle with 
her feelings, on positively resisting the re- 
newal of his addresses, except assured 
there could be no danger of what she ap- 
prehended. The consequence of this de- 
cision was the delay of the introduction 
of lord Altidore to her parents, and that 
appearance of particularity between his 
lordship and Eveleen, from her being the 
confidant of both parties, that more than 
once excited uneasiness in the mind of 
Donaghue. 

Mrs. Southwell did not, by this time, 
require the admonitory letters of her bro- 
ther, to awaken her to a full sense of the 
injury she had done Rosetta; but still she 
knew not how to bring herself to acknow- 
ledge what must so essentially injure her 
in his estimation. The serious considera-. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 317 

tions effected by declining health, brought 
on by the appearance of culpability into 
which she had been drawn through the 

artifices of lord S , who, finding he 

could not completely triumph over her 
principles, at length deserted her for ano- 
ther, finally effected what was wished, and 
the happiest result was the consequence. 

Lord Altidore had, indeed, been seri- 
ously attached to Rosetta; so much so, 
that it was more through pique and re- 
sentment, than any real transfer of re- 
gard, he had been induced to think of 
another. Fully acquitted in his opinion, 
she no longer delayed making known 
to her parents what has already been 
detailed, and it may well be believed, 
they had no hesitation in receiving lord 
Altidore as a relative, or sanctioning her 
union with him. Preparations for this 
immediately commenced, though, out of 
respect to the feelings of sir James Mel 
ville, of a private nature, so that sir Wil- 
liam actually had not deceivpr! Oonaghue, 
P 3 



318 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

when he informed him that lord Altidore 
was on the very eve of changing his con- 
dition. 

Those who have never experienced dis- 
quietude cannot properly be said to know 
what real happiness is, so much does con- 
trast heighten every felicitous feeling. 
This was not wanting to add to the enjoy- 
ment of the party now assembled at the 
Vale, and perhaps a more truly happy one 
could hardly have been met with. 

Lady Jane, w^ho, through her emissaries^ 
kept up a kind of telegraphic communi- 
cation with the neighbourhood, soon re- 
ceived intelligence of all that had occurred 
at the Vale. How lord Rosenellis had 
been able to vindicate himself of the 
charge she had brought against him, she 
could not conceive, but she had a strong 
suspicion it was not without a detection 
to her prejudice, and, in consequence, de- 
cided on no more returning to the Vale, 
ietAir,^ it utterly impossible, with all her 
confidence, to be able to face any of the^ 
j)arUt;s she had so attempted to injure inx- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 319 

mediately again ; not that she apprehend, 
ed positive reproaches from them, but the 
idea of silent scorn was more insupportable 
than that of absolute invective ; and she 
accordingly hastened to Dublin, for the 
purpose of returning to London. Hence, 
however, not to be entirely foiled in every 
scheme, she dispatched a letter to sir Ed- 
ward, reminding him of the wish he had 
expressed to be allowed to accompany her 
to England, whenever she thought of re- 
turning to it. 

But this letter met with a very different 
reception from what she had hoped or ex- 
pected ; the spell she had cast round the 
flattered baronet was dissolved the mo- 
ment she had taken her departure, and 
with delight he returned to the enjoyment 
of poor little Miss Bond's conversation — an 
enjoyment he had not ceased regretting 
his relinquishment of, even at the very 
moment he was most gratified by the 
proud distinction to which he conceived 
the notice of lady Jane had elevated him, 
so perfectly was the conversation of this 



320 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

young lady adapted to the meridian of his 
understanding, and so inexhaustible was 
the amusement he derived from her de- 
scription of all the wonders she had seen 
when in Paris, Not immediately, how- 
ever, could he obtain her forgiveness for 
the sudden cessation of his attentions to 
her; perseverance, at length, subdued her 
resentment, and the result of their renew- 
ed intercourse was a proposal that devoted 
him to her for the remainder of his life. 

The party at the Vale were delighted 
to hear of the departure of her ladyship, 
since, after what had occurred, nothing 
could well have been more distressing than 
for those who could not, without pain, 
feign what they did not feel, to have been 
obliged to receive her again. Generously 
pardoning all the uneasiness she had caused 
them, their wish was more for her amend- 
ment than punishment ; but a wish which, 
when they afterwards encountered her in 
London, they had very little reason to be- 
lieve, either from what they heard or then 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 321 

saw, there was any chance of yet awhile 
being realized. 

Very little further remains to be added : 
a reconciliation was no sooner effected at 
the Vale, than Donaghue waited on his 
uncle, and, from the explanation that en- 
sued, had the pleasure of being accompa- 
nied by him from sir Ulick Magennis's, 
where he had taken up his abode, to Al- 
toir-na-Grenie. It was to the oblicrincr 
information, indeed, of sir Ulick, that Do- 
naghue was indebted for the letter he had 
received from the general; and, had the 
artifices of her ladyship prevailed, there 
would have been new claims upon his re- 
gard, that must have superseded those of 
his nephew. 

The preparations that were so abruptly 
interrupted for the marriage of Donaghue 
and Eveleen were quickly renewed ; and 
the fondest wish of lady Erin's heart was 
at length accomplished, in witnessing the 
union of her daughter with the son of her 
earliest and dearest friend. The marriage 
of Melville took place about the same 



322 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

time, and lord Altidore's quickly followed. 
From what has already been mentioned 
of the respective parties, we conceive, any 
of their respective plans or arrangements 
would be superfluous ; suffice it, therefore, 
that what they censured in others, they 
resisted being allured into themselves; 
and though occasionally obliged and in- 
duced to absent themselves from their re- 
spective homes, still made it a point to 
have it understood, that the land of their 
forefathers was their permanent residence. 
The result was all that was gratifying to 
their feelings; from it they clearly saw, 
that were their example followed, many 
of the evils now complained of there 
would be avoided ; for — 

'* 111 fares the land, to hast'ning ills a prey," 

when basely deserted by its own children. 

FINIS. 



Printed by J. Darling, Leadenhall-Street, London. 



NEW PUBLICATIONS 

PRINTED FOR 

^. K, JVKWM^Jf H CO. 



AT THE 



tyr linear a c^iL t€44f 
LEADENHALL-STREET, LONDON 



Prejudice, or Physiognomy, by Azilc D'Arcy, 3 vols.. . 15 
Jessy, or the Rose of Donald's Cottage, by the Author 

of the Bra^p of Bohemia, 4 vols. .., 1 .' ') 

Yamboo, or thd North American Slave, Sd edition, by 

the same, 3 vols o 

A Bride and no Wife, by Henrietta Rouviere Moss, 4 

vols 1 

The Foundling of Devonshire, or Who is she ? by Miss 

C. D. Haynes, 5 vols 5 ? 

Leap Year, or a Woman's Privilege, by Selina Daven- 
port, n vols 1 T ' ' 

Howard Castle, or a Romance from the Mountains, by 

a North Briton, 5 vols 1 ' ~- 

The Deserter, by the Author of Montreithe, and Hu<:- 

band Hunters, 4 vols i , o 

Edric the Forester, by Mrs. Ker, 3 vols m !.> o 

Beauchamp, or the Wheel of Fortune, 4 vols ] :^ 

Robertina, by Catherine G. Ward, 2 vols o lo 

Anti-Delphine, by Mrs. Byron, 2 vols 10 

Amabel, by Mrs. Harvey, 2d edition 1 4 

The Balance of Comfort, or the Old Maid and the Mar- 
ried Woman, by Mrs. Ross, 4th edition, 3 vols i6 

Mademoiselle de la Fayette, by Madame Genlis, 2 vols. l'» 6 
Secrets in every Mansion, or the Surgeon's Memoran- 
dum Book, by Anne of Swansea, 5 vols. ..,,.... I ' 6 

8] 



NEW Pb^BLlCATIONS. 

£ s. ti. 

My Native Land, or the Test of Heroism, by Catherine 

G. Ward 6 <> 

The Prior Claim, by Mrs. IlifiF, 2 vols 9 

Lady Durnevor, or My Father's Wife, by A. F. Holstein, 
Svols 16 

Beggar Girl and her Benefactors, by Mrs. Bennett, 

3d edition, 5 vols 1 7 6 

Rosaura di Viralva, 'Id. edition, 2 vols 10 <> 

Cambrian Pictures, or Every one has Errors, by Ann of 
Swansea, 3 vols 16 

Strangers of Lindenfeldt, or Who is my Father? by 

Mrs. Ross, Author of the Cousins, &c. 3 vols 15 '-' 

I says, says I, a Novel, by Thinks I to Myself, 2 vols . 10 t". 

The Monastery of St. Columb, or the Atonement, by 
Mrs. Roche, Author of the Children of the Abbey, 
Discarded Son, &c. &c. 3 vols 1 r 

Stories of the Four Nations, by the Author of Margiana, 
Sir William Dorien, &c. 5 vols 1 7 

Sir Ferdinand of England, an Historical Romance, by 

J. N. Brewer, Author of A Winter's Tale, &c. 4 vols 1 'J 

Substance and Shadow, or the Fisherman's Daughters 

of Brighton, 4 vols i "i. '^ 

Arrivals from India, by Henrietta Rouviere Mosse, 4 vols 1 l t> 

<* Says She to her Neighbour, What?" being a Com- 
panion to " Thiniis I to Myself," 4 vols 1 o 

Old Times and New, or Sir Lionel and his Protegee, 

4 vols i i" 

Ethelia, second edition, by the same, 3 vols u lo 

Santo Sebastiano, or the Young Protector, 5 vols 1 10 th 

Ferrandino, a German Romance, 2 vols 10 6 

Trecothick Bower, or the Lady of the West Country, 
by Mrs. Roche, 3 vols It; 

Midnight Weddings, by Mrs. Meekc, second edition, 
3 vols 1 ^ 

Conscience, by Mrs. Mceke, 4 vols 1 4 

Conviction, or She is Innocent, by the Author of Cam- 
brian Pictures, &c. 5 vols 1 -- Jh.-:^, 

Tales of the Passions, by G, Moore, second edition, 8vo. 10 6 
