ALEXENA; 

OR, THE 

Castle of Santa Marco, 

A ROMANCE, ^ 
IN THREE VOLUMES. 




VOL. I. FACE .87. 



./ 



ORj THE 

Castle of Santa Mo^rco, 

A ROMANCE, 
IN THREE VOLUMES. 



EMBELLISHED WITH ENGRAVINGS. 



*' Ye gods of quiet and of sleep profound ! 
Whose soft dominion o'er this castle sways ; 
And all the widely silent places round. 
Forgive me, if my trembling pen displays 
What never yet was sung in mortal lays." 



VOL. r. 



JLonDon: 

Printed ul the Minerva Press, for 
A.K. NEWMAN AND CO. LEADENHALLST. 

1817. 






ALEXENA; 



OB THE 



Castle of Santa Marco, 



■» 4-»t»>->- 



CHAPTER I. 

" Again she plunges! hark! a second shock 
Tears her strong bottom on the marble rock: 
Eown on the vale of death, with dismal criei. 
The fated victims shudd'ring roll their eyes: 

5f At length asunder torn, her frame divides, 
•w And crashing spreads in ruin o'er the tides." 

Falcomek. 

X HE clouds passed darkly and rapidly 
over the magnificent mansion of Lord 
Mortimer^ as he crossed the court-yard 
leading- to the draw-bridge, where his 
charger stood snorting, impatiently 
waiting his approach. Tom Rourke 
held the stirrup while his master mount- 

VOL. I. A 



2 alexena; or the 

cd, and ventured to point out the neces- 
sity of an additional great coat as the 
thunder was distinctly heard, and the 
dark shades of night were fast falling 
on the outline of the extensive land- 
scape that lay between his castle and 
that of his friend Sir Edmond Hastings, 
with whom he was then going to dine. 

It was a cold December's evening, in 
the year 1557; the wind howled hor- 
ribly in the neighbouring woods, and 
scarce had his lordship proceeded one 
mile, ere the dcemon of the storm appears 
to have bestrode the blast. The rain 
fell in hissing torrents, intermixed with 
showers of hail, which involved Lord 
Mortimer and his attendant in almost 
total darkness, save when the pale 
and arrowy lightning partially revealed 
the scene, as it gleamed in repeated 
flashes, and momentanly illumined the 
road. The elements groaned ; peal 
succeeded peal, in long and lengthened 
voUies, and all nature appeared threat- 
ened with universal chaos. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 3 

Lord Mortimer pressed bis steed for- 
ward at a full gallop, and was closely 
attended by his servant, of whom he 
was particularly fond ; his attachment, 
zeal, honesty, and blunt good nature, 
were deeply traced on his lordship's 
memory, and often procured him those 
indulo:encies and familiarities which few 
servants would be allowed. But Tom 
Rourke was an exception to the gene- 
rality of domestics, for he never presum- 
ed on the kindness of his lord, nor ever 
forgot the respect due from a servant to 
his master; indeed, had Lord Mortimer 
been his dearest relative, it is a ques- 
tion, whether Rourke could have been 
more attached ; he would fight for him 
'till the last gasp, if necessary, and 
watched o'er his health and safety with 
the anxiety of a parent. Rourke was 
an Irishman, and about this period, 
thirty years old ; ten of which had 
glided away in tlie service of Lord 
Mortimer, to the mutual satisfaction of 
both ; he was brave as a lion, with a 
heart replete with every generous feel- 

A 2 



4 ALSX.ENA ; OR THB 

icg, and among his fellow servants was 
distinguished by the appellation of 
' Honest Tom Rourke.' — Butto return : 

His lordship continued at full speed 
(as the road was perfecdj^ safe,) with 
Tom at his heels, who now and then 
burst into such exclamations^ as ' Och 
murder, poor Skylark, there won't be 
a drop in you when we get to Hol- 
lywood-Castle! — Where are you Lion? 
(this last was a favourite Newfoundland 
dog that never failed to accompany him, 
and of both Skylark and Lion, Tom 
was particularly fond,) and therefore 
announced his joy on seeing the lights 
in the windows of the castle, by ex- 
claiming, ' Mushen, yonder's the liglit, 
and it is'nt I that's glad to see it once 
more, to be sure ! — Nell, my jewel, I 
hav'nt seen your ears since the storm 
began before, and there's not much 
fear of it being over inahuri'y!' — 'I 
thought Tom,' said his lordship, (as he 
slackened his pace) ' that a cold windy 
night gave you little inconvenience!* 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAncO. B 

* Very little indeed, my Lord/ said Tom 
respectfully, 'but I am vexed about 
the cattle ; for as to Lion, he does not 
value it ; but Skylark won't be the 
better on't this mouth of Sundays, and 
his coat, which was so sleek to day, will 
stand an end like the burnt heather 
on the bog- of Allen.' His lordship 
laughed, and said, ' so, so, I find all 
' your uneasiness is about the horses I' 
' Not iiil my lord ; I heartily wish you 

* may not be the v*^orse, for by this 
'time you must be drenched to th©^ 
'skin; but please excuse me for first 

' expressing my compassion for these 

* poor du;nb brutes, that can't tell their 
' wants, and Skylark is a favourite, bein»j 
' so gentle that he follows me like a dog, 
' there is not such a beauty in th« 
' whole country, except one, and that 
' is that Spanish lady's horse, and 
' since 1 saw him, I am glad he is her 
'property/ 'Why?' inquired his 
lordship. ' Because she is not only 
'the most beautiful lady I have ever 
'seen, but the best also; all Sir Ed- 



G ALEXENA ; OR THE 

' mond's servants doat on her, and would 
' almost lay down their lives for her 
' sake; there's Betsy, that has lived with 
' my Lady Hastings these ten years, 
' and who is one of the properest young; 
' personages as a waiting-maid, in this 
^ here country, loves her almost as well as 
' her own mistress ; 'troth, I am sartiri 
' she would make an excellent wife for 
' the best lord in the land, and none 
' but the best desarve her.* ' In faith 
Tom,* said his lordship, ' you have 

* excited my curiosity a little ; pray 

* when did she arrive at Hollywood?* 

* About three weeks ; she is the greatest 
' toast within fifty miles. Your lord- 
' ship's tenants have been after putting 

* up prayers that you might see, fall in 
' iove with, and marry her, and her 
! aunt, who is with her, is a very 
' good lady, turned of forty, or there- 
' abouts ; but how could she be bad, 
' seeing she is Sir Edmond's own sister ! 
' As to the lady Alexena,' continued 
Tom, ' there may be an objection, 
' because she is a Spaniard ; but what 



\ 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 7 

'o' that, when her own mother was an 
' English-woman.' ' I know now, who 
the Lady is/ said his lordship, ' and I 
believe you have heard nothing more 
than facts respecting her goodness, 
but hush! we are under the castle 
walls; see the horses to the stable, and 
then bring my dressing-case to my 
chamber.' That I will, my lord, in a 
hurry, was the reply, and the same 
moment they were challenged by the 
sentinel of the watch, and instantly the 
draw-bridge was lowered, and they en- 
tered the court-yard. Sir Edmond met 
Lord Mortimer in the hall, and ex- 
pressed much concern on seeing him 
in such a miserable plight, (as his 
clothes were drenched through with 
rain,) and he felt uneasy lest his 
friend should be a sufferer from the 
inclemency of the night; he therefore 
hurried him to his apartment, where 
he quickly changed his dreeping 
garments, and in a very short time 
made his onntre into the saloon, where 
he found, among a gay and numerous 



8 alexena; or th« 

assemblage, the object of Romke's 
honest praise. The moment was por- 
teritious to both the lady and his lord- 
ship ; he had, from report,, been prepared 
to admire a young female, lovely and 
accomplished ; but his most lively 
imagination, in all its playfulness, had 
not formed an object so every way 
fascinating; no wonder then, that the 
moment he was introduced to Alexena 
de Guzman, he became the willing cap- 
tive of her charms; and when the name 
of Mortimer Mas announced, the face 
and beauteous neck of the fair Spaniard 
became suffused with glowing crimson, 
though she herself could not tell where- 
fore. The noble Mortimer observed 
her emotion, and augured favourably 
from the incident, as it seemed to say, 
his name was not entirely unknown to 
her ; nor was he mistaken, for the name 
of Mortimer had long been familiar, as 
her aunt never felt more agreeably en- 
gaged than when lavishing praises on 
him in her presence, he being a great 



\ 



CASTLB OF SANTA MARCO. 9 

favourite with her, they having been for 
years intimately acquainted. 

Before dinner was announced, he had 
the pleasure of enjoying an animated 
conversation with Alexena; and before 
they retired from the saloon, lie became 
the most enamoured of lovers. Among 
the iiMiests of Sir Edmond, were Miss 
Dash fort, his wife's sister, the Rev. 
IVilliam Jones, Henri Bolerno, a Spa- 
niard, cousiii of Alexena,. and many 
other noble personages; but as their 
names are immaterial, I shall pass them 
over in silence. Dinner over, and grace 
« said. Sir Edmond observed what a 
contrast there was in the scene within 
and without the castle; inside, all har- 
mony ; without, the rude hoarse roaring 
of the tempest, and the distant dashing 
of the wares against the rocky beach. 

Hollywood-Castle was situated on the 
western coast of England, and was not 
merely considered a noble ediGce, but 

A 5 



10 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

a place of considerable strength ; it 
commanded a fine view of the country 
oa one side, while on the other, the 
foaming ocean spread in boundless 
extent, and washed a dangerous ledge 
of rocks to the right of the castle, on 
which the luckless mariner often pe- 
rished, though every precaution had 
been taken by Sir Edmond to prevent 
the frequent occurrence of such melan- 
choly catastrophes; lights were placed 
in one of the highest towers that com- 
manded the coast, and boats were 
always in readiness to assist the dis- 
tressed, many of whom had been saved 
by these most praiseworthy exertions. 

Very shortly after the ladies had re- 
tired, the storm increased to a dreadful 
pitch of fury, and shook the castle to 
its base. Consequently considerable 
alarm was excited, and the gentlemen 
arose to seek the ladies for the purpose 
of quieting their fears, when the report 
of a gun, (a signal of distress,) was 
faintly heard ; another and another ra- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 11 

pidly succeeded, and in a moment after, 
every inmate of the castle was in mo- 
tion. SirEdmond and Lord Mortimer 
rushed out on the ramparts, followed by 
a numerous train. The faint cries of 
the drownins: unfortunates came on the 
blast, and were easily distinguished ; in 
a moment the draw-bridge was lowered, 
and the dark ramparts became reflected 
by the blaze of torches that were 
speedily lighted, and which neither 
wind nor rain could extinguish. Every 
one pressed forward to the rocky shore, 
which lay not more than an hundred 
paces from the castle, and among the 
foremost was Rourke, attended by Lion, 
whom he called his life preserver. 
The flash of the cannon, at intervals, 
illumined the sinking vessel, which 
threatened to go to pieces with each 
succeeding wave, and the wretched 
crew were seen frantically clinging to 
the shattered masts. In a short time 
the shore was crowded with Sir Ed- 
mond's domestics and the neighbouring 
peasants ; but the storm was so exces- 



12 ALEXEWA ; OR THE 

sively violent;, and the rocks so steep 
and dangerous, that the most hardy re- 
fused to venture in a boat to their relief, 
thouij-'h the rewards offered by Sir Ed- 
mond and Lord Mortimer, were very 
liberal ; the attempt, however, it was 
coneeived, would be attended by inevi- 
table destruction. The crew were sen- 
sible that no assistance could reach 
t!iem, and their cries, at this moment, 
became insupportable ; tliey could dis- 
tinguish the land, which few of them 
were ever to reach with life, and fruit- 
lessly stretched forth their hands en- 
treatiuii' that relief which it was a moral 
impossibility to afford. The scene was 
horrible, but in a few moments, sus- 
pense was at an end ; a tremendous 
breaker dashed the frail and crazy vessel 
to pieces, and another hushed the cries 
of the crew in (helongsilenceof a watery 
grave. It was some moments before 
Lord Mortimer was convinced that 
the ship had perished, as she had often 
been undiscernable from the immense 
heavy sea ; but very shortly aftefj a few 



CASTLE OF SANTA MATICO. 13 

of the survivors were seen {loatino* 
towards the shore on pieces of plank, 
to which they had bound themselves ; 
and one particularly could be dislin- 
guislied, bntTettinu" the waves that fre- 
-q neatly raised him many, many feet 
above the surface of the surge, and 
then seemed to sink with him into the 
recesses of the deep. With much diffi- 
culty he was pointed out to Lion, who 
instantly, on perceiving him, plunged 
into the foaniino' tide. The utmost 
anxiety was now excited ; every one 
offered up their prayers for the success 
of the dog, and for the preservation of 
the unfortunate object who then ap- 
peared almost exhausted. Lion was 
repeatedly, within an arm's length of 
him, when some surly and envious wave 
drove him back. Those on the beach 
encouraged him with their cries, and 
at length he was seen to dive or sink. 
One moment all was horror and despair, 
but the following instant the noble ani- 
mal rose within grasp of the almost 
lifeless wretchj and seized him. A shout 



14 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

proclaimed his success, and for a short 
space, the late mournful event was for- 
gotten, in the joyful prospect that one 
life would be saved. Lion rapidly ap- 
proached the shore with playful tail and 
head erect ; but the peril was not yet 
over ; he had the frightful rocks to en- 
counter, as he was too far from the usual 
landing place, and to reach it in his 
present state was impossible. Rourke, 
therefore made the servants fasten a 
rope round his waist^, and at the immi- 
nent dano:er of forfeiting- his existence, 
ventured to the surface of the frio'htful 
surge, and scarce had the white foam 
dashed over his limbs, when he seized 
the sailor with one hand, and the neck of 
Lion wiih the other, and in a moment 
they were hoisted on the beach. The 
senses of the st«'anger had fled, and 
while some were busily employed in ap- 
plying restoratives, others were en- 
deavouring to assist another wretched* 
b eing, who had reached the shore on a 
plank, and was then hanging on a ledge 
of a rockj in momentary expectation of 



CASTLE OP SANTA MARCO. 15 

being buried in the bosom of tlie in- 
furiated deep. By the assistance of 
ropes, he also was saved, but every 
other soul, save these two, perished. 

Sir Edmond commanded his domes- 
tics to hasten towards the castle with 
all possible despatch, that speedy relief 
miii'ht be administered to the unfortu- 
nate strangers, who were carried in 
chairs, and in a few moments after 
they arrived, were undressed and put 
to bed. 

The man whom Lion saved, was long 
insensible, from the fatigue and loss of 
blood that had flowed from a deep 
wound in his side, inflicted by a splinter 
of the wreck, against which he had 
been dashed at the moment the vessel 
went to pieces. In less than half an 
hour, however, he became sensible of 
the danger he had so miraculously 
escaped, and the first words he uttered, 
after offering a fervent prayer to heaven^ 
were, ' Had father Montane been 



IQ ALEXENA ; on THE 

saved:' on being informed (liaf one 
other person in a monk's habit had been 
rescued from the deep, his looks ex- 
pressed his disappointment, and he 
replied, 'that is he,' and then appeared 
buried in thought. Surgical aid had 
almost instantly been procured, and 
on the wound being examined, it was 
pronounced dangerous: quiet was re- 
commended, and strict orders oiven 
that none should disturb the stranjrer 
by asking questions. 

Sir Edmond at this time was as- 
sisting the monk, who begged to be 
left to the solitude of his chamber for 
that evening, and that he should in the 
morning explain from whence he came, 
and the nature of his business. Sir 
Edmond, in reply, observed, he was 
entirely at liberty to act as he thought 
prudent in that respect, and retired, 
wishing him sound and peaceful slumber 
after his fatigue. The monk bad ad- 
dressed Sir Edmond in Spanish, and from 
thence he concluded his guest was of that 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 17 

nation, and though his curiosity was 
somewhat excited ; he resolved not to 
make any attempt to gratify it for the 
present. — 1 should have observed^ that 
while Sir Edmond remained in the 
room, the father had drawn from his 
bosom a sealed packet, which he care- 
fully dried by the fire, and placed under 
his pillow, before he retired to repose. 

When the confusion and bustle 
that the late event had occasioned, 
.•somewhat abated, the gentlemen at- 
tended the ladies in the drawing-room, 
where the strangers became the- topic 
of conversation for the remainder of the 
evening, and many were the praises 
bestowed on Rourke, for the very 
timely assistance he had afforded, and 
both Sir Edmond and his master deter- 
mined to reward him; nor was Lion 
forgotten ; not a creature in the castle 
who were not eager to bestow some 
mark of favour on him. and, indeed, he 
was literally loaded v/ith caresses. 



18 ALEXEJTA ; on THE 

The monk intimated that he had 
arrived from Spain ; and this intimation 
gave birth to many vague conjectures 
in the minds of Sir Edmond and Lord 
Mortimer, who resolved to have a care- 
ful eye on him, as the country was 
much distur})ed by the cruel edicts of 
the detestable Mary, and they suspected 
he was a big-ot from the court of Spain, 
sent for the purpose of adding fuel to 
the flame, that at that period raged 
horribly in every quarter of the king- 
dom. But their suspicions were with- 
out foundation. 

As soon as Tom Rourke had changed 
his garments, he went to see the man, 
whose life, with the assistance of Pro- 
vidence, he had been the means of 
preserving ; and finding him in a deep 
sjumber, sat by his bed, determined to 
watch by him through the night, to mi- 
nister to his wants, should it be neces- 
sary. His sleep, which at first appeared 
tranquil, soon proved otherwise, by his 
sudden jjtartings, and more than once he 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAllCO. 19 

named Montano^ and groaned audibly. 
Tom had learned that this was the name 
of the monk, and resolved to mark the 
expressions of his sleeping patient, 
who shortly after pronounced the name 
of De Guzman, with a deep sigh, and 
muttered a few words in a language to 
which Tom was an entire stranger. 
About two o'clock in the morning he 
av/oke, and on observing Rourke, spoke 
to him in Spanish, but the latter made 
signs he did not comprehend his mean- 
ing. The stranger then lay quiet for 
several minutes, as if trying to recollect 
the late events, and in an instant after, 
started upright in his bed and addressed 
Tom in very good English, at which 
the latter was much surprized. The 
Spaniard inquired by what means, and 
by whose assistance, he had been pre- 
served, and Tom gave him the detail 
of all he knew, mentioning his own 
name with much modesty, and praising 
his master to the skies, who, he said, 
held the rope by which he had been 
lowered, and assisted in drawing them 



so ALEXEXA; OR THE 

up the rocks. Oa Gonzales hearing 
the rank of Lord Mortimer^ he said, 
he felt most grateful, and hoped it 
should be one day in his power to 
render him some acceptable service in 
return, and then again inquired for the 
monk. ' He is now asleep/ Tom replied, 
' but, if necessary, I shall have him 
summoned to your bed side.' ' No ! oh, 
no! by no means, I am merely sorry 
his sleep is not eternal.' Rourke 
started, and imai^ined he was deran^^ed, 
but Gonzales look no notice, and ob- 
served, ' if his streui^ftli would i)nt per- 
mit, he could tell deeds of the monk 
that would make his blood freeze.' ' It 
maybe! it may be!* muttered Tom, 
'all is not ii^old \\y\\ olitters, but don't 
weary yourselt" nsore at present, some , 
otlier time will do as well.' ' Pray,' 
said Gonzales, ' how long hast thou 
lived v\ith thy lord ?' * About ten years 1' 
* Where does he reside?' ' Within five 
miles of tliis castle!' 'And to whom 
does it belong?' ' To Sir Edmond 
Hastings!' 'To Sir Edmond Hastujgs! 



CASTLE OF SASTTA MARCO. Jl 

say you?' crird Gonzales, with great 
emotion, • Yes/ replied Tom The sick 
man gasped for breath, but in a mo- 
ment he continued, ' Have you ever 
by any chance heard of a Spanish hidy 
«f the name of Alexena de Gnznian?* 
' That I have ; she now rests under this 
roof, and may God's holy angels watch 
her slumbers/ ' Amen, Amen !' was fer- 
vently ejaculated by Gonzales. Tom's 
curiosity was now excited to a painful 
degree, and with very little intreaty he 
gave the stranger all the information in 
his power, and concluded with a hearty 
wish, that she might one day be the wife 
of his lord. ' Is he acquainted with 
her?' again, eagerly demanded Gonza- 
les. ' He has only seen her this evening,' 
replied Tom, ' for the first time ; but as 
my master is the most handsome man, 
and one of the best in England, a great 
deal may be done in a very short time, 
and her aunt doats on my lord ; aye, that 
she does.' ' Well, thank God,' mur- 
mured the invalid, ' all yet may be 
Tyell; it is now four o'clock, do you 



22 alexena; or the 

therefore^ my good friend, retire to rest, 
as I again feel inclined to sleep, if 
this wound of mine. will permit.' Tom 
was anxious to w atch the remainder of 
the night, but Gonzales insisted on his 
seeking repose. However, the moment 
he left the chamber, he sent one of the 
domestics to take his place, and on 
his seeking his bed, found Lion lying 
along side of it, as if anxiously expect* 
ing his arrival. 

— > < »■»» i 



CHAP. II. 

" which is the villain ? let me note his eye, 
That when I see another man like him, 
I may avoid him." 

Shakespzarb. 

xliARLY on the following morning, 
Rourke was summoned to his lord's 
chamber, where he found him already 
half dressed. 'What is the matter?* 
said his lordship, as he entered, '^your 
eyes seem to say you have not slept^ 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 23 

are you indisposed?' ' I never was bet- 
ter in all my life, I humbly thank your 
lordship, but I hope I have not kept 
you waiting, for I know I am but a 
bad valet, and will ill supply Mr. 
Albert's place, howeyer, he was much 
better yesterday, and will soon be able 
to resume his station, and long may he 
enjoy it, for he is as honest a soul as 
ever broke the world's bread.' ' 1 feel 
rejoiced he is so much better,' observed 
his loixlship, * but you really look un- 
well; have you been to bed?' ' That I 
have, though not very long. I thought 
as how I would sit awhile with that 
poor wou[idcd stranger, and on my 
entering his room I found him asleep, 
so I sat on the foot of his bed, and 
while I remained, he chattered in 
his dreams like a magpie, and cursed 
that monkish old Don that we picked 
off the rocks, and, as well as a body 
may guess, not without reason.' ' Let 
me hear what he said.' ' That I will, 
my lord, though the whole is'nt much.' 
Tom then related every word (hat had 



24 ALEXENA* OR THii 

been uttered in the chamber of Gon- 
zales. Lord Mortimer listened atten- 
tively, but merely observed that the un- 
fortunate man's intellect was disturbed 
by his recent danger, and the pain of 
his wound. ' It may be so/ replied Tom, 
'and it is not unlikely but he has got 
more than one/ 'Where?' said his 
lordship. ' One in the body, and the 
other in the mind, and the last seems to 
fijive the greatest pain of the two/ 
Lord Mortimer appeared thoughtfub 
but changed the subject by inquiring 
for Sir Edmond, and shortly after 
descended to the breakfast parlour, 
where he was agreeably surprised to 
find him at such an early hour, and 
they immediately went out on the ram- 
parts together. There his lordship re- 
peated the conversation that had passed 
between the wounded stranger and his 
servant, and requested to know what 
Sir Edmond thought of it. ' I know 
' not what to think ; but our stranger 
' guest has promised to give an account 
* of himself this morning ; do you ob- 



CASTLE or SANTA MARCO. SS 

*■ serve him, while I, if possible, shall 
' draw him into conversation, and learn 
' the true purport of his business to this 
' country ; for, to be candid with you, 
' from the little I have seen, I like him 
' not, and as to his appearance, it is any 
* thing" but prepossessing.' 

Shortly after they returned to break- 
fastj and found the ladies assembled 
but the monk chose to take the morn- 
ing's repast in his own chamber, and 
sent a respectful intimation to that effect, 
but mentioned his intention of waitina: 
on Sir Edmond in the course of the 
forenoon ; to which the latter returned a 
polite reply. 

Immediately after breakfast the ladies 
retired to the music-room, for the purpose 
of catching a glimpse of the monk as5 
he passed into the library, and as the 
hour approached. Sir Edmond and 
Lord Mortimer felt a degree of anxiety, 
for which they could not account, save, 
that the dark hints, or rather ravings, of 
Gonzales, had excited their curiositj. 

TOL. I. B 



SG ALEXENA; on THE 

A little before eleven o'clock, Mon- 
tano descended from his apartment, 
(attended by a domestic,) habited iu 
the dress of his order, and as he parsed 
through the music-room, paused for a 
moment, on seeing the ladies who pre- 
tended to be engaged with various 
musical compositions; but on observing 
the monk, they rose and curtsied ; their 
salutation was returned by Montano, 
who crossed his hands on his bosom, 
and bowed : then fixed his eve on 
Alexena with an inquiring gaze, as if 
tryinjT to recal to his recolleclion the 
countenance of one with whom he had. 
formerly been acquainted. 

From the moment he entered, 
the ladies continued to gaze on him 
with curiosity, awe, and wonder, and 
when the library doors shut him from 
their view, their eyes were rivettcd to 
the spot on which he stood, as if they 
had seen the iiiltiiig shade of some 
supernatural being; nor were the sen- 
sations of Sir. Edmoad and Lord 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 2T 

Mortimer, on beholdin*^ him, a whit less 
strange ; the latter started from liis seat, 
and let fall a book which he had been 
reading, without being sensible of his 
awkwardness ; Sir Edmond, however, 
was more collected, he rose, and after 
the first complimentary salutations, in- 
troduced his lordship, and some time 
after begged to know how he felt after 
his recent fatii2:ue. Montano made a 
slight inclination of the head, and in a 
voice, remarkable for the deepness of 
its tone, answered, ' extremely well,* 
and then returned thanks for the atten- 
tion he had received. 

In the course of conversation, he 
touched lightly on the melancholy 
event of the preceding night, and ob- 
served, he felt amply repaid for all 
past hardships, by the good fortune 
that had cast him on the spot to which 
he was bound ; and then requested 
to know how many of the crew had 
been saved. 'I conceived,' said Sir 
Edmond, 'you were informed that one 

b2 



SS ALEXENA; OR THE 

more only survives, and that he is dan= 
gerouslyill/ 'One only/ cried Montano, 
' what ! have all the rest perished V I 
am heartily grieved, ' It is even so,' re- 
plied Sir Edmond. 'And, pray/ de- 
manded the monk, (as he slowly raised 
his eyes from the floor, and fixed them 
on Sir Edmond, with a deep look of 
inquiry,) what is the name of the sur- 
vivor? I believe he calls himself Gon- 
zales. — Gonzales! echoed Montano, 'it 
is impossible, I saw him sink, I, I — .' He 
paused, and his face almost changed to 
blackness, while his agitation was too 
apparent to escape observation, and was 
instantly noticed by Lord Mortimer, who 
said, 'I assure you, he is the same; he 
' told my servant so, and the first person 
'for whose safetyhe inquired, was your's'. 
His lordship accompanied these words 
with a look that was meant to search 
the very soul of the monk, and it had 
\he momentary eifect of depriving him 
of caution, for he rapidly exclaimed, ' so 
then, the villain is a traitor, and hasbeen 
tampered with :' but the same instant, a. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAHeO. ' 29 

• hastly smile proclaimed the triumph he 
had regained over his passions, and he 
quickly said, ' I am disturbed, I know 
not what I say ; the incoherency of my 
expressions is owing to the perverse- 
ness of that Gonzales, by whose mis- 
conduct the vessel and her unfortunate 
crew have perished ; and therefore his 
name at this moment, is as peculiarly 
grali iig to my ears, as to my recollection/ 
Lord Mortimer looked doubtingly on 
the monk, who cast a penetrating glance 
of deep inquiry on his lordship, as 
if he demanded his meaning; but the 
former was firm, and Montano with- 
drew his eye, then walked towards a 
window which commanded a view of 
the coast. 

There was now a painful silence; 
Sir Edmoiid, at length, ventured to ask 
the nature of Montano's mission; this 
seemed to relieve all parties; for the 
latter instantly turned from the window, 
and replied, ' he came for the purpose 



50 AI^EXENA; OR THE 

of couiluciino- a young lady, then in 
England, to her friends in Spain.' 

Lord Mortimer now became uneasy 
and alarmed, but suppressed his emo- 
tion, while the monk continued, 'I 
believe she is a relation of your's. Sir 
Edmond; — I mean the lady Alexena de 
Guzman. It was to oblige her family, 
that I have at this time of life left the 
blessed abode of sanctity and peace, 
to encounter all the evils of a tedious 
voyage, and perils of a stormy sea: 
her father has some time ago paid 
the last debt of nature, and her bro- 
thers are anxiously awaiting the return 
of their only sister; poor girl! she is 
now without a parent, and without a 
protector.' ' I beg your pardon, good 
father,' said Lord Mortimer, rather 
warmly; ' Lady Alexena never can 
want a protector; such purity and inno- 
cence as her's, will ever be the peculiar 
care of heaven.' The monk bowed, 
and as he slowly raised his eye to meet 
that of his lordship,, it shot forth a 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 31 

glance, accompanied with a slight 
distortion of the muscles, between a 
sneer and a grin, so undefinablc, yet 
so expressive, that the arch fiend him- 
self would fail in the imitation. As lie 
replied, '1 entirely agree with your 
' lordship; yet as this world isbnrthened 
' with men, both dangerous and design- 

* ing, and oppressed with cares, trou- 

* bles, and misfortunes, the parent of 
' this 3'oung lady wisely designed to 
' remove, this his only daughter, far 
' iVom its tempestuous storms, to the 
'peaceful and holy sanctuary of a con- 
' vent, fi'om whence her pure spirit 
' might, in due time, ascend to the cver- 
' lasting joys of paradise. But now 
' tiiat he is removed from this scene of 
' troubles, her eldest brother, the young 
*" and amiable Velasco, has resolved to 
' leave her future views in life entirely 
"^ to her own choice; merely reserving 
*■ the privilege of advising and pointing 
'' out the advantasres and disadvanta^res 
' that conscquenily' are the attendants 



S2 ALEXENA; OR THE 

' on frail morfality in this vale of tears/ 
Here Montano paused, expecting a 
reply; but Lord Mortimer appeared 
lost in profound thought, and the va- 
cant expression of his look seemed to 
say, he had not heard the conclusion of 
the monk's observations. 

Sir Edmond resumed the subject, by 
inquiring, when it was his intention to 
return to the continent. 'Much depends 
on the I^ady Alexena,' replied the monk, 
' but in three weeks, at farthest, I ex- 
pect to leave this kingdom.' ' Should 
the young lady and her friends be 
averse to part so soon; what then?* 
inquired his lordship. ' Oh ! should 
that be so,' observed Montano, ' I will 
apply to the queen, to whom I have a 
letter, from the Suprema of the most 
holy Inquisition, requiring her majesty 
to send the young lady in safety to her 
friends.' There was now another pause; 
it was evident that not onlv Lord Mor- 
timer, but Sir Edmond, was greatly 



CASTLK OF SANTA MARCO. 33 

shocked at the abrupt threat, or rather 
intimation, of the monk ; for they had 
reason to dread the vengeance of the 
queen, if they openly opposed his 
"wishes, and he not only observed their 
distress, but evinced his joy at it, by 
a gloomy look of malicious exultation. 
To use violent measures might prove 
fetal ; therefore, they resolved to soothe 
the father, and, if possible, induce him 
to prolong his intended journey. Influ- 
enced by this motive. Sir Edinond in- 
formed him^ that Lady Alexena was 
then in the castle; that she was his 
guest, and hoped he would have the 
goodness not to deprive him of such a 
charming visitor, at so early a pe- 
riod as that on which he had fixed for 
his return to Spain. Montano pro- 
mised to gratify him, if in his power, 
and seemed much surprised at finding 
Alexena under the same roof; then 
begged to be introduced to the lady in 
the course of the evening, and observed, 
that it was his intention to conceal her 

b5 



«^ 



1 alexexa; or the 



father's death for tlie present, tliat she 
might enjoy the ainusements of the 
castle, whiie she vet remained. This 
easy copapliance with Sir EdmontVs 
request^ restored, in gome measure, a 
slic;ht degree of hope, that the monk 
might not be actually so bad as their 
fears, Gonzales' hints, and the com- 
mencement of their interview led them 
to si^ppose. 

Shortly after, the father retired to 
Write some letters, and to seek for one 
written ])v youni:: Velasco to Sir Ed- 
mond. When the door closed after 
liim. Lord Mortimer paced tlie room 
in evident distress, and Sir Edmond 
knew not what to say to soothe hig 
perturbation; he conceived it rather 
stranire, that Alexena should have ex- 
cited so ijreat a decree of interest in 
his lordship's heart in so short a period, 
and yet it was evident, his uneasiness 
was solely on her account. ' What is to 
lie done,' said he, as he finnly clasped ,the 



CASTLE OV SANTA MARCO. 35 

Iiand of his friend. Shall I see this Gon- 
zales, and if possible obtain some infor- 
mation about the monk, for whom I must 
acknowledge I have already conceived 
an aversion. 1 have formed an opinion 
by no means in his favor, and fear the 
deep cunning- of his expressive eye ; fw 
has he not appeared here like the flitt- 
ing" shadow of some evil spirit, to mar 
my fair prospects of happiness. It is 
im'possible to elude his keen observance^ 
and conceal the true state of my heart ; 
I love this fair Spaniard too well for my 
peace, and am resolved if I meet with 
the sliirhtest encouraij^emcnt, to mak^ 
her a tender of my hand and fortune^ 
and sl^iould I be supremely blessed by 
her acceptance, 1 trust her brothers 
will have no objection to my alliance. 
I feel an irresistable something that 
binds me to this lovely orphan, utterly 
inexpressible, and should her immense 
fortune present an obstacle, 1 will wii- 
lingly resign it: let the Hj)aniards keep 
their money, I only seek the girl ; as 
vet! fear nothing, save this monk, and 



S6 alexena; on the 

on him I shall keep a watchful, nay, 
a jealous eye. 

'The Spaniards are proud/ said Sir 
Edinond, laughing-, ' and would rather 
immure their daughters in convents, 
than give them portionless to the arms 
of emperors; but since I find you are so 
deeply smitten, I shall use my every ex- 
ertion in your behalf.' Lord Mortimer 
shook him heartily by the hand, and 
they then went in pursuit of the ladies^ 
who were anxiously expecting an ac- 
count of their interview with the ghostly 
father, and on their entrance, almost 
stunned them with a volume of questi- 
ons. Sir Edmond, in reply, merely said, 
' Montano was a messenger from Spain, 
sent to convey Alexena to her relatives, 
in the course of a month or two, when 
she should feel inclined to undertake 
so fatiguing a journey. Alexena heard 
this news without any particular sensa- 
tion of joy or giief. Home had few 
pleasures for her; she had not seen her 
father more than three times since she 



CASTLE OP SANTA MAttCO. ST 

attained her fourth year, and then only 
for half an hour at a time in the parlour 
of the convent^ where she had been 
educated. 

Shortly after the bigotted Mary had 
ascended the throne of England, Miss 
Hastings, the aunt of Alexena (who was 
a maiden lady then about forty,) went 
to Madrid for the express purpose of 
bringing her niece to London, and as 
the former was in possession of a splen- 
did fortune, the father of Alexena 
thought it prudent to assent to this visit. 
Miss Hastings was kindly and hospitably 
received by her brother-in-law, and 
having remained with him a month, 
left Spain accompanied by her niece, 
whom she loved most affectionately, and 
treated with every mark of attention. 

Alexena, notwithstanding she had 
been in England three years, spoke 
the language of the country very im- 
perfectly, w hich, with a slight lisp, gave 
a pleasing intonation to her voice, that 
made hdr accent highly interesting to 



SS ALE3CEXA ; en THB 

a stranger. She ^vas tofally unac- 
quainted wifli Uie wiles of (he world, 
and her mind was as pure and innocent, 
as her form was lovely. Wherever 
she went, she had the 'witcliinq- charm 
of creatiu!;, not merely admiration, ])ut 
a wish to please, serve, and oblii^e her. 
Her foreign accent, sweet plaintiveness 
of manner, and endearing disposition, 
f^ecured her the universal esteem of both 
sexes. Such was the lovclvbeins: who 
was shortly to be placed under the 
protection of Montano the monk: A 
Villain, on whose bvow every rice (hat 
disgraces man, appears to have been 
written in legible characters. No won- 
der, therefore. Lord Mortimer should 
feel uneasy at this approaching event, 
for it cannot be denied, that there is 
something in the countenance and ad- 
dress of almost every man. that in a 
{rreater or lesser decree commends him 
to our favor, or renders him suspicious. 



It is lordship had seen Alexena in all 
her charjus ; he iiad also seen tlic monk. 



GASTLE OF SANTA 2IAT.C0. $9 

— and trembled for her ?afoty. She 
indeed felt no fears, and looked forward 
to her return to Spain vilhont any 
feeling', save that of regret. She had 
been too Ions: in the jrav world to wish 
to part with it so soon, or exchange it 
for the dull '^routine of a convent, 
though her natural disposition led her 
io prefer the domestic fireside to the 
f^aieties of the crondcd assembly. Her 
father's mansion had never proved that 
kind home to her, where the sweet 
soothings of a parent smoothed her bed 
of sickness, or where the tender atten- 
tions of dear relatives served to make 
the solitary hours of ennui, glide by un- 
observed. She had been brought from 
the gloomy cloister to the stiil more 
gloomy palace of her father, to see her 
aunt ; and where, save that lady, no 
other female ever appeared since her 
mother's death. 

There were a few domestics, whose 
manners partook of the gravity by 
which they were surrounded, and v>hosc 
avocations in life rendered them un- 



it) alexexa; or the 

suitable companions for a lovely, and 
a high-born Spaniard — and these were 
the only inmates of her father's house. 

Alexena was susceptable of every 
feeling- of gratitude, but was as yet a 
strano'er to that most delightful of our 
passions — Love. She had not then seea 
Lord Mortimer, the most facinating", 
the most honorable of men, but when 
that moment arrived, she felt a parti- 
cular degree of pleasure in his society, 
and a kind of lassitude in his absence, 
which, in a little time, rendered hinn 
very dear to her; and she then began 
to have some idea of that sweet, but 
alarming, passion. In the privacy of 
her chamber she questioned herself 
relative to the nature of her feelings, 
and burst into tears on discovering the 
real state of her heart, but they were 
not painful tears. She could not tell 
what caused them, and yet they flowed. 
Was Lord Mortimer the cause? Yes! 
Was he negligent in paying any of 
those polite attentions which are ex- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 41 

pected, and are the peculiar right of 
every lovely and virtuous female? cer- 
tainly not. On the contrary, he was 
most delicately attentive, and it was 
evident those attentions were particu- 
larly offered to herself. Did Lord Mor- 
timer love her with all the honorable 
feeling of a noble nature, her heart res- 
ponsively answered, 'Most assuredly.' 
* Yes!' she cried, ' he does, and have I 
not reason to be happy.' 

Such were the thoughts of the lovely 
Alexena, about a fortnight after the 
arrival of the monk; but in her review 
of them, she, for that time, overlooked 
the nature of the father's mission to 
Hollywood-Castle. — But to return from 
this digression. Lord Mortimer in a 
short time became a favourite with her, 
and deservedly so, for he might be said 
to live on her looks. Whenever she 
sung the plaintive airs of her country, 
he hung over her chair with fond solici- 
tude, and became enraptured with the 
sweetness of her voice, and the exquisite 



43 alexena; on the 

pathos of lier expression. At tlio^e 
moments his soul beamed in his eyes^ 
and when seated by Alexena^ he forgot 
the world and its cares. 

The monk, however, often intruded 
on those golden moments, and already 
they beheld each other with evident 
diso:ust. Montano hated his lordship, 
without being able to explain the 
reason, even to himself, and the latter 
disliked him for these frequent imper' 
tinent intrusions. 

in about eight days after the iater- 
I'iew between Montano and SirEdmond, 
Gonzales grew much worse, and his 
medical atierjdants were of opinion that 
he could not long survive ; they there- 
fore recommended him to prepare for 
the last awful change, and tlie monl: 
was directly summoned to his chamber, 
where he remained about an Iioin*, and 
on his return was evidently much dis- 
tui'bed. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 43 

Sliortlj after,, Ronrke ^vaited on his 
lord with a message from llie dying man^ 
in Avliich he expressed a wish (o see him 
immediately Lord Mortimer instantly 
pbeyed the summons, aiid accompanied 
Tom to his apartment. On enterini:^ 
it, the dying' Gonzales raised himself 
iti his bed, and havino: returned thanks 
to his lordsiiip for his past kindness, 
said, ' he had something of particular 
consequence to communicate respect- 
ing the Lady Alexena/ 

His lordship instantly ordered Ronrke 
(o with(haw, and having secured the 
door, sat down in anxious expectation 
of hearing this disclosure. 

After a pause of a few moments, 
Gonzales began by a prefatory caution 
against the wiles of the monk, and drew 
his character in colours of the deepest 
sliade ; then gave him a circumstantial 
detail of Don Velasco's death, and of 
his will, saying, that he himself had 



44 ALEXENA : OR THE 



been a domestic in the family of his late 
lord, upwards of twenty years, and 
that his knowledge of the character of 
Montano, was his sole inducement for 
taking such a long, and, as it proved, 
fatal journey ; for he apprehended the 
safety of his young mistress was confided 
to a dangerous guardian, and therefore 
resolved to brave every peril for her 
sake. 

He was about to enter into the ex- 
planation of the cause of requiring his 
lordship's attendance, when the door 
-slowly unclosed, and Gonzales pointed 
to the lonjr sraunt fi«>:ure of the monk, 
who stood with outstretched neck at 
the entrance, and had evidently been 
listening, from the fury that sparkled 
in his eyes. His pale and quivering 
lip and agitated figure, proved his bale- 
ful intentions, and when he found he 
was observed, he sprung forward with 
all the active ferocity of a tyger, crying, 
' Villain ! slave ! traitor ! this to thy 



CiiJTLE OP SANTA MARCO. 45 

lieart !' and had he not been prevented 
hy Lord Mortimer, would have sheathed 
his stiletto in the bosom of Gonzales. 
Twice he essayed to wrest the dagger 
from his lordship's grasp, who, being at 
length fatiojued with the struggle, and 
enraged at the monk's depravity, by a 
well directed bloWj laid him prostrate 
at his feet. 

Gonzales anxiously beheld the con- 
test ; but the moment Montano fell, 
the former burst into a long convulsive 
iaugh, conceiving he was slain, and 
shouting, cried, ^ already the demons 
of darkness have seized him !' then fell 
into a fit, and instantly expired. 

The blow had stunned Montano, but 
he quickly recovered, and on rising, was 
thrust from the room by Lord Mortimer, 
who, at the same time, called loudly for 
assistance ; but it was too late — Gon- 
zales was lifelessj and his secret died 
with him. 



4G alexena; or the 

From that moment the revengefui 
monk became imjDlacable, and had 
Lord Mortimer a thousand lives^ and 
he the power, he would have stabbed 
them all; his malice was of the most 
fell and dcuclly nature; ungovernable, 
unquenchable, and all attempts to ap- 
pease it were attended with the same 
etiect, as that of castinij oil on burninir 
embers, only serving- to make them 
blaze with increasing fury. 

Lord Mortimer then sought Sir Ed- 
mond, and related this atrocious at- 
tempt of Montano, and orders were 
instantly issued for his arrest; but it 
was too late; he had passed the draw- 
bridge, and was no where to be found. 
His lordship rejoiced at the circum- 
stance; and as day after day passed 
without any tidings of him. Sir Edmond 
and his friend hoped he had returned 
to Spain, and that they were rid of him 
for ever. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 47 



CHAP. III. 



** I will work- 



an exploit, now ripe in my derice, 



Under the which he shall not choose, but fail.'* 

Hamlet. 

-i HREE weeks had flitted away inoyt 
agreeably since Montano had quitted 
the mansion of Sir Edniond, and was 
almost forgotten ; when one evening as 
the happy inmates of the castle were 
enjoying the amnsernents of cards and 
chess, a domestic announced, "^the war- 
der was summoned to admit messengers 
from the queen.' Sir Edmond instantly 
appeared on the ramparts, and de- 
manded the nature of their business, 
and was answered in the well-known 
voice of an old friend, whom he recog- 
nised as Sir William Hunt, and imme- 
diately ordered them to be admitted. 

Sir William was attended by a nu- 
merous train, chiefly guards, and amon^' 
the group. Sir Edmond recognised 
the monk, whose ghastly looks and 



48 ALEXCJTA ; OR THE 

Bcowling eyes, marked the triumphant 
villainy of his hearty and had he 
been accompanied by any other officer, 
the mind of the former would have 
been almost distracted by apprehen- 
sion ; but fortunately Sir William had 
been chosen to execute the wishes of 
the wily INIontano; and though he 
could not avoid doing his duty, yet he 
had the power to grant those indulg-en- 
cies which it would be absurd to expect 
from a stranger. 

When the soldiers bad retired to 
seek refreshment, and the monk had 
been shewn to his chamber. Sir Ed- 
mond led the way to his study, accom- 
panied by Lord Mortimer and Sir 
W^illiam; where the latter informed 
them, he came for the purpose of ar- 
lestin": a ladv, named Alexena de 
Guzman, to see her on board a ves- 
sel prepared for her reception, already 
lying off the coast, and send her under 
an escort to Spain. ' To-morrow/ be 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 49 

continued, 'she must embark, and I 
earnestly beg that neither of" you will 
interfere/ Here the colour of Lord 
Mortimer's cheek vied with the lily ; 
but he revived on observing- the playful 
archness of Sir William's countenance, 
who, smiling, said, ' my friend Henri 
' Bolerno, the lady's cousin, who is now 
*at court, in confidence imparted the 
' state of your lordship's heart, and if you 
' are as serious as I apprehend you are^ 
' I think I have it in my power to serve 
'you; what say you to the appointment 
' of captain of this escort? the monk 
* need know nothing of it till after your 
' embarkation, and then his opposition 
'to the measure will be vain; should it 
'transpire hereafter, and the queen hear 
' it, I must pretend total ignorance, and 
' I trust all will be well.' Sir William 
paused, and Lord Mortimer clasped 
him to his breast; indeed, some mo- 
ments elapsed ere he could restrain his 
joy, or return suitable thanks. It was 
judged necessary, instantly to commu- 
nicate the purport of Sir William's 

VOL. I. c 



60 ALEXEVA ; on THE 

visit to Miss Hastings^ and which was 
accordingly done by Sir Edmond; she 
was shocked at the violence of the 
measure, but at once declared her de- 
termination of accompanying Alexena, 
if she should not act in direct opposi- 
tion to the mandate of the queen. Sir 
William was ao^ain consulted, and as 
he had not received any intimation on 
the subject, he, without hesitation, com- 
mended the propriety of her intention. 
The time being short, preparations and 
arrangements were instantly made for 
their voyage, yet the utmost secrecy 
was observed. Orders were issued for 
packing dresses, valuables, and all other 
necessaries ; while musical instruments, 
and drawing materials were got in 
readiness, to soothe the weary hours 
that must necessarily intervene before 
they reached the continent. 

At two o'clock in the afternoon of the 
following day, Alexena went on board, 
accompanied by Montano. Miss Hast- 
ings, Lord Morfimer, and their attend- 
ants;, having reached the ship in a boat 



CASTLE 07 SANTA MARCO. SI 

an hour before, without the monk hav- 
ing the slightest intimation of their in- 
tention, and they were many leagues 
at sea, ere the blustering Rourke 
disclosed to the enraged father, his 
master was commandant, and that 
the master of the vessel had received 
instructions to obey him in every tiling; 
but this was not exactly correct, as the 
ship was bound for Spain, and the pilot 
had been ordered to steer direct for 
that country; but the injunction was 
unnecessary, as Lord Mortimer woidd 
rather forfeit life and happiness than 
injure his friend. The wind being 
favorable, the voyage was prosperous, 
and his lordship felt regret when the 
mariners descried the coast, as he never 
had been happier, having enjoyed 
the society of his beloved Alexena 
without interruption ; while the monk 
was engaged apart, brooding mis- 
chief, and plotting destruction on them 
all. After they had landed, his lord- 
ship wrote a detail of their voyage to 
Sir Edmond, and then dismissed the 

c3 



5f ALliXENA; OR THE 

master of the vessel^ with many sub- 
stantial marks of his favor. It was 
now arranged by Miss Hastings^ that 
they should proceed by easy stages to 
Madrid, and on their arrival, she hoped 
to have sufficient influence with young 
Velasco, to obtain his consent to his 
sister's marriage with his lordship, who 
Lad made a tender of his hand and 
fortune to the lovely Alexena the night 
before she left Hollywood-Castle, and 
had the good fortune to be received in 
a manner that left him every thing to 
hope, if he could obtain her brother's 
consent. On the second day of their 
journey, Montano abruptly quitted 
them, without assigning any. causCj, 
which gave Lord Mortimer consider- 
able uneasiness; he feared the monk's 
power, and his malice, without tlse pos- 
sibility of preventing either, and there- 
fore took the precaution of doubling 
the guards of his escort, which, he trust- 
ed, would prevent any private attack 
that might be meditated. In ten days, 
they arrived at Madrid, and Misg 
Hastings instantly despatched a billet 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 53 

to Don Velasco^ expressiiiiif her wish to 
see him in the course of the evening-, 
if not particularly engaged. In a short 
time, her messenger returned, accompa- 
nied hy a servant, who stated, his mas- 
ter had left the city a week before, for 
the purpose of going to Barcelona, to 
meet Lady Alexena, Lord Mortimer 
did not give credit to a sentence of this, 
but concealed his doubts from the 
ladies, while he cautioned both Rourke 
and Albert to be extremely watchful, 
and not to leave the hotel on any ac- 
count, even for a moment. 

The following evening, his lordship 
went into the interior of the city, for 
the purpose of delivering some letters to- 
a friend of Bolerno's, and who he was 
fortunate enough to find at home; on 
enterino' into conversation with this 
gentleman, he faimd he had every 
thing to fear from the character of young 
Velasco, who was the most abandoned 
noble in Madrid, and it was pretty 
generally understood, that he had dissi- 
pated a large fortune in a few months, by 



.54 ALEXENA ; on THK 

Lis iinconti'ouled and excessive love for 
play; and as to Montano, who had lat- 
terly been confessor in the family, little 
was known, only his austere habits, and 
apparent sanctity were suspected to be 
feijrned. 



'O' 



The dusky shades of night had 
darkened the horizon, before his lord- 
ship was aware of the lateness of 
the hour; he now hastily arose, and 
after returning- thanks to his new friend, 
hurried towards his hotel, angry with 
himself for the uneasiness he had caused 
Alexena and Miss Hastings. The night 
was mild, and now and then his atten- 
tion was attracted by the reflection of 
the moon's pale rays on the variegated 
glass of the cathedrals ; but he had not 
then time, minutely to examine their 
beauties; Alexena engaged his every 
thought, and he cursed the folly that had 
detained him so much beyond his usual 
liour; but on turning into a street near 
the Casa del Campo, judge his rage and 
T€xation^ on being surrounded by a 



CASTLE OP SANTA MAReo. 5$ 

number of armed men, who rushed 
from an adjacent building", and sur- 
rounded him in an instant. As it was 
in vain to contend with sucli a number 
of opponents, he made no resistance, 
but quietly resigned his sword to the 
captain or chief officer, who had fiercely 
demanded it; and was then conducted 
by his guards through several streets, 
to the wing of a large building, at a 
small grated door of which, they loudly 
knocked for admission. The same in- 
stant, a kind of covered carriage or 
litter drove up, escorted by troopers, 
and tliougli there were a considerable 
number of persons on tlie spot, not a 
sentence was uttered by any of them. 
Lights seemed to pass to and fro within, 
and, in a little time, a heavy iron gat€ 
was thrown open, and the carriage 
passed into a dark court, from which a 
lady was assisted to alight, by a person 
dressed in a loni^ black robe. Thelii^ht 
of the torches was not sufficiently strong 
to enable Lord Mortimer to have a 
distinct view of her countenance, but 



56 ALEXENA; OR THE 

)ie had seen enough, to convince him it 
was handsome ; he could not, however, 
divine the meaning of so much cere- 
mony, but was not long kept in sus- 
pense ; the little grated door ojiened, 
and his guard conveyed him through 
several winding passages into a dark 
cell, without letting him know whether 
it contained a bed or any other article 
of furniture. On requesting a lamp, his 
gaoler gazed on him in evident sur- 
prise, then with a horrid grin, motioned 
silence, and pushed him into his prison, 
securely locking the door after him. 

Lord Mortimer leaned against the 
"wall until he became fatigued stand- 
ing, and at length began to grope 
about for a chair or somethinsr to sit 
on, but was almost petrified with 
horror, on clasping a human skeleton 
in his arms, that hung dangling from 
the ceiling; he fled from its musty em- 
brace to a corner of the cell, and sat 
down on the damp floor; on recovering 
the powers of reflection, he felt assured 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 57 

lie was then in the dungeons of the 
Inquisition^ and that Montano was the 
cause. He was roused from a kind of 
stupor, by approaching' footsteps, and 
in a few moments his gaoler entered, 
attended by two mutes, who conducted 
him down several fiiohts of stairs, and 
throuijh a Ions: subterraneous avenue, 
into an apartment of the most gloomy 
description ; the wails were covered 
with black cloth, on which were painted 
death's heads, while the fleshless hands 
of real skeletons held burning black 
wax tapers; skulls were converted into 
lamps, from which the pale and sickly 
light issued at those orifices, where once 
eyes, perhaps, tlic eyes of beauty, 
beamed wish resplendent loveliness. 
There was a cold chill air which played 
in strong currents through those regions 
of terror, that was almost sufficient to 
freeze the blood, if there had not been 
many other ways of staying its circula- 
tion. His lordship, though as brave a 
a man as any in existence, could not be- 
hold this chamber of despair without 

c5 



58 ALEXENAJ OR THE 

being moved; but his thoughts suc- 
ceeded each other with such rapidity 
from the novelty of his situation, that 
lie. could not tell what he either saw 
or felt, and was at length awakened 
out of a kind of trance, by the Vicar 
General's orders, — ' that he should be 
brought forward, and answer truly, 
every question that would be asked, 
without prevarication, equivocation, or 
hesitation, as he hoped for mercy/ 
The mutes now led him forward to 
the table, at which the secretary sat, 
ready to note down his answers, 
Ihe questions being already entered. 
Above the secretary sat the Vicar 
General, with two other inquisitors, all 
habited in black, and at each of the 
eight difl'erent entrances to the hall, 
stood two familiars, bearing torches, 
awaiting the signals of those men of 
fate. 

After a pause of a few minutes, the 
secretary handed Lord Mortimer a 
book, on the cover of which were many 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 59 

mystical characters, and having sworn 
him to tell the truth, he demanded his 
name, to which he answered, ' My 
name is Frederick Mortimer, called in 
England^ Lord Mortimer, and I am a 
viscount.' 'What!' said the Vicar Ge- 
neral, starting on his feet, 'dare yon pre- 
sume to deceive us in our judgment-seat, 
by giving a feigned name, and adopt- 
ing a foreign language! speak Spanish, 
or 1 will make you speak it on the rack !* 
' I assure you, I cannot," said his lord- 
ship; *1 addressed yon in French, be- 
cause I was aware 1 should be under- 
stood, and, on my life, I have declared 
the truth ; my servants are now at an 
hotel ill this city, and if you take the 
trouble, you can easily be convinced 
there is some mistake in this matter.' 
The inquisitors again paused, and con- 
sulted each other, in a whisper, for a few 
moments, then made a sign to one of 
the officials, who instantly disappeared, 
but immediately returned, leading in a 
female, closely veiled ; her figure was 
elegant, and her height that of Alexena, 



60 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

His lordsliip trembled with emotion ; he 
feared it was her, and that the monk 
MontanOj had laid some desperate plot 
to ruin both. The inquisitors observed 
liis frequent change of countenance, 
and ordered the familiars to take oif the 
lady's veil ; when^ to his evident sur- 
prise, he beheld, instead of Alexena, a 
lovely stranger, whom, from what he 
had seen, he conceived to be the fe- 
male conveyed there that evening". 
The Vicar General now addressed 
Evelene, and commanded her to tell 
the name of the person then present, 
and pointed to his lordship. She in- 
stantly raised her eyes to his expres- 
sive face, and started on beholdin<r 
him ; then said, ' I have not the honor 
of knowing this gentleman/ 'Gra- 
cious Powers!' exclaimed the second 
inquisitor, ' what perverseness : why 
deny a fact so notorious? 'As wliat!* 
timidly demanded Evelene. k familiar 
now laid his finoer on his mouth, as an 
order to be silent, and again the in- 
quisitors consulted each other; they 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. Gi 

spoke too low to be overheard, and 
while they yet conversed, a bell tolled ; 
instantly the Vicar General descended 
from the tribunal, and hurried through 
a distant door; but in a moment re- 
turned, and after he had said a few 
words to his brother inquisitors, again 
demanded Lord Mortimer's name, and 
was answered as before. Instantly a 
si^-nal was 2:iven, and he was led from 
the hall into a plain chamber, where he 
was cautioned by a monk, if he valued 
his existence, to keep secret what he 
had seen, and tliat he should be con- 
ducted in safety to his hotel. His lord- 
ship promised every thing^ required of 
him, and was innncdiately after placed 
in one of the litters belonging to the 
Inquisition, and about two o'clock in 
the morning, found himself once more 
under the roof with Alexena, who had 
watched the moments of his absence 
with the greatest inquietude. Ronrke 
was almost frantic with joy, when 
he saw his lord safe again ; he cursed, 
criedj sung, and laughed^ in the course 



63 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

of a minute, and appeared absolutely 
mad^ but in a few moments aftei^ being 
called by his lordship, he grew more 
composed, and when in his presence, 
restrained his feelings^ because they 
were the genuine effusions of an affec- 
tionate heart, and he was too proud, as 
a man, to wish to impress on his master 
the true state of his thoughts. 

The Rev. Mr. Jones, the clergyman, 
who has been mentioned as one of the 
guests of Sir Edmond Hastings, accom- 
panied Lord Mortimer to Spahi, and was 
a valuable acquisition, as he spoke the 
language most fluently. On the night 
after his lordship had been confined 
in the Inquisition, Mr. Jones went into 
the city for the purpose of gleaning the 
news of the day, and in the course of 
an hour, returned with the alarming 
intelligence, that a nobleman named 
Don Vitelli, had been assassinated in 
the same street in which Lord Morti- 
mer was arrested a very few moment* 
before; and that it was generally be- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. G3 

lieved^ the dago^ers of the murderers 
had mistaken their victim, and that the 
wretched Vitelli had fallen in his stead. 
The Inquisition had taken cognizance 
of the affair, and one of the assassins 
had luckily been apprehended ; so the 
most sanguine hopes were entertained 
that the principals would meet the 
punishment they so well deserved. 

When Lord Mortimer had heard this 
relation, an unaccountable something 
impressed his mind with ttufe idea that he 
was the object for whom the stillettos of 
the villains had been intended, and the 
more he dwelt on this idea, it became 
the more firmly impressed on his mind, 
and he resolved, if he should be able to 
produce any proof, to use every exertion 
in discovering whether young Velasco 
was the instigator of this diabolical 
attempt. Lord Mortimer next morn- 
ing made many inquiries in the city, 
but without being able to obtain any- 
satisfactory information. Report said, 
the nobleman who had been assassi- 



64 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

nated;, incurred the displeasure of the 
holy tribunal, for heresy, and that 
the Lady Evelene was involved in his 
crime, by having- become a convert to 
his opinions. Towards evening, how- 
ever, it was rumoured that his lordship 
had hired the murderers, who had mis- 
taken the unfortunate Vitelli for Don 
Velasco, and the reputed cause as- 
signed for the commission of this 
atrocious deed, was, that the latter had 
refused his consent to his sister's mar- 
riage with his lordship. This was really 
alarming, and might be attended by 
the most fatal consequences; it removed 
every doubt from the mind of Lord 
Mortimer, which yet existed^ with 
respect to Montano, who he now felt 
firmly convinced was the detestable 
and bloody author of the late tragedy. 
He communicated his sus|)icions and 
Lis fears to Jones, who advised him to 
leave Madrid instantly, as his life was 
in imminent danger; but to this he 
would by no means assent, while his 
fears for the ladies reduced his njind 



» 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 65 

to a state Utile short of distraction. 
Miss Hastings obsci ved his uneasiness, 
and pressed him for an explanation of 
the cause; he then in confidence im- 
parted every thing he either knew or 
suspected. She was greatly shocked 
at the villainy of the monk, and at 
once resolved to press her niece to ac- 
company her to Saragossa, where a 
relation resided, and from thence, re- 
turn by Taragonna, to England, as it 
vs^ould be next to madness to leave her 
under the brutal controul of her bro- 
ther. Miss Hastings had paid a few 
visits to those friends with whom she 
had formed an intimacy when last in 
the Spanish capital, and from them 
learned the true character of her aban- 
doned nephew, which she now resolved 
to inform Alexena of, as it was neces- 
sary to her peace and safety. 

A!exena,on hearing: the sad narrative of 
Velasco's monstrous depravity, and that 
her younger brother Antonio was then in 
Grenada, with his regiment, she at once 



66 ALEXENA ; on THE 

resolved to accompany her aunt ; and 
the clanger of Lord Mortimer induced 
her to intreat Miss Hastings to leave 
Madrid the following day. When his 
lordship was informed that she wislied 
to quit the city as soon as possible^ he 
gave orders to Rourke^ to have every 
thing in readiness at an early hour next 
morning; but it seemed, the inquisitors 
were resolved not to let him depart so 
soon^ for he was again arrested, and 
conducted before that dread tribui\al. 
However, on his arrival, instead of being 
thrust into a dark cell, he was conduct- 
ed to a comfortable chamber, and in 
half an hour after followed one of the 
familiars to the Hall of Judgment, 
where ev'ery object presented the same 
gloomy horrors, and where all was 
silent as the tomb. He was a^ain 
sworn, and then ordered not to utter a 
sentence, except when spoken to ; his 
lordship bowed assent, and the mo- 
ment after, one of the inquisitors touch- 
ed a bell. Two mutes now entered, 
leading' in the Lady Evelene; and two 



-5>- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARC0. 67 

familiars, with a ruffian, whose arms 
were bound with cords. The Vicar 
General then ordered Lord Mortimer 
to read his deposition of the preceding 
night, and sign it, which he instantly 
did. Evelene received the like com- 
mand, and obeyed ; then the deposition 
of the assassin of Vitelli was read to 
him, and when sworn, he affirmed it 
to be true. Lord Mortimer heard it 
with surprise and horror, as it stated 
he was the person who had induced 
the wretch to murder Vitelli, having mis- 
taken him for Don Velasco, and that 
he had pointed out the deceased, by 
exclaiming, 'that's he;' at which the 
ruffians stabbed him in the back with 
stillettos, inflicting four mortal wounds, 
that caused his instant death. 

In answer to a quere, as to his belief, 
what had induced Lord Mortimer, a 
total stranger, to perpetrate such a 
bloody deed, or cause it to be done, 
he answered, ' that from the conversa- 
' tioii of his comrades, he had been led 



68 alexena; or the 

' to believe, that the hopes of being, 
' married to Don Velasco's sister wag 
' the motive^ and which covdd not take 
' place while he lived, as she was de- 

* voted to a monastic life, by the will of 
'her father, and her brother had re- 
' ceived strict injunctions to see his will, 

* in that respect, carried into immediate 
' execution. Scalto,* was then ordered 
to affix his sio^nature, which he did with- 
out hesitation, and delivered his depo- 
sition into the hands of the secretary. 
The inquisitors now consulted a mo- 
ment, and then the Vicar General ad- 
dressed Scalto thus: 'Thou wretch! 
' that hast the hardihood and want of 
^ grace, to depose on your oath a vilc' 

* and infamous falshood, even within 
•■ the pale of this most sacred court, 
*■ say what have you to ofler, thou man 
' of blood \ why your polluted body 
' may not be delivered to the torments 

* of the wheel : know that the olijecl, 
^ who, by your deposition, you iu- 
' tended to destroy, stood on this spot 

*■ The ruffian's name. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 69 

' at the very moment you have sworn he 
'pointed out the murdered V'iteili/ The 
villain was not prepared for this blow, 
and continued silent until the toll of the 
bell brought four horrible officials to 
bear him to the question. He then fell 
on his knees, and drew from his bosom 
a scroll, purporting to be a protection 
from one of the inquisitors. This ex- 
cited considerable confusion, as the in- 
strument, on examination, appeared 
genuine ; but it was necessary to ascer- 
tain the fact, and the inquisitor, sup- 
posed to have signed it, was instantly 
summoned. In a few moments he ap- 
peared, and at once denied all know- 
ledire of it. The criminal then affirmed 
it had been given to him by Montano, 
one of the Dominican fathers. Here 
the inquisitors seemed perplexed, but 
issued an order for his appearance, and 
in less than half an hour he entered (he 
hall. The hood of his gown concealed 
the expression of his features, but on 
throwing ft back, he was almost petrified 
.son beholding Lord Mortimer and Scalto 



70 ALEXENA; OR THE 

confronted, (a circumstance very un- 
usual,) yet the subtile monk speedily re- 
covered his presence of mind, and in a 
moment determined how he should act. 
After being called and sworn, his name 
and order was entered, and thentheVicar 
General desired the secretary to pro- 
duce the scroll, and demanded had he 
ever seen it : he replied, ' Never !' — 
(To a question from an Inquisitor,) 

* Do you know this man, named Scalto, 
' or have you seen him before ? — 
' Montano,' 'Certainly not.' — 'Oh ! you 
villain,' exclaimed the infuriated assas- 
' sin, ' you first induced me to commit 
' this crime, and now you leave me to 

• perish. Lord Mortimer is the object 
' of your hate, and in an evil hour I 
' became the instrument of your ven- 
' geance; therefore, 1 deserve my fate, 
' and should die satisfied if you meet the 
'just reward of your enormities.' Here 
the inquisitors commanded him to be si- 
lent, on pain of instant torture, and then 
demanded what Montano had to offer in 

Ins defence. The monk, with a feigned 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 71 

look of surprise, observed^ ' that he had 
' not an idea of what the prisoner stated, 
' and that he relied on the justice of the 
' holy tribunal. His character, it was 
' true, had been impeached by the fran- 
' tic ravings of a condemned assassin, 
' but, he trusted, his pure and spotless 
' reputation was proof against the hid- 
' den malice of any enemies he might 
' have.' He was then ordered to an 
adjacent cell, to await the determina- 
tion of the court, and the miserable 
tool of his villainy, was instantly con- 
demned to be broke on the wheel. Eve- 
lene was led from the hall, and Lord 
Mortimer having been again cautioned^ 
was conducted in safety to his hotel; 
b..t as he followed the familiars through 
the windings of the subterraneous dun- 
geons, he heard the shrieks of the suf- 
fering wretch, who had already been 
delivered into the hands of the execu- 
tioner. On his return, he found Alex- 
ena and Miss Hastings almost paralized 
with fear on his account, and could 
only quiet them by his solemn promise 



72 alexena; or tiie 

to leave Madrid next morning. Every 
thing' was prepared by Albert and 
Rourke, but it was necessary that tlie 
ladies should recruit their weary spirits 
with a few hours repose, of which they, 
as well as his lordship^ stood much iu 
need. 



CHAP. IV. 

** Methought, he bore him in the thickest troop. 
As doth a hon in a herd of neat ; 
Or as a bear, encompass'd round with dogs; 
Who having pinch'd a few, and made them cry, 
The reit stand all aloof, aqd bark at him." 

Hknrt VI. 

At five o'clock the following- morn- 
ms:. Lord Mortimer sent Albert forward 
to prepare fresh relays of horses at the 
different stages that intervene between 
Madrid and Guadalaxara, with a proper 
route and instructions, to enable him 
to avoid mistakes, and at eight, he 
followed, accompanied by Alexena and 
Miss Hastings. Mr, Jones remained 
in the city, as he had business to trans- 
act, but promised to make all possible 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 75 

haste, to join them at Saragossa. The 
weather was clear, though cold, yet 
not disagreeable, so they travelled with 
much pleasure, enjoying a delightful 
view of the country through which they 
passed. At dusk, they reached a small 
inn, within two leagues of Brihuega, 
where they resolved to remain that 
night, and were much better accom- 
modated than the appearance of the 
place gave them a right to expect. 
Lord Mortimer trusted there was little 
danger of a pursuit from Montano, 
who, he hoped, would be obliged io 
remain a few days in the Inquisition, 
before his tardy superiors should think 
proper to make any further inquiries 
about Vitelli's death. Albert, as he 
proceeded, procured either mules or 
horses without much difficulty, and 
continued to keep some leagues in 
advance, but with this precaution, that 
he always took care to calculate where 
jt was most likely his lord would pass 
the night, and there he awaited 
his arrival. Lord Mortimer, in the 

TOL. f. D 



74: alexena; or the 

course of the next clay, tried his utmost 
powers of persuasion, to induce Alex- 
ena to consent to their immediate union, 
and Miss Hastings had the goodness 
to join his lordship, and observed, that 
her brother Velasco was too worthless 
and abandoned to have any just claim 
on her affection, or to render it neces- 
sary to consult him on this important 
subject; and at length, their united 
exertions prevailed. Alexena consented, 
and promised to bestow her hand on 
the now happy Mortimer, when they 
should arrive at the little town of 
Siguenca. His lordship kissed her hand, 
and declared that it should be the future 
study of his existence to repay her for 
so much goodness, and that he hoped 
the remainder of his life would prove 
the sincerity of his heart, by rendering 
her happy. They now approached 
that hour in which the beetle 



winds 



His small, but sullen, horn, 

As oft h e rises 'midst the twilight path 

Against the pilgrim borne iu heedless hum." 

A mountain's brown sides skirted the 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAHCO. 75 

road, which were covered at unequal 
distances with dark groves of pine, 
above which the jiroiid spires of a 
convent reared their lofty heads, and 
■were distin"uishable at intervals in the 
momentary breaks of the woods. About 
a mile further it appeared to emerge 
from the deep shade, and burst on 
the astonished sense in all the majestic 
awfulness of gloomy grandeur. His 
lordship inquired the name of this 
immense pile, as it was evident there 
were two distinct buildings, though 
_ adjoining each other, and was answered 
by one of his Spanish guides, (in bad 
French,) that they were the monastery 
and convent of the Dominicans, re- 
nowned for sanctity and the severity of 
their discipline; they are, continued 
the guide, ' some of the oldest institu- 
tions in Spain; I have heard many- 
dreadful stories of them, but indeed so 
horrible, that I should not like to either 
hear or repeat them again.' Alexena 
shudderedj and grew very pale ; Lord 

d3 



75 Al,EXpNA; OR THE 

Mortimer motioned the guide to be 
silent^ and in a whisper, in treated to 
know the cause of her fears. ' Oh!' she 
replied, 'this is the dreadful convent 
' in which my father often vowed to 
' confine me, if I ever disputed his will, 

* and I now have a strange prcsenti- 
' ment of evil.' Lord Mortimer tried 
to laugh away her fears, he soothed 
and used every little art to relieve her 
mind from such idle fancies, and pressed 
the guides to hasten forward, that they 
might reach a shelter for the night. 
One of them instantly observed, ' that 

* there was a monastery of Benedictiue 
' monks about two miles further, and 
' within a mile of Siguenca, who were 

* very hospitable, and would willingly 

* render every accommodation in their 
' power; but if you should not like this,' 
he continued, ' there is a small house 
' near it, on a common, the owner of 
^ which is a verv honest man, who is 
■^always provided with necessaries for 
^ travellers, and will do his utmost to 



\ 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 77 

' make you comfortable.' ' We will' 
go there!' said his lordship, 'shall we 
not, ladies.' 'Oh! yes. Oh! yes/ ex- 
claimed Alexena, with an approviu'^ 
smile, ' if my aunt will have the good- 
ness to consent, for I have an uncon- 
querable aversion to monks, nuns, friars, 
and every thing appertaining to, or 
connected with them.' Miss Hastinsfs 
laughingly said, 'you see ray lord, this 
' young lady's way of thinking is 
' greatly changed, she would now much 
' rather be a wife than a nun.' ' The 

* former, I hope to make her this night, 

* if it shall please God,' replied his 
lordship, ' as I mean to claim her 
' promise, being within a short dis- 
' tance of the town where I expect 
' to be made the happiest of men.' 
Alexena blushed deeply, but made no 
reply; and in a few moments they 
reached the inn on the common. 

After Lord Mortimer had given or- 
ders for supper, he made many inquiries 
about the little town of Siguenca 



78 ALEXENA; OR THE 

which was in the neighbourhood, and 
asked Anselmo, ' could a priest be found 
there, if necessary/ who answered, ' cer- 
tainly not.' 'One of the Benedictine 
fathers always attends the sick within 
fiv^^ miles of this, and performs the mar- 
ria.f^e ceremony when required/ He 
tht !i smiled, and casting an arch look on 
Alexena, observed, ' should you need a 
' worthy father, I can recommend one, 
' but he dare not marry any, except those 
' who choose to attend in the chapel 
' that stands a quarter of a mile from 
' this; it was once a splendid edifice, but 
' is now fast falling into decay, and both 
* the Benedictine fathers, and the inha- 
' bitants of the neighbouring town, are 
' too poor to keep it in repair; however, 
' this is of very little importance to you, 
' if you can prevail on the lady to ac- 
' company you to such a dismal old 
' place.' Lord Mortimer returned 
thanks to his kind host, and repeated 
what he had said to Miss Hastings, 
and begged she would use her influence 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 79 

with Alexena to perform her promise; 
pointing out the advantages that would 
ensue from their union. ' I will/ ob- 
served his lordship, ' have a les^al rinrht 
to protect her, and our marriage will 
be a check on the ungovernable 
Velasco, and prevent a renewal of 
Montano's late infamous attempts.* 
Miss Hastings assented to the neces- 
sity of their immediate union, and 
pressed it so much, that Alexena, find- 
ing it impossible to contend with her 
kind aunt, and impatient lover, con- 
sented, though not without consider- 
able reluctance. When his lordship 
had succeeded thus far, he instantly 
despatched Anselmo to the monastery, 
and ordered Rourke and Albert to 
accompany him to the chapel. Rourke 
could scarce restrain his joy within the 
bounds of moderation, on being as- 
sured Alexena was to be instantly 
united to his master, and Albert felt 
equally pleased at the event. These 
two faithful domestics had the horses 
ready in a few moments, and then the 



so alexena; or the 

former cut a caper, and brandishing an 
Irish black-thorn, shouted, ' Och ! to 
be sure I am'int the boy that would 
lick any ten Spaniards in the king^dom, I 
would soon make them dance in their 
brogues/ ' You be in very great glee 
Mr. Tom/ said Albert, ' take care you 
are not called on to keep your word 
very shortly/ Rourke laughed, and 
shaking Albert by the hand, promised 
to stick to him * like a skiver in a 
blanket,' if there ever should be occa- 
sion. 'I mean,' said Tom, "that I 
would willingly make powder of that 
fellows bones, who would wish to 
swinge a hair of your head.' ' Thank 
you ! thank you !' replied Albert, (as 
the tear of gratitude glistened in his 
eye,) I sincerely believe you would.' 
These friends then again shook hands, 
and led the horses to the door. 

In the mean time Anselmo returned 
with word, that father Zelo waited 
at the altar, and instantly lighted two 
torches that he had procured. In a 



I CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. S-l 

few minutes the anxious Mortimer and 
his bride elect, (who trembled vio- 
lently,) accompanied by Miss Hastings, 
and Anselmo, who was to have the 
honor of giving her away, proceeded 
to the chapel on horseback, attended 
by Rourke and Albert, who walked be- 
fore with the lights; and on entering 
it, found the worthy father alfeady 
there. He appeared to be upwards of 
sixty; corpulent, low in stature, and 
his hair silvered with age ; his habit was 
of coarse cloth, fastened to his waist 
by a leather girdle, from which hung 
his crucifix and beads; his countenance 
was mild and expressive, though care 
worn ; yet take him altogether, he was 
prepossessing, and Lord Mortimer felt 
pleased with his appearance. 

As to the chapel, Anselmo might 
well say it was a ruin ; the roof had 
given way in many places, and large 
decayed beams, that once supported the 
ceiling, lay prostrate on the benches, 
covered with the rubbish of which it had 

D 5 



SSt ALEXENA ; on THE 

been composed ; above, the owls had 
nestled in many places, and on seeing* 
the lii2:ht, terrified Alexena with their 
screams, as they glided with flapping 
■winofs throiio'h the lons^ dark aisles. 
Shafts of pillars lay scattered on the 
floor at uneven distances, and it was 
utterly impossible to discover the ex- 
tent ef this dismal sanctuary, by the 
languid flame of only two torches. 
However, the roof above the altar was 
entire, and the floor below unincum- 
bered by rubbish ; the neighbouring 
peasants having removed it, as this 
was the spot where their marriages 
were celebrated, and where the last 
awful rites were generally paid to the 
dead. 

Lord Mortimer led his Alexena to 
the altar, almost petrified by the gloom 
in wliich she was enveloped ; and 
Miss Hastings by her side, in much the 
same situation; even Rourke gazed 
wildly round, and heartily wished the 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. S3 

whole party at Anselmo's fire-side 
again. 

Father Zelo opened the book of 
holy writ, and began the ceremony; he 
handed the ring to Lord Mortimer, who 
took the beauteous and lily hand of 
Alexena, and was in the act of placing 
the dear pledge on her finger, when 
Rourke frantically exclaimed, ' blood- 
an-ounds! who are these?' His lordship 
turned hastily, and the same instant 
was wounded by Montano, who fired 
at him. The villain was accompanied 
by a troop of officers, habited in the 
robes of the inquisition, who loudly- 
called to Lord Mortimer and his at- 
tendants to surrender, as they rushed 
towards the altar to seize them. Zelo 
commanded them to hold, but his 
words were vain, and instantly a des- 
perate combat deluged the house of 
prayer with blood. Alexena, on ob- 
serving the cause of Rourke's alarm^, 
fainted, and when Montano fired, and 
Miss Hastings saw his lordship stag- 
ger, she fell senseless on the floor. In 



sir ALEXENA ; OR THE 

a moment, Albert, Rourke, and his dog 
Lion, drew up by his lordship's side, 
and with their back asrainst the wall, 
waited the attack of an host of enemies, 
determined to sell their lives as dearly 
as possible. Anselmo removed the 
senseless forms of the ladies within the 
pale of the altar, where the distracted 
Zelo endeavoured to assist them, and 
this was all the work of a moment. 
The inquisitorial officers were armed 
with cutlasses, but fortunately had no 
fire arms. Montano, it is true, had a 
case of pistols, but these were all — 
Lord Mortimer and Albert were armed 
with swords. Rourke had only his 
black-thorn cud^^el, and unfortunately 
Anselmo was without any weapon of 
defence. The inquisitors poured on 
his lordship's little band, but in a 
short time, many of them bade this 
world good night. Lord Mortimer, 
though wounded, was not disabled, 
and his soul's fury flashed lightning 
from his sparkling eyes, as he attacked 
the bloody, the treacherous Montano. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. B5'' 

In a moment, down tumbled the villain, 
his lordship having laid his cheek 
open from the temple to the ear, and 
then assailed the next ; he endeavoured 
to keep the wall as much as possible,' 
to prevent the demons, by whom he 
was nigh overpowered, surrounding his 
worthy assistants, and encouraged them 
to keep together; his voice was as a 
trumpet, it steeled every neiTe, and 
breathed new vigour into their bosoms; 
death and blood accompanied every 
blow. Rourke, as the sounding strokes 
fell thick and heavy, shouted, that's my 
honey ! down with them, Albert ! och, 
that's my jewel ! make bruteene of their 
bones, cransh them, Lion ! guzzle them 
myboy, guzzle them; hilloo! you blood- 
hounds, death and damnation, what's 
this for? — Lion was not inattentive to 
his master's encouraging cries, for he 
had already torn two of the wounded 
inquisitors almost to pieces, though 
he had then four deep gashes in dif- 
ferent parts of his body. Six of these 
JBips* of darkness were already dead, 

* In^uUitorj, 



86 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

and both Roiuke and Albert wounded, 
the latter only slightly. His lordship 
was exhausted, and i;rew taint with ihe 
loss of blood, thou <;!i he yet kept the 
oilicers at ba^-. None dare attack him 
singly; his sword had pierced the hearts 
of tbur^ but victory was evidently on 
the side of the inquisitors^ and in a few 
moments the contest was at an end. 
INIontano, who had slowly recovered 
from a state of insensibility, now drevy 
from his bosom his second murderous 
engine, then raising liimself in a sitting 
posture, levelled it at Lord INIorlimer; 
twice he essayed to draw the trigger, 
but his strength refused to obey the 
impulse of his heart; he tried a third 
time, and was more sticcessfnl, his aim 
was sure, the fatal instrument exploded, 
and his lordship fell. His fall was ac- 
companied by a shout from the iv'i- 
nmpliant inquisitors, and a wild cry of 
horror from Rourke. Och! murder, 
my master, you're kilt ! but by my soul, 
while there is blood in my body, it shall 
be shed over your corpse : then snatch- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 87 

ing his lordship's sabre, (with a foot 
on each side of him J at the first blow 
split the scull of the nearest foe. Dur- 
ing this time Father Zelo and Anselmo 
used every exertion to keep the ladies 
out of the reach of the inquisitors, who, 
poor souls, made the chapel ache with 
their heart-rending screams; but when 
Lord Mortimer fell, they both again 
relapsed into happy insensibiHty. — 
Rourke, supposing his master dead, 
now resolved to save Alexena, and as 
there was no time to be lost, he cauo'ht 
up her pale and beauteous figure from 
the cold floor, and at the same time ter- 
rified his foes, by his wild Irish cry, and 
the frantic manner in which he flourished 
his bloody sabre. Anselmo retired with 
Miss Hastings, while Albert covered his 
retreat, fighting desperately all the way 
down the aisle of the chapel. It was 
fortunate for them that there was only 
one torch to give light to this scene, 
(the other had been extinguished,) and 
this was fastened to the railing that 
wound round the altar. There was yet 



.8S alexexa: or the 

hopes, Alexena would escape, as Roiirke 
was already at the door, ha> iiiij^ cut his 
wav, auclc deep, throus^h Wood and 
smoakius^ bodies ; but at this critical 
juncture, returnino'lifebroni>,ht with it a 
sense of all her misery, and with piercing" 
screams she called on Mortimer ; her 
strun^gles were violent, and she at leuijtli 
disengaged herself from the protecting 
arm of the almost tainting Rourke, 
and flew to seek her lo\-er amons: 
the dead and dying. ' Mortimer ! oh 
Mortimer !' she cried ; — he answered 
with a groan ; she heard it, saw him, 
and clasped him to her bosom. Her 
hair hung down loose and dischevelled, 
braided with the clotted blood of their 
enemies ; she pressed her lips to his cold 
aching- forehead, bathed his face with 
her tears, besought him to live for her, 
and tried to «top the etFusion of his 
blood with her thin white robes, 'till at 
length the sinewy arm of a merciless 
inquisitor forced her, wildly scream- 
ing, from his lordship's feeble grasp. 
Rourke, now seeing all hopes of saving 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAUCO. 89 

her, vail) ; fled, and >vith the assist- 
ance of Ansehno, pluced Miss Hastings 
on one of the horses, (which were con- 
cealed a little way from the chapel,) 
and escaped, while Lady Alexena and 
Lord INIortirner fell into the hands of 
those inhuman barbarians, who threw 
the almost lifeless body of the latter 
into a kind of litter, that had been pro- 
cured for the purpose, and in that me- 
lancholy condition conveyed him, co- 
vered with blood and wounds, to the 
subterraneous dungeons of the Domi- 
nican monastery. 



CHAP. V. 

** There are more things in heaven and earth— 
Than are dreamt of in your philosophy." 

Hamlet. 

On the arrival of Lord Mortimer at 
tlie Dominican monastery, a monk, who 
understood surgery, was sent to examine 
and dress his wounds. After he had 
probed and washed them, he gave a 



90 ALEXENA ; on THE 

favorable opinion : — the first ball that 
Montano fired having wounded his 
lordship slightly in the breast, the last 
lodged in his thigh, and this was con- 
ceived to be the most dangerous ; how- 
ever, the skilful father extracted it with 
the best success, and tlien had his 
patient removed from the dungeons to 
a cell off one of the galleries, where the 
air was better, and administered some 
light and nourishing refreshment fitting 
his exhausted condition. Tlie uncer- 
tainty he was in respecting Alexena's 
fate, and the pain of his wounds, forbade 
sleep to visit his weary ej^es, and tossed 
his thoughts in a sea of agony. Ber- 
nardo, the monk, came frequently to 
see him in the course of the nis^ht, and 
the moment he entered, his lordship 
was sure to assail him with a volume 
of questions ; but ^to one of which the 
cautious father refused to reply, till 
Lord Mortimer produced a heavy purse 
of that yellow shining metal, which not 
only opens the prison door, but often 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 91 

discloses the secret workings of the 
hearf. This he promised^ if he would 
inform him what had been done with 
the lady who fell into the hands of 
the officers in the chapel. It had the 
desired effect^ the monk looked wist- 
fully at the gold, then started, softly 
unlocked the door, and looked into 
the long deserted gallery, returned 
aji^ain, and drew from his bosom a smalt 
brass crucifix. Then, in an agitated 
voice, said, ' give me the gold, and 
' swear to be as secret as the grave, 
' never to disclose what I shall unfold/ 
His lordship said, ' I swear,' and then 
kissed the crucifix. Bernado was satis- 
fied, and informed his lordship of many 
interesting particulars, among which 
he gave a description of the convent 
and monastery, and a sketch of Mon- 
tano's character. He has given, con- 
tinued Bernardo, a voluminous descrip- 
tion of his journey to England, in which 
he expresses the most implacable hatred 
to the whole nation, but particularly to 
your lordship, who he represents as a 



92 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

worthless heretical libertine; and states, 
he more than once caught you in the 
commission of acts as infamous as they 
were mean ; for instance, listening to 
the idle fabrications of a servant, named 
Gonzales, who frequently displayed his 
mischievous disposition in exciting your 
disgust against Lady Alexena's brother, 
for the purpose of retarding her return 
to Spain. That domestic, before his 
death, sent for your lordship, for the 
purpose of disclosing some important 
secrets of the Velasco family, but 
luckily was prevented by Montano, who 
burst into the room, and warmly up- 
braided you on the occasion; on which, 
loosing all regard for his sacred func- 
tion, you impiously raised your hand 
against his person, and used such 
menaces, as rendered it unsafe for him 
to remain under the same roof Being 
thus persecuted, he applied to the queen 
for redress, and that most pious princess, 
instantly sent officers for the purpose ; 
but they, unknown to her, were your 
lordship's friends, and had the cruelty 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 93 

to appoint you commander of the vessel 
which conveyed him to this country. 
On landing, being apprehensive his 
personal safety was in danger, he with- 
drew the first opportunity, and hastened 
to Madrid, where he made Don Velasco 
acquainted with bis voyage, and with 
your character, and besought him to 
save his sister from the grasp of such a 
wretch as he has represented you to be. 
Velasco accordingly applied to the holy 
tribunal; yet, notwithstanding their 
vigilance, you, with the assistance of 
spiesj had intelligence of their proceed- 
ings, and avoided punishment by flight; 
but he now rests assured you will meet 
the just recompense of your crimes and 
blind presumption. 

' Is not this very plausible?' observed 
Bernardo, ' though few here believe it; 

' Montano is known too well for many 
' to place confidence in his narrative, 
' particularly where his interest is so 
* deeply interwoven, as is the case in 
' the present instance. You must 



9J: ALEXENA; OR THE 

' know he looks forward to the hope 
' of being elected treasurer to this in- 
' stitution very shortly, and is at present 
^ a great favorite with the lady abbess 
' of the adjoining convent, whose power 
' is far from despicable. Influenced by 

* those circumstances, he left no means 
' untried to gratify her insatiable ava- 
' rice; and the fortune of Al^xeua, 
' which he has prevailed on her brother 
' to endow her cloister with, on con- 

* dition that his sister is immediately 
' compelled to take the veil, has in- 
'sured her confidence. Don Velasco 
' has condemned the Lady Alexena to 
' perpetual solitude within the con- 
' vent walls ; a few hours ago, with 
' Montano's assistance, the infamous 
' compact was concluded, which, if I 
' mistake not, irretrievably ruins the 
'^ peace of mind of you both. She being 

* unwell, from fatigue and grief, I was 
' ordered to attend her for a few mo- 
' ments, and, by my beads, she is the 
' prettiest novice I have seen within 
' these walls those many years.' Here 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 95 

the tears trembled in Bernardo's eyes, 
and clearly proved he was deeply inter- 
ested^ at the same time promising to ren- 
der him every assistance: ' I have taken 
your gold/ he said, but it shall be 
devoted to your service, and, I trust, it 
will unbar the gates of this prison for 
us all, if not, it may facilitate our es- 
cape by other means; for, believe me, 
I am detained here against my incli- 
nation, as well as you, and am not a 
professed monk, but merely surgeon 
to the institution. But no more of this, 
I have already staid too long, and cer- 
tainly have been rather indiscreetly 
communicative to a stranger, of 
whom the good father Montano has 
spoken with such severity. However, 
in this instance, I hope I risk little, 
and 1 wish your lordship a very good 
night ; to-morrow, I trust, will bring 
some tidings of the Lady Alexena, 
which will revive your languishing 
hopes.' Lord Mortimer shook his 
new friend's hand, and with many 



96 alexena; or the 

thanks for his kindness, let him depart, 
but not without first extorting' his pro- 
mise, that he would see Alexena early 
the following morning, and cotwince her 
of his existence, and the favorable stale 
of his wounds. 

Shortly after the death of Don 
Velasco, his son plunged into the 
most shameful excesses, and gave vent 
to those passions which had been 
restrained during his father's life. 
Montano became acquainted with him 
at an early period, and speedily formed 
an accurate judgment of his temper 
and disposition; the conclusion was 
favorable to his views, and he was 
determined to court the protection of 
the young' Velasco, who was eventually 
to enjoy the power and fortune of his 
family, while the delicate state of his 
father's health, promised him the im- 
mediate enjoyment of it. Influenced by 
those circumstances, Montano privately 
ministered to the passions of the heir, 
and winked at the evil propensities 



CASTJ.E OF SANTA MAHCO. g7 

which were too prominent in his ♦^-ene- 
ral character to escape ohservatioii. 
Velasco soon becanne attaclied to the 
monk, and made him many promises 
of future lavor, which he punctually 
performed, the moment he had the 
means. His bounty and larg-esses served 
to excite the avarice of his confessor, 
who embraced with avidity every pro- 
ject that promised a golden reconT- 
pense. The excesses of his pupil 
knew no bounds, and, consequently, in 
a short time, he became greatly embar- 
rassed in his pecuniary affairs, and 
applied to Montano for advice and 
assistance. The latter, thouo-h unwil- 
ling to part with his money, made 
amends by proposing ingenious ways 
and means; one of which was, t!iat 
he should seize the fortune of his 
sister, then about thirty thousand dol- 
lars, as she could not possibly havfT 
occasion for so larire a sum, and then 
place her in a convent, agreeable to 
her father's original intention. Velasco 
at first felt reluclant to enter into liiis 

VOL. I. E 



9S ALEXEXA; or XilE 

barbarous measure, but when his ne- 
cessities became more pressing, he 
yielded, and as few obstacles opposed 
this plan, he resolved to carry it into 
immediateexecution. One ditficulfv ob- 
truded, which was, that Alexena resided 
in England w ith her aunt, who might 
refuse to allow her to return, as she was 
one of the guardians appointed by her 
father's will; but Montano instantly 
offered to obviate this difficulty, by ob- 
taining, under feigned pretences, an 
order from the Inquisition to the queen of 
Great Britain, commanding her lO send 
their victim under his protection, to her 
friends in Spain ; as to the rest, it 
would be easy to engage a vessel 
for the purpose, and it was mutually 
agreed, that if Alexena died in the in- 
terim, or on the passage, the monk was 
to have two thousand crowns, in addition 
to the sum he had stipulated for, as 
compensation for his private services. 

When this horrid contract was finally 
concluded, Montano made instant pre- 
l)aratiouSj and easily obtained the order 



CASTLE OF SAXTA MARCO. S9 

from the holy tribunal ; every thing pro- 
mised the speedy completion of their vil- 
lainy, until Gonzales intruded. He was 
an old and faithful domestic, who had 
spent a long life in the service of his late 
lord^ and had, from Montano's introduc- 
tion to the family, conceived an unac- 
countable aversion for him, and by ob- 
serving his deportment with a watchful 
eye, saw enough to increase his dislike 
a'nd suspicions. The monk, however, 
acted with great caution^ during the life 
of the late Don Velasco, and did not 
throw off the mask until a few months 
after his death; but then his character, 
which had hitherto been concealed 
under the veil of hypocrisy and dissi- 
mulation, gradually burst through the 
flimsy covering, and disclosed the 
villainy that had so long lurked be- 
neath it. Gonzales overheard a few 
words relative to the intended voyage, 
which gave him an indistinct idea of 
what was intended, and he instantly 
resolved to ascertain the facts, no 
matter how. Urged by his fears for 



100 ALEXENA; OR TfIC 

Alexena's safety, the next time the 
monk was admitted to a private con- 
ference with his young master, he ap- 
plied his ear to the key-hole, and by 
this means, however reprehensible, 
obtained a perfect conviction of their 
intentions, and resolved to defeat (hem, 
even should his life be the sacrifice. 
Thus influenced, he intreated liberty 
to accompany Montano to Enj;land, 
but was absolutely refused, as it was 
evident he would be a restraint on his 
intentions, and might defeat them alto- 
gether. Gonzales, however, became 
more urgent, and as both Velasco and 
the motdc feared his penetration, and 
knew the implacability of his hatred, if 
once excited, they consented to grant 
his request, but had predetermined to 
throw him overboard, the monjeut tliey 
jliould descry the British coast. 

In a few days after, Montano sailed, 
attended l)y this servant, and a band of 
bravo's, who, the former, had engaged 
for the purpose of consigning Alexena 



TATSTLE OF SANTA MARCO. lOl 

to a watery grave ; but Providence had 
ordained they should never reach the 
land, as the storm buried them in tlie 
deep. And those were the circum- 
stances that Gorizales wished to com- 
municate the night he expired m 
Hollywood-Castle. 

On Montano's return to Spain, he 
traced his way back to Madrid witli 
all possible expedifiorj, and sought 
Velasco, to whom he gave a particular 
detail of his voyage. The latter was en- 
raged almost to frenzy at the result, as 
he had disposed of part of Alexena's for- 
tune, and impatiently exclaimed, 'what 
shall I do, if she now claims it? my 
reputation, already on the decline, 
will be irretrievably ruined!' The 
monk, without hesitation, told him the 
plan he had formed, by which Lord 
Mortimer could not possibly escape 
destruction ; and if he, who was tho 
chief obstacle, was once removed, they 
then could dispose of Alexena and 
leer fortune, without further mipedi- 



102 ALEXENA 



OR rriE 



ment. Velasco readilv subscribed io 
his lordship's annihilation, when he 
found that he actually loved his sister, 
and was beloved by her; but when 
the monk informed him that Gonzales 
had overheard their intentions, and 
disclosed them, together with an ac- 
count of the scene in that domestic's 
chamber, previous to his death, his 
rage became almost insupportable, and 
he demanded, with convulsive eager- 
.ness, couM Montano have a moment's 
hesitation in stabbing him to the Jieart, 
if opportunity offered. Montano, at 
this moment, sat close to a table, on 
which a solitary lamp feebly gleamed, 
and cast a dim light on the large apart- 
ment in which they sat ; while Velasco 
had drawn his chair nigh the few expiring 
embers on the hearth, over which he 
leaned, muttering curses on his sister's 
lover, as he peevishly waited the monk's 
reply. It came not for a few moments, 
-and Velasco raised his eyes to those 
of his confessor, to inquire the cause, 
ys\xQ\\ he found them ready to burst 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 103 

with spleen ; they shot forth the fires of 
disappointment, and blazed with re- 
venge; his countenance was the throne 
of horror, and its colours expressed the 
variety of the passions by which he was 
irritated ; murder lowered on his brow^ 
and was distinguishable by the black- 
ness of his visaije ; remorseless raije and 
treachery, by the yellow sickliness of 
his cheek, and the quivering of his 
Up, then ghastly pale; speech at 
length returned, and in a voice, charged 
with the thunder of inveterate malice/ 
be exclaimed, ' 1 stab him ! I slay him ! 
'is it with a simple dagger? Oh! nn- 

* fortunate necessity, that he shall dio 

* thus, and cheat me of revenge; by 

* all my hopes, had I half an empire, 

* I would part with it to purchase 
^ Sampson's strength for one short hour, 

* and have Gonzales livins:, and this 
'iod within my grasp, that I' might 
' squeeze their vitals, till torture should 

* force such wild and piercing screams, 

* as should fright away then* senses : 
' between earth and heaven I would 

* dash their convulsed and agonized 



J6i AI,EXENA; OR THE 

' forms against eacli other, and as 

• with out-stretched arms they vtiiuiy 
' endeavoured to avoid the shock, with 
' a desperate blow 1 would shi^ er Ihcir 

* limbs in countless pieces, and bepaint 
•"each wilh his fellow's brains, then tear 
'their shattered heads from their yet 
' reeking carcasses, and with a curse, 
' cast tliem to the dosrs.* Montano 
paused, and gasped for breath, while 
Velasco's broad grin, proved the satis- 
taction he felt at the monk's depravity, 
and instantly pointed out Scalto, as a 
person fit and willing to commit the 
deed. The latter, after some hesita- 
tion, assented, yet continued to lament 
the necessity that indjjced him to let 
Lord Mortimer shake off this frail 
incumbrance of martal dust so easily; 
but before they parted for the night, 
Montano promised, if Velasco would 
supply a sufficient sum, he would un- 
dertake the entire arrangement of this 
business, to which the former gladly 
assented, and paid the money tlic fol- 
lowing- morning. The former thetr 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. IQS 

proposed the horrid crime to Scalta, 
and to quiet his fears, in case of ap- 
prehension^ gave him a forged protec- 
tion, knowing it was in his power to 
elude the consequences, being welt 
acquainted with the inquisition. 

When Lord Mortimer left Madrid 
for Saragossu, the monk, accompanied 
by a number of hired cut-throats, for 
whom he had obtained inquisitors.* 
robes, set out for the monastery of th^ 
Dominicans, and by pursuing a different 
direction, reached it six hours before 
the arrival of his lordship on the com- 
mon. Montano introduced Velasco to 
the abbess, and then related a tale by 
which slie became interested for their 
success. The latter having agreed to 
make her a present of a thousand 
crowns, if she woidd suspense with, 
some of the usual forms, previous to 
Alexena's taking the v( 11, as there vvaa 
yet a possibility Lord Mortimer might 
escape, and contrive to get her onca 
again in his power. This the abbsaS 

n 5 



^06 AtEXENA; OE TUB 

promised to take every precaution to 
prevent, and then he proposed to pay 
ten thousand dollars as her portion; 
'ivliich, thouo^h not more than one third 
of her fortune, was considered very li- 
beral. Montano was to have two thou- 
s^and more as compensation for his 
wounds, and the remaining eighteen 
t'^'ousand, Velasco conscientiously/ in- 
tor'?3ed to appropriate to his own use ; 
and after Alexena had been conveyed 
to the convent, he left it and returned 
to Madrid, without feeling any thing 
like rc^norse at the despair and misery 
to wh ch he had abandoned his lovely 
and unfortunate sister. 



CHAP. VI. 

*« How poor are they, that have not patience V- 
What wound did ever heal, but by degrees ? 
Thou know'»t, we work by wit, and not by witchcraf^ 
And wit depends on dilatory time.'' 

IS EXT morning, Bernardo awaked 
Lord Mortimer out of a sweet and re- 
freshing bleep; he had com« to drea 



CASTLE OF 8ANTA MARGO. 10^ 

his wounds, but his lordship was much 
more anxious about Alexena than any 
bodily pain, and impatiently inter- 
rupted his inquiries, by a number of 
questions, which succeeded each other 
with amazing rapidity. * Please speak 
'* lower/ replied Bernardo, ' and have a 
' little patience, for you will have need 

* of a large portion before you remain 

* many montlis within these walls. I 
^ have seen Alexena, and, fortunately, 

* we have had a few moment's conver- 
' sation, in which 1 informed her of 
' your safety, and that there were hopes 
' of your escape, but not unaccom- 
^ panied by her. She trembled with 

* apprehension, lest I should be over- 

* heard, and told me the abbess and 
' nuns had informed her, you had died 
' of your wounds, which 1 might have 
'easily known by her swelled and 
' tearful eyes; however, the poor timid 
' thing is now much easier, and, I trust, 
'will not be treated with harshness; in 
' truth,, her gentle, pensive look, and 

* pretty words, will hardly fail to wiu 



\(^ ALEXENA; on THE 

' the irood ^vill of the sisterliood, many 
'of whom are kind-hearted creatures. 
' As to you, 1 am appointed your keeper, 
' and have received instructions to iet 
' vou walk in the gallery when your 
^trennjth permits, and now and then 
' on the terrace, until such time as the 

* holy tribunal consult your queen, in 
' what manner you are to be disposed 
' of; and I much fear, unless you are 
' able to effect your escape before that 
' period, that you will fall by the hands 

* of the executioner. I was unwillinsr 
' to let vou know this last ni"ht, but it 

* is better you should be prepared 'for 
' the worst. When you are somewhat 

* recovered, our superior intends to ex- 
' amine you Ijjmself, and I charge you 
' to be cautious respecting what answers 

* you may tliink prudent to give, least 

* they appear in evidence against you 
' hereailer.' 

Bernardo now expressed a very favor- 
aLle opinion of his lordship's health, 
and after ordering him some refreshing 
nutriment, retired, leaving his patient 



• ASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 109 

to plod over the means of escape, at all 
times ilifTicnIt from the situalion of the 
monastery, which stood in a friglitfnl 
vale between two mountains, surround- 
ed almost on every side with inacces- 
sible rocks. The road wound auioni*- 
the precipices, above which, tufts of 
trees were scattered at small distances, 
and seemed to hang on the ledge of 
these romantic crairs, vainly endeavour- 
ing to kiss the tops of the tall pines in 
the chasms below. The landscape in 
the immediate vicinity of those sanc- 
tuaries was a\N fully grand, and few be- 
held it without shrinking at the idea, 
that it misrht be their fate to linsrer 
within those prisons which frowned in 
its bosom; and there Lord Mortimer 
lay planning a thousand methods of 
escape, not one of which he ever had 
it in his power to make trial of. 

About a fortni<>ht after his arrival, Ber-' 
nardo was sent to say, the superior would 
•ee him next night in the hall appropri- 
ated for the trial of the monks, and where 
he was accordingly conducted at the 
-iippointed hour, dressed iu the English 



11(3 ALEXENA ; OR tHE 

costume; very few moments were al- 
lowed him for reflection before tlie 
folding doors (lew open, and a number 
of monks entered, bearing torches; they 
resembled a group of Pandemonian 
ghosts, who were unusually pale and 
ghastly, from the length of time they 
had wandered on the shores of Styx, 
before Charon had compassion to 
ferry them over. Their prior was old 
and feeble ; his person tall, but very 
much stooped ; his face yellow and full 
of wrinkles; his eyes dim and deep, 
sunk in his head ; they had lost the fire 
of youth, if they ever had any, and al- 
together he looked like an half de- 
4:'ayed corpse animated. A number of 
attendants, dressed in fantastic habits, 
waited on this spectre, and assisted him 
to his chair, (which was raised a few 
feet from the level of the floor,) and a 
few minutes after, he thus addressed 
Lord Mortimer: — ' Say, young and 
' thoughtless stranger, what evil genius 
' tempted you to commit those crimes, 
'in the very perpetration of which, yott 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. Ml 

' fell covered with painful wounds; say, 
' have you not in the short space ot" a 
' few months, committed the iniquitous 
^ deeds of an age? have you not been 
' guilty of a sacrilegious violation of 

* our laws, in spiriting away a virgin, 
' holy dedicated to her God ? of most 
^ foul murder ou the persons of many 
' of our sacred officers? blasphemy 
' against our church, and rebellion 
' against every decree of heaven ? Each 

* of those vile offences is punishable 
■^ with death — a death of lingering tor- 
' ments. What compensation can you 
' offer 1 What atonement can you make? 

* Who have been your assistants, and 
'what were their motives? To this last 
' question, I intreat a true and satis- 

* factory answer ; make ample confes- 

* sion, 'tis the only thing that can now 

* save you from everlasting misery, for 

* your enormities are of too deep a 

* shade to allow me to flatter you with 
' the most distant hope of pardon in 
^ this world ; therefore, I beg you will 
' jnake good use of the short tune that 



11^ ALEXENA ; OR THE 

' the unparalleled clemency of our holy 
'' church has yet indLi]<^e(l you with : 
' prepare for that awful eternity into 
' which you are so shortly to be launch- 
*ed, to meet an offended Deity, and, if 
^possible, appease his wrath by timely 
'repentance.' 

His lordship now intreated to be 
heard, and said, although he was aware 
he \'^as not then on trial, yet, he trusted, 
if the prior would have the patience to 
hear him, he could, in some measure, 
remove the prejudice that it was evi- 
dent existed in the minds of all those 
who had heard any thing of the recent 
transactions, 'In the first place.' conti- 
nued Lord Mortimer, ' I deny that I 
'have committed blasphemy; aiid as to 
' the other crimes of which I am accused, 
' I thus reply : — I saw Lady Alexena at 
' the house of a triend of mine in Eng- 
' land, and from the earliest hour of our 
' acquaintance, I became her professed 
* admirer, and in a little time, being as- 
'isarcd of her aiuiul^ility, I oflercd her 



f!ASTLE or 8AKTA MAR«0. IIS 

mv hand and heart, and was blessed 
by her acceptance. A nnoiik was now 
sent to conduct her to a brother's 
armSj and I accompanied her; that 
brother proved unworthy of the ^reat 
trust of a protector, and 1 pressed the 
speedy celebration of our union, that 
1 miirht be entitled to that enviable 
name. She consented : I led her to the 
altar, innocent and unconscious of 
offence, when tliat inhuman monster, 
one of the brother's of your order, 
Montano ! dashed the cup of joy un- 
tasted from my lips, and endeavoured 
to deprive me of existence. The 
worm on which you thread will turn ; 
then why expect I should tamely sub- 
mit to be butchered. What I have 
done was in the defence, and for the 
preservation of my life, and in the 
hope of saving the innocent Alexena 
from the merciless gra?p of her in- 
human brother and his vile associ- 
ate: I fono-ht while I had strenijth, 
and fell when exhausted . Men arc 
not to be absolutely judged by their 



114 alexena; or the 

' actions^ their motives should first be 
' considered. I am ready to &tand or 
' fall on this most equitable basis, and 
Met the result be what it may, none 
* can deprive me of the plaudits of an 
' approving conscience : as to emissa- 
' ries, I had none, my faithful servants 
' were my only assistants, and 1 regret 
' they were wounded in the defence of 
' a man, who, from the import of your 
^ words, never will have the power to 
' reward the fidelity and courage they 
' so nobly displayed in the hour of 
' danger. If there has been guilt, I 
' alone am guilty ; therefore, on me let 
' the punishment be inflicted, and I 
' trust I shall meet the vengeance which 
' you say awaits me, with the fortitude 
' of a man unconscious of crime.' 

*' I dare do all that may become a man ; 
Who dare* do more, is none.*' 

Here his lordship bowed, and thft 
prior appeared interested ; his words 
carried conviction to the heart of the 
father, who acknowledi]:ed this to him- 



CASTLE or SANTA MAnCO. I J5 

self, and as he rose to withdraw, said, 
' he would carefully consider his lord- 
ship's case, and if it proved correct, 
would interest himself in his behalf.' 
Lord Mortimer returned him thanks, 
and the prior then retired with his at- 
tendants. His lordship had his doubts 
as to the result, and resolved to effect 
his escape, and carry oft" Alexena, 
though she were professed, as he felt 
assured ijothing but force could com- 
pel her to take the veil. 

It was now four months since he 
became a prisoner, and nothing de- 
cisive had yet been done ; Alexena's 
noviciate drew near a conclusion, and 
the preparations were already talked 
of, preparatory to the solemn vow. 
Bernardo had only been able to con- 
vey a few billets to and from the lo- 
vers, and even this was attended with 
considerable danger; but it now be- 
came absolutely necessary that some- 
thing should be attempted to prevent 
the complete frustration of their hopes. 



116 alexena; on the 

Therefore, the next night, when Ber- 
nardo came to indulge his lordship vviJh 
his evening's walk on the terrace, he 
pointed out the urgency there was for 
some bold effort; to this the other 
readily assented, and informed him the 
fears and suspicions of the abbess were 
lulled by Alexena's ready compliance 
with the fust forms; she having attend- 
ed to his instructions in every thing, 
and if they could but obtain assistance- 
from without, he had no hesitation in 
saying, their escape would be easily 
effected. Here he was interrupted by- 
two njcn, who had clambered (o the 
summit of a rock, which was almost on 
i\ level with the terrace, though a con- 
siderable distance frouj it. Bernardo 
retired into the shade, and desired his 
lordship to address them in English; 
he did so, and judge his emotion on 
being instantly known and answered 
by Rourke, who Albert, with ditiicully, 
prevented from bawling, lest he shoidd 
discover and ruin all. Lord Mortimer, 
after expressing his joy, begged they 



CASTLE OP SAXTA WARCO. 117 

would speak in a suppressed tone, as 
every word echoed among the rocks. — 
' Oh ! God save you, my lord ! speak 
again, 1 hope you're alive, but I doubt 
it/ exclaimed Tom. 'Oh! my deer 
master, say you're alive, or I'll loose my 
seven senses! arrah, thunder-an-ounds 
Albert, man, is there no way to be after 
getting him out of this murder'n hole.' 
' For, heaven's sake, Rourke, be silent/ 
replied his lordship, ' or you may cause 
my instant destruction.' ' I will ! I 
v\ill, my heart's blood, but how can we 
sarve you.' Albert then said, 'my lord, 
' since Providence has discovered you, 

* I will, with your permission, come to- 
' morrow night, at this hour, with a let- 
' tor, in which I will communicate what 

* has happened since I saw you last, 
' and you can lower a string lo which 
' I can fasten it, and receive your in- 

* sfructions by the same conveyance. 
' Miss Hastings is well, and at present 

* in a private house in the vicinily of 
VSaragossa; but as it is very di(iicultto 
' ascend those precipices, it is neces- 



ilS ALEXENA ; ©R THE 

' sary we should now retire^ for it will 
' be day-light before we reach our re- 
' Ireat a^aiu.' He and Rourke then 
pulled off their hats, and his lordship 
wished them good night. 'May all 
the holy angels protect you/ said 
Albert. ' Amen ! Amen !* ejaculated 
Rourke, ' and now that you're found, 
with God's help, you shan't be long 
in that purgatory.* 

The moment those faithful fellows 
were out of sight, Bernardo embraced 
his lordship, saying, 'all's well, we 
' only want the lady Alexena, and a 
' few trusty fellows to keep off the 
' banditti that infest this accursed 
' neighbourhood, as T have the means 
' of escape already within my power ; 
' let us now retire to your cell, where 
' I will furnish you with pen, ink, and 
'^ paper, together with a cord to lower 
' the letter.' His lordship then wrote 
to Albert, to have the horses and ser- 
vants at the foot of the great bridge, 
within a gun-shot of the building, at 



©A3TLE OF SANTA MARCO. 119 

twelve o'clock on the fourth ni^ht from 
the date of his letter, and to he care- 
ful to have all his English attendants 
M^ell armed and mounted, witli relays 
of horses fifty miles on the road to 
Valladolid ; and to adopt every other 
precaution that his prudence should 
dictate, which would be likely to en- 
sure their escape and safety. He im- 
patiently waited the approach of the 
next night, and at the appointed hour 
hurried to the terrace to ni^et Albert, 
who was close under the walls, while 
Rourke watched at a distance ; his 
lordship instantly lowered liis letter, 
and drew up that of his servant. Al- 
bert contrived to read his by the light 
of a small lamp he had concealed 
under his cloak, and then promised to 
have every thing ready at tlje time 
nwd place appointed, and shorHy after 
retired most hapjiy in the hopes of 
delivcriuii" his master. 

Bernardo now communicated his 
plan, which promised success. Lord 



i^O alexena; oa TKr 

^Jortimcr v,as to personate a rnonk, 
who acted as aa assistant to the foi- 
iner, and to follow him, disguised, into 
the subterraneous dungeons, as out of 
them only they could entertain a hope 
of escape. The vigilance of the abbess 
was to-^be eluded by the confusion that 
was likely to ensue in consequence of 
the execution of a lovely female, who, 
by the excellence of her wit, contrived 
to deceive the porters at the grate, 
and effect her liberation the night of 
the day before the one on which she 
should be compelled to take the veil ; 
but having only her courage and 
strength to carry her from this dreaded 
placCj unfortunately missed her \^a3', 
and fell into the hands of some of 
our otficers, who inhumanly delivered 
her into the hands of her tormen- 
tors: she was tried, found guilty, 
and by the laws of the institution, 
condemned to be buried alive, but 
through the intercession of the prior, 
her sentence was mitigated into dying 
on the wheel. She is^ continued Ber- 



^ISf LE OF SANTA MARC©. lH 

uardo, merely to be fastened to the 
machine, and die by a blow, not to 
suffer all the tortures of that dreaded 
instrument. The abbess must be in- 
duced to compel Alexena to witness 
this execution, as by that means only, 
we can effect her deliverance, and I 
will write to the lady mother, stating-, 
that from what I have seen, it is my 
firm belief, her apparent compliance 
"with the will of her brother, is mere 
hypocrisy, and if I might so far pre- 
sume, 1 would advise she should be 
a spectator of Ellena's punishment, 
as an effectual preventive against 
similar attempts on her part. Lord 
Mortimer agreed to the necessity of 
the measure, though not without con- 
sideral)le hesitation, and Bernardo re- 
tired, for the purpose of making the 
attempt, and had the good fortune to 
succeed, even beyond his expectations ; 
having seen Alexena, and coivinced 
her of the urgency that induced him 
to adopt such disagreeable proceed- 
ings, and desired her to express re«» 

TOL. I. F 



122 alexena; oe the 

luctance to a monastic life before those 
nuns that were most likely to convey 
her sentiments to the ears of the ab- 
bess. While he was thus engaged, 
his lordship writhed under the most 
cruel apprehensions^ Jest something 
unforeseen should occur to defeat their 
intentions, or retard their deliverance ; 
at the same time, he felt the deepest 
regret, that the hourwhich was to restore 
liberty and Alexena, would be the last of 
the hapless Ellena's existence. ' Oh ! 
accursed, diabolical cruelty,' he men- 
tally exclaimed, ' you reign triumphant 
in those liabitations that should be the 
mansions of peace and tranquillity.* 
He sickened at the idea of the ap- 
proaching scene, and retired to his 
hard couch, oppressed with melancholy 
reflections. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 1S5 



CHAP. VII. 

« The midnight clock had toll'd ; and, hark, the bell 
Of death beats slow ! heard ye the note profound ? 
!t pauses now ! and now, with rising knell, 
Flings to the hollow gale its sullen sound.'' 

Mason. 

■M HE dreaded nii^Iit arrived, on which 
the unfortunate Ellena was to ipay the 
forfeit of her crime; half past eleven 
o'clock was the hour in which the me- 
lancholy spectators were to assemble, 
previous to her execution. Lord 
Mortimer sat musing in his solitary 
cell, when the dull sound of the 
convent bell announced the approach- 
ing death of the loveliest of mor- 
tals ; his blood chilled in his veins, 
and he started with a look of horror ; 
again, the slow and solemn note siole 
upon his ear, but ere it came a third 
time, Bernardo entered to conduct him 
to the gallery of the chapel, where he 
might offer up his prayers for a de- 
parting sister, without fear of being 
recognised by Aiexena, and was re- 

f2 



124 ALEXENA; on THB 

luctantly obliged to use a monkish habit 
for that purpose; his guide then led the 
way, and was followed bj his lordship. 

The house of prayer was lighted by 
a number of torches placed round the 
altar, but which served to cast a me- 
lancholy gleam over the columns in the 
back ground, and gave a most awful 
impression to the succeeding scene. 
The mournful peal of the organ pro- 
claimed the approach of the hapless 
victim, and when his lordship beheld 
her, the tears of pity and compassion 
trinkled down his cheek. 

In front of the procession were foiir 
old nuns bearing torches; next, the 
prior of the Dominicans and the lady 
abbess; then two monks, between 
ivhom the lovely Ellena ; after her. 
four other monks with torches ; next 
followed Alexena and several other 
novices, and last of all the executioner, 
who bore in his hand the instrument of 
tleath. The nuns were already in thcK* 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 12S 

proper place in the chapel, and this 
melancholy cavalcade now became mo- 
tionless before its altar. There EUena — 
the unfortunate, ill-fated Ellena — was 
led to hear the abbess proclaim the na- 
ture of her crime, and mode of punish- 
ment; and as she had not been pro- 
fessed, the prior gave her absolution, 
and the abbess her maternal blessinir. 
Oh ! had jou seen her at that moment, 
how meek, how resigned, she knelt on 
one knee, as she turned her soft blue 
eyes towards heaven. The scalding 
tears chased each other down her pale, 
but beauteous cheeks ; her fine hair 
hung in careless ringlets on her shoul- 
ders and snowy bosom ; her lovely form, 
sjiaped with the most elegant symmetry, 
was arrayed in a loose white robe ; 
and the heart of the noble Mortimer, 
as he gazed, bled at the idea of the 
sacrifice that was about to be oflfered 
on the altar of cruelty ; the impressive 
sound of the organ roused his atten- 
tion, and he waited in trembling, hope- 
less anxiety, for the conclusion of a 



156 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

scene, the most heart-rending that can 
be imagined. 

They now proceeded to the execution 
chamber, through innumerable wind- 
ings, turnings, and dreary passages; 
the floors of which were covered with 
saw-dust, while clammy sweats covered 
the cold damp walls ; they moved along 
in profound silence ; nought was to be 
heard, save the sobs of the noviciates, 
and the clinking of the friars' beads ; 
at length, they reached the execution 
chamber; it was a cold, gloomy dun- 
geon, in which stood wheels, racks, 
gibbets, and several other instruments 
of torture : this charnel house was very 
extensive; in the walls were various 
nitches, some built up, which contained 
the remains of luckless nuns, who liad 
long before been entombed alive for 
similar offences, for which even then 
EUena was about to suffer; others stood 
open with ponderous jaws, and gaped 
for prey, while tools for building, stone^ 
and lime, lay scattered on the floor. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. ]27 

I The wretched maiden was led into 

the further extremity of tliis vault of 
terror^ and delivered into the hands of 
the executioner, by a monk who always 
attends for the purpose ; she at that 
dreaded moment^, did not either shriek 
or groan, but submitted silently to 
her hard fate. The executioner led 
her to the scaffold, which was covered 
with black, on which was placed the 
wheel ; he seized his victim, and bound 
her on it, then took off her veil, and 
covered her eyes with a black handkerr 
chief; she then threw back her hair which 
hung in ringlets on her neck, p^nd wait- 
ed the fatal signal. The same monk 
now advanced, and laid his hand on his 
heart ; it was a sign to give her the coup 
de grace — to despatch hei in a moment ; 
the executioner understood him, and 
the wheel remained motionless ; but he 

fW^' raised his briiiht stilleto. and turnina: 
his back to the terrified spectators, 
aimed at her heart. The daa^orer 
was sure, and found a shelter in the 
loveliest bosom that ever srraced a 



158 ALEXENA ; OR TUB 

human form. A piercing shriek an- 
nounced the dead) blow, it was but 
one, she never gave another ; her con- 
vulsed and quivering lip shewed the 
quick approach of death ; a cold dew 
trembled on her forehead ; she sobbed 
violently; then slightly struggling, with- 
out a groan, yielded her bright spirit 
into the bosom of her Redeemer. 

Thus perished Ellena ! Thus had 
these inhuman monsters, under the 
mask of religion, deprived the lovely 
Ellena of life, for being guilty only of 
attempting to elude persecution. 

When the principal witness of the 
recent tragedy observed, that the spi- 
rit of Ellena had fled to Paradise, to 
enjoy eternal bliss, the abbess ordered 
a requiem to be chaunted for the re- 
pose of the soul of the departed ; and as 
the deep and melancholy notes of the 
organ, swung with a softened cadence 
along those damp, chilling passages. 
Lord Mortimer observed Alexena stand- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 129 

mg in the centre of the vault, almost 
paralysed with horror, apparently in- 
sensible to the terror-striking' objects 
around her^ until the hoarse, pestilen- 
tial, and heart-appalin^ voice of the 
abl)ess roused her to a dreadful sense of 
her situation. ' Follow me/ said this 
retailer of exquisite torments ; ' follow 
* me to the receptacle prepared for 
' meditation and repentance, and there 
' reflect on what you have seen : re- 
' member this is the slightest punish- 
' ment inflicted on the crimes of con- 
' tumely and disobedience.' 

The abbess then ordered her to be 
conducted to a cell next the dungeon, 
where, but a few minutes before, she 
beheld the hapless EUena expire ; and 
while the massy door grated on its 
rusty hinges, as it opened to receive her, 
she shuddered at the idea, that the pe- 
riod might not be far distant, when she 
should perish by the same fatal pun- 
ishment, or even worse. The moment 
the ponderous bolt bounded into its 

F 5 



J30 ALEXEXA; OR THB 

lustj^ fastenings, and had enclosed th« 
delicate form of Alexena in its cold 
and vanity bosonfi, the abbess delivered 
the key to Bernardo, and the same 
moment Lord Mortimer was conducted 
by two familiars to his cell. 

When his lordship again found him- 
self in solitude, he drew forth the let- 
ter of his faithful Albert, which till 
then lay unread and neglected ; and as. 
his eye passed over the well known 
characters, he found that his faithful 
and attached servant <:onceived he 
had been killed by the officers of the 
Inquisition, on that eventful night in 
which he had fallen, bravely defending 
his Alexena. On this supposition, he 
had hastened with all possible despatch 
to the hovel on the common, and in less 
than ten minutes left it at full speed, 
accompanied by Miss Hastings and 
all the servants, expecting every mo- 
ment to be pursued, overtaken, and 
Irv'^atcd fijost barbaroiisly by the monks. 



CASTLE OP Santa marco. 151 

He therefore did not continue in the 
direct road, but chose an unfrequented 
way that led to a place of safety, where 
he arrived at day break, and there kept 
the entire of his lord's suite, Rourke 
and he having resolved to perish 
rather than leave the country until 
they should obtain positive confirma- 
tion of his death or safety. To obtain 
information that miorht be relied on 
was difficult, but the host on the com- 
mon, who lived in the neighbourhood 
of the convent, contrived to let him 
know, that his lord had been conveyed 
to the Dominican monastery, where he 
still survived, and was in a fair way of 
recovery. Rourke, therefore, regularly 
every night, took his station on the 
point of the horrible rocks that over- 
look those ever to bo dreaded and 
terrific mansions, with the fond hope 
of seeing his master; for it n3ver oc- 
curred to his imagination, that he was 
strictly confined ; on the contrary, he 
conceived Lord Mortimer had liberty 
io wander through the buildings, as 



132 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

often as he felt an inclination^ and, 
bnoyed up with those hopes, continued 
his nightly watch, until he and Albert 
"were so fortunate as to find him 
on the termce. The moment Lord 
Mortimer had read the last sentence, 
lie consumed the letter with the assist- 
ance of his lamp, and was watching 
the last expiring sparks produced by 
its ashes^ when Bernardo ,entered. He 
apologized for the delay, by observing, 
it was his duty to see the remains of 
EUena prepared for interment, and then 
produced a gown and a dagger. ' My 
assistant is secured,' said he, ' disguise 
' yourself in this dress, and follow me 
' with these select perfumes to the 
' chamber in which the cold and 
' breathless form of EUena lies.' His 
lordship joyfully obeyed ; but first cau- 
tiously muffled himself in the monk's 
habit, then locked the door of his 
prison, and walked after the kind 
BernardOj in profound silence. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 133 



CHAP. VIII. 



Lay her i' th' earth ;- 



Aad from her fair and unpolluted Reik 
May violets spring. 



Hamlet. 



" And shall no lay of death, 
With pleasing murmur, sooth 
Her parting soul ? 
Shall no tear wet her grave ?" 



Sayers. 



\-JN Iheir way to the dungeons^ they 
were met by several monks^ whom they 
passed without speaking, or being 
spoken to^ and, at length, after passing 
through many windings, and dreary 
passages, reached the vaults where 
several miserable wretches were con- 
fined, doomed to languish the remain- 
der of their wretclied existence in those 
loathsome charnel houses, deprived of 
light and every comfort. They quickly 
passed them, and in a few moments 
arrived at the prison of Alexena — a 
treasury, which contained a jewel of 
inestimable value! When Bernardo 



1S4 AtfiXENA; 6R THC 

was about to enter it. Lord Mortimer 
pointed to a light that faintly glim- 
mered in the distant extremity of the 
vanity passage, his guide motioned 
silence, and at the same moment libe- 
rated his fair prisoner, then forbidding 
all expressions of congratulation until 
a more fit season, moved rapidly for- 
vyard towards that liijht which had 
caused Lord Mortimer^s observation; 
as they advanced it increased ; and, at 
length, they discovered a narrow pas- 
sage, apparently cut in the wall, the 
entrance of which was strongly secured 
by a gate composed of iron bars ; on 
the inside stood a table covered with 
wine, and other refreshments of the 
most savory and delicious description, 
and this curious banqueting-chambei* 
was well lighted with torches. At the 
farther end there was another gate, in 
every respect the same as the former, 
through which hands were extended 
-endeavouring to obtain the food before 
them, but could not, though it wa^S 
within a few inelics of their fingers; 



CASTLS OF SANTA MARCO. 135 

iherc were two in this earthly tantalus, 
and it is unnecessary to say they ex- 
cited the most lively pity. Bernardo 
explained the nature of their crime, and 
of their punishment, by stating, ' that 
' they had been sentenced to be starved 
' to death ; and I wonder they yet 

* live, as this is the fourth day of their 
' confinement. Those provisions which 
' you se6, were intended, by their deli- 
' cious sraell, to increase their appetite, 

'■' and make their punishment still more 
' horrible ; but the hour of their deliver* 
' ance has arrived, if it is not yet too 

* late, for I will this moment release 
' them.' He then unlocked the out- 
tvard gate; and the instant those lovely- 
unfortunates saw him, they begged a 
mouthful of bread, for the Holy Virgin's 
sake. ' Be pacified,' said Bernardo, 
' and you shall have enough, for I 
' came for the purpose of rescuing 

* you from this miserable dungeon.* 
At first they conceived he mocked them, 
but when Lord Mortimer assured them 



136 ALEXEHA ; OR THE 

of his kind intentions, the eldest of 
the two exclaimed^ 'Oh! Mortimer!' 
and fell fainting against the railing; 
she was instantly recognized by his 
lordship, as that Evelene whom he 
met before the tribunal at Madrid. 
When Bernardo had extorted a pro- 
mise from each, that thev would not 
taste ought but what he should allow^ 
least it might prove fatal, he unbarred 
the gate of their den, which was a 
dark narrow cell, covered wifh the 
mouldering bones of human bodies, 
without either bed, or any kind of 
furniture. Hunger had so far pre- 
vailed over these hapless females, that 
the youngest of the two twisted a 
thigh bone from a skeleton, and pulled 
down from the table a piece of venison, 
which they drew to them with the 
same implement, and greedily devour- 
ed; but on making a second attempt, 
the bone, rotten and decayed, had 
broken, and they had neither strength 
nor resolution to try the same expedient. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 137 

Bernardo, on releasing them, gave 
tliem a small portion of food, and after 
they were somewhat relieved, they all 
hastened towards that door that pro- 
mised to release them from this scene 
of honor. Necessity obliged them 
to pass through Ellena's funeral cham- 
ber; and as they entered, the most 
awful sensations chilled their hearts. 
The walls and floor were covered with 
black; seven white wax tapers burned 
on a table close to the bed, the furni- 
ture of which was black, ornamented 
with white ribbon, underneath its ca- 
nopy lay the cold form of Ellena; a pall 
covered her remains, now arrayed in 
sepulchral robes. When the ladies 
reached her couch, they fell on their 
Jinees, and offered a prayer to the 
throne of grace, for the repose of 
her soul, and then formed a group, 
which composed an interesting picture. 
Imagine you see the little trembling 
party in the centre of a cold damp 
chamber, decorated with all the so- 



138 AtEXENA; OR THE 

lemnity of the grave, in the fore ground, 
tliree incomparable female figures 
leaning over one of the loveliest Torms 
the breath of life had ever animated,, 
while the pearly tears of unfeigned^ 
sorrow bedewed their cheeks. Be- 
tween light and shade, a monk in the 
attitude of a man lost in profound 
thought; his waist encompassed by a 
leather belt furnished wiih a rosary; 
and in the back ground, a cavalier 
leaning against a pillar's shaft, wrapped 
in a friar's gown ; his bosom decorated 
with an embroidered vest and the po- 
lished hilt of a bright stiletto, while 
grief and pity contend which shall 
best express his feelings. 

' Come, come,' said Bernardo, as he 
started from his reverie, ' haste, haste, 
lest you share Ellena's cold pillov// 
For a moment they heard him not ; an 
unaccountable attraction, fixed all their 
faculties; Lord Mortimer threw him- 
self on his knees, then caught the beau- 
teous hand of the murdered novice, and 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 130 

imprinted on it a warm^ fervent kiss of 
affection; of regret,, and another on 
those lips that once breathed ambrosial 
sweetness; imagination cannot paint, 
or fancy form^ a more interesting ob- 
ject; his lordship's tears fell thick on 
her bosom^ that then ceased to heave, 
but was as fair as the snow on the 
mountain. Alexena clasped her clay 
cold form to her heart, and sobbed 
audibly, while the other females v^ere 
not less distressed. It was with diffi- 
culty Bernardo forced them from this 
melancholy scene, but at length their 
fears prevailed^ and they hurried to 
the door which opened on the rocks. 
They passed through many a dripping 
cold damp vault, cell, and chamber, 
lit only here and there by solitary 
torches, before they arrived at those 
gates which opened to liberty; at 
length they reached them, Bernardo 
laid his liberating hand on the mas- 
sive bars, and already removed two 
of the three that enclosed them in this 
iivins: tomb. At that moment Lord 



140 ALEXENA ; OR TUB 

Mortimer spied a figure move through 
the gloom in the distant extremityof th» 
Yault, and pointed it out to his friend, 
who made a sign, and they softly dre\T 
their daggers ; it approached — every 
instant his lordship expected to hearth* 
women scream; if they did, all were un- 
done ; it still moved forward, at length 
stopping within a few yartls, they 
were convinced it discovered them. 
Bernardo groaned aloud. Lord Morti- 
mer sprang forward to seize the intru- 
der, or put it to death, if not already 
an inhabitant of the other world ; but 
he had not advanced two paces, until 
the subject of their fears, sunk senseless 
on the earth. She was a young and 
lovely woman; his lordship lifted her, 
and was the next moment beside 
Bernardo. 'Unbolt the gale, quickly,' 
said he, 'and we are yet free;' 
his words were not thrown awav, the 
last ponderous bolt was withdrawn, 
and the scene changed ; the door was 
pulled too, and they fled for their 
lives. 



teASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 141 

The lady who had alarmed them in 
the dungeon, was soon made sensible 
of her happy reverse of fortune ; tears 
of joy ran down her pale cheeks, as she 
nimbly ascended the precipices. In 
a few minutes they arrived at th« 
bridge, where Rourke and Albert waited 
with six English servants, well mounted 
and armed, besides their guides. They 
were first alarmed at the approach of 
so many^ though his lordship, at Ber- 
nardo's request, had ordered two ad- 
ditional horses, the latter having pre- 
viously resolved to save Evelene and 
her friend. The ladies were soon placed 
in their saddles. Lord Mortimer and his 
attendants then mounted, Bernardo 
was accommodated with Albert's horse, 
who sat behind the guide, and they 
were about to move forward, when 
Hourke fell on his knees, and with up- 
lifted hands, exclaimed : ' Heaven be 
' praised, my master is safe, but from 
' my soul, I wish that the devil may fly 
'away with abbot and abbess, monks, 
* nuns, racksj wheels^ gibbets^ dun- 



142 alexena; on the 

' geons^ cold vaults, clammy cells^ and 
' afterwards toss yon house topsy 
' turvy on the heads of his late tor- 
'ments;' then bouncing upon his 
saddle, led the way, while the rest 
followed at as quick a pace as they 
could proceed at, for some time, and 
when they gained the level, galloped 
towards Valladolid, as fast as their 
animals could carry them. 



CHAP. IX. 

*' In Winter's tedious nights, sit by the fire, 
■With good old folks ; and let them tell thee tales, 
Of woeful ages, long ago betid; 
And 'ere thou bid good night, to quit their grief, 
Tell thou the lamentable fall of me. 
And send the hearers weeping to their beds.'' 

Richard II* 

Jl hey dashed along in safety to the 
first stage, and then only stopped to 
change their monastic dress, for com- 
fortable disguises that the careful 
Albert had in readiness Day-light 
found them twenty-five miles from tlie 



GASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. li$ 

^conventj and they had great hopes 
their CvScape was not even then dis- 
covered. Bernardo's absence would 
be the first noticed^, and it was likely 
several hours would intervene before 
his non-appearance should either 
excite alarm or suspicion, as he was 
obliged to attend the sick, and those 
'who were punished with the torture, 
in both the monastery and convent, 
which communicated with each other. 
The ladies were much fatigued, par- 
ticularly Evelene and Arabel, in con- 
sequence of their long fast ; and Vir- 
ginia, who had alarmed them at the 
door of the dungeon, was still more 
exhausted. When Lord Mortimer 
could distinguish the features of the 
latter, he found she was very lovely, 
as well as very young ; and they had 
not proceeded twenty miles before 
she seemed to have forgotten her late 
deplorable situation, from her many 
and repeated sallies of wit and merri- 
ment. Rourke, who rode close behind, 
finding tliat she enlivened the drooping 



144 alexena; or the 

spirits of the other ladies, and observing 
his master evidently obliged by her 
exertions, frequently exclaimed, though 
he did not comprehend one word she 
Baid, * God save the pretty gob on't, 
and mushen, merry be your heart/ 
Bernardo heightened the gaiety of the 
whole party, by declaring all danger 
from pursuit was over, but advised 
they should not go to Valladolid ; Met 
us/ said he, ' cross the Pyrennees, by 
' Pampeluna, enter France, and from 
' Bayonne embark for England.' This 
advice was instantly adopted by Lord 
Mortimer, as being the most secure, 
and it gave infinite satisfaction to 
the ladies, particularly to Arabel, who 
was a native of that country. 

At eleven o'clock in the forenoon, they 
stopped at a pleasant village, where 
they were regaled with cream, dried 
fruits, and excellent bread; hunger 
gave a high zest to their repast, and 
the certainty of their safety, added 
comfort to it. Lord Mortimer sat 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 145 

down^ surrounded by beauty ; Alexena 
appeared more charming than ever; 
she was dressed in a green habit, like 
those worn by the ladies of the coun- 
try ; the others in the dress of at- 
tendants. Evelene had lost nothins: of 
the beauty by which she was so much 
distinguished at Madrid, while Arabel, 
her young and delicate companion of 
the cave, tliough not quite fifteen, 
promised fair to be one of the finest 
women of the age, and Virginia, all 
mirth, gaiety, and good humoun 
claimed a large share of loveliness, and 
was a favorite with them all. Miss 
Hastings, whom, in future, we shall 
call Mrs. Hastings, loved them wi(h the 
aflfection of a parent, and always, w hen 
speaking to them, used the endearing 
epithet of my dear daughter ; and her 
fond solicitude was gratefully repaid 
by every attention in their power to 
bestow. None beheld them with 
greater satisfaction than Rourke, who 
now and then plucked Albert by the 
sleeve, and, in a kind of half whisper, 

VOL. I. G 



14G ALEXENA; OR THE 

said, 'arrah, did you ever see snck 
' beauties — bim my soul they desarve 
' to be queens, and there's the four 
' kingdoms of Leinster, Ulster, Muii- 
' ster, and Connaught, would fit them 
' as neat as a peeleen fits a preaty ; 
' but for all that don't be after thinking 
' that the blaze of their beauty wouhl 
' make my fair counti'ywomen hido 
^ their nose in a corner ; no such thing, 

* my jewel, for there is Biddy Mulwor- 
' nagh, of Ballyporeen, has two cheeks 
' like two suns, and every eye in her head 
' as big and as blue as a plover's e^^ ; 
'it's true she has no edification, but 
' meaby if she was benefactered with as 
' much care, her coat would sit as well, 

* without disparagement to these mur- 
' neens of the world, who, God show- 
' ers blessens on, thicker and faster than 
'meal falls from a hopper.' — 'Amen!' 
said Albert, laughing, ' and Heaven 
bless Biddy.' — *^ Oh! you may laugh/ 
replied Tom, rather displeased, ' but 
you were not altogether so full of your 
fun this time yesterday.' 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 147 

When Lord Mortimer and bishappjj 
friends had finished their repast, Ber- 
nardo urged their immediate depar- 
ture, representing- the imprudence of 
delay; and on the ladies expressing 
some rehictance, in consequence of 
their fatigue, he begged to know had 
they ah-eady forgotten the dangers from 
which they so recently escaped, ' Now/ 
he continued, 'if you have no particu- 
' lar inclination to be buried or roasted 
' alive; to have your bones broken piece- 
' meal on the wheel, or drawn asunder 
^ on the rack, I advise you to pursue 
' your journey with all possible expe- 
* dition, until you reach Pampeluna, 
' where you may rest a few days in 
' perfect security/ Bernardo's advice 
was attended to, and they proceeded 
without halting, except at night, until 
they arrived in the neighbourhood of 
Estella, on the Pyrennees, about seven 
leagues from the above city, wliere 
they enjoyed a few days repose. 

As it was summer, the evenings were 
ilelightful, and they often vvander&d 

g2 



148 ALEXENA ; OR TlVE 

Among' the mountains, to enjoy the 
cool shade of the myrtle groves that 
skirted their sides; then each told a (ale, 
or sung a glee, to enliven the evening 
hour. Oil ona of those excursions, 
being fatigued with the length of their 
walk, and the roughness of the paths 
among the precipices, they sought a 
recess in an adjacent rock, where they 
might indulge their weary limbs, with a 
few moments repose. They w ere scare® 
seated, ere Virginia, with her usual 
vivacity, said, ' I find a particular wish 
to hear myself prate, what think you : 
shall I relate how 1 had the misfortune 
to be confined in the Dominican con- 
vent? — you all appear to be dull, and 
I am resolved either to cure you by 
exciting your attention, or kill you 
quite with tire sad story of my life.' — 
' Ve vil, much glad to hear Mortimer, 
rent ve,' said Alexena. ' Oh ! yes,' 
replied his lordsliip, mimicking, ^very 
much glad, particularly if she could give 
the relation in such excellent English 
as you speak/ Alexena smiled, and r;as 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAKCO. ]49 

about to reply, when Virginia began 
her narrative in those words ; — 



I was born in the capital of this 
kino:dom, and recollect little of my 
early infancy, except the death of my 
mother, after which melancholv event, 
I was at the age of six years sent to a 
convent in Valencia, to be educated by 
my annt, who was the superior of it; 
and made considerable progress under 
her care, until 1 attained my fourteenth 
year, when I began to dislike a mo- 
nasiic life, which may appear rather 
strange, as I knew no other world, 
having never been forther than the 
convent garden. However, in a house 
adjoining my prison, a cavalier resided, 
who was both young and handsome, and 
one morning, as 1 was gathering flow- 
ers, he chanced to see me from a lat- 
tice ; my veil had fallen off, so he was 
gratified with a full view of my face, 
and iiistan<ly expressed his satisfaction. 
Being alone, I Tentured to look up, and 



y. 



]50 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

beheld Don Carlos standing at the 
\vindo'-»v ; I directly snatched up my veil, 
and was about to retire, but he con- 
jured me, for the Virgin's sake, to stay 
a few minutes; and I could not resist^, 
though I was aware of my imprudence. 
He then informed me, he had spent 
■whole weeks, nay months, patiently 
watching for that blessed opportunity, 
and then threw down a letter, without 
asking my permission ; what could I do 
but take it? to leave it tiiere until found 
by some of the nuns, might be attended 
with fatal consequences, not only to 
Don Carlos, but myself; to return it was 
utterly impossible, and to deny that I 
had a strons: inclination to see what it 
contained, would be untrue. I therefore 
placed it in my bosom, which gave my 
beau great satisfaction, and after he 
had extorted a promise that I would 
attend in the same place, and at the 
same hour, the following morning, he 
kissed his hand, and I retired, lest I 
should be observed by any of the 
sisters ; then flew with impatience to 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 151 

my cell, to enjoy in solitude the letter 
of Don Carlos, which was a little vo- 
lume of lave, of kisses, of sighs, and 
of tears, accompanied with a lively 
description of dances, balls^ entertain- 
ments, plays, galas, routes, and mas^ 
querades, which he had himself enjoy- 
ed. I read this letter asrain and a^rain, 
and it is unnecessary to say, that it made 
me heartily sick of the convent's dull 
routine ; I wished for the morrow, that I 
might again see Carlos, whom, I believe, 
I then began to like greatly ; and next 
morning I was sure to be under the 
lattice at the appointed hour. In a 
moment after he appeared, and let down 
by a cord, a book and another letter; 
this last was like the former, but with 
this difference, that in it he proposed 
assisting me to escape, and intreating 
me to marry him, as the only remedy to 
avoid taking the veil, which my father 
somotiine before had commanded me 
to prepare for. I pretended to be an- 
gry at tliis hasty declaration, and left 
the garden apparently displeased, (hen 



' 152 ALEXENA; on THB 

- retired to my cell to read the bookj and 
once more perused my letter^ liaving 
read it again. I cannot say what ailed 
me, but 1 began to cry, and the same 
minute lauglicd at my folly; now think- 
ins: on Don Carlos — then lookin"*on the 
/ /• book — trying to read it with the wrong 
•^^'^^^'^'SidiQ up — repeating the words, — ' I, a 
- C^ iAji ■^vife!' i s it me! — then laughed — a^ain 
%^^l£^^^ thousfht on my father's cruel command, 
iiT ?4<t^t^-and suddenly found myself drowned in 
tears; after some time, being more corrt- 
posedjltried to read, and having perused 
a few pages, my attention was attracted, 
and 1 soon ])ecame delighted, as it was 
the first production of the kind 1 had ever 
seen ; in every page tliere were beautiful 
ladies, magicians, enchanters, giants, 
dwarfs, huge castles, and love- sick 
kniohts, chained to tovverino^ battlements, 
expiringby the unkindness of their flinty- 
hearted mistresses ; in short, I fancied 
mysdi a damsel in distress, and I believe 
this forwarded the suit of Don Carlos 
1 ^y/ri^ more than fifty letters >yould.have done. 
I deterffiined to see this man next day, 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 15S 

and give him some faint hopes — Poor 
soul ! he had been in the dismals from 
the moment I vanished, and almost 
flew out of the casement on seeing me 
again. He was as impudent as ever, 
and so tormenting, that in less than 
a month, he absolutely persuaded me to 
consent to be his. The moment I ^-ave it, 
he made preparations for our flight, and 
the third night after, by the assistance 
of a rope ladder, I found myself in his 
apartment, and in a few minutes more, 
on the back of a spirited courser on the 
road to Orgiva, from which place we 
intended to sail for Italy, and there re- 
main until such time as my father should 
be reconciled. Don Carlos' sister ac- 
companied us, and in less than an hour, 
the proud city of Valencia was some 
miles behind. The Fates, however, were 
not long propitious; I was missed at 
early matins, and instantly pursued. 
We were overtaken v.ilhin a few miles 
of the sea-port, and after a desperate, 
though fruitless, resistance, on the part 
©f Don Carlos, in which he was left 

G 5 



]54: ALEXENA; OR, THE 

senseless on the road, his sister and I 
were led back towards Valencia — she to 
mourn the loss of the best of brothers, 
and I to pine away the remainder of 
my wretched existence, in the prison 
from which I so recently congratulated 
myself I had escaped. For the first 
day we travelled without interrup- 
tion, but on the second we met my 
father, who had an order from the 
abbess to the officers, to restore me to 
him should I be captured. This they 
instantly complied with, and the fol- 
lowing- moment I was surrounded bj 
my father's domestics, who watched 
me with more vigilance than they 
would have done, had I been a 
state prisoner. Immediately after the 
departure of the inquisitorial agents, 
my father reviled me in the bitterest 
terms, and swore he would instantly 
conduct me to the convent of Domini- 
cans, the harshest in the w^orld, where, 
at the expiration of my noviciate, I 
should be compelled to take the veil, 
and pass the remainder of my life in 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 155 

the most austere seclusion. On hearinir 
this dreadful sentence, I wept^ prayed^ 
and intreated, but all in vain ; notliiufj 
could soften him. So we travelled in 
silence towards Tortosa, where he had 
some business, and from that place I 
was to be conducted to the convent. 
On our arrival there, my father was 
surprised to find my uncle Oriso, and 
in a few minutes after, was overwhelm- 
ed with grief^ when informed his only 
son had died suddenly. Though I 
had never seen m.y brother, I was 
greatly shocked on hearing of his 
death, and from the agitation of both 
my body and mind, I became extremely 
ill, so much so, that 1 was despaired 
of. My father was in the greatest 
distress imaginable, as I was now his 
only child, and made compensation 
for his late severity, by his unre- 
mitting attention during the period of 
my illness. At length I began to re- 
cover, and was blest with the assur- 
ance, that I should never again enter 
a convent, except by my own desire, 
aod added to my happiness, by 



156 alexena; or the 

enquirlni^ the name and rank of my 
lover, and when he found Don Carlos 
was every way unobjectionable, he 
consented to bestow mv hand on him. 
should he have survived the cruelty of 
the inquisitors. About a month after 
my brother's death, my father was 
summoned to attend his majesty, with- 
out a moment's delay, and was 
obliged to leave me under the protec- 
tion of my uncle, as I was yet too 
weak to travel wiih tlie rapidity that it 
was necessary he should use, but pro- 
mised to follow him next day, by easy 
stages, to Madrid ; which place, how- 
ever, my uncle had previously resolved 
I should never see. I conceived he 
was the best of men, but we are all 
liable to be deceived by appearances. 
as under the mask of kindness he con- 
cealed the villain ; his attention, and 
pretended esteem, gradually gained 
my affection, and I conceived myself 
blest, by being so nearly allied to so 
worthy a man: sometimes he would 
pat m.e on the checks, and *Jij, I was 
the prettiest^ sweetest, finest, liveliest. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MATICO. 157 

and most agreeable little i>;irl in the 
universe; yet he could scarcely sup- 
press his joy, on seeing my father de- 
part, and leave me an easy, defenceless 
prey, which he resolved to make sure 
of as soon as possible, as I was the 
only surviving- obstacle between him 
and my father's vast possessio ns. 

About four hours after my parent 
left Tortosa, Don Oriso entered my 
apartment, with an open letter in his 
hand, and feigned sorrow on his coun- 
tenance; I felt alarmed, and begged to 
know had any new misfortune befallen 
our house? * There has, my dear Virgi- 
nia,' he replied, ' and I am sorry to be 
' the bearer of ill news. Your father's 
' horse stumbled, and fell with him, 
' about ten miles from this, and the con- 
^ seoiience is, he has received a severe 
' contusion on the head, though, happily, 
' not one that is likely to prove fatal; yet, 
' for fear of the worst, he has sent a ser- 
' vant for, and requires your attendance 
-* early to-morrow.' Judge my teelings 
'On the recital of this melan<:holy events 



358 alexena; or the 

I instantly proposed we should set out^ 
but my uncle beg-ged I would not 
expose my constitution to the night air, 
as he felt apprehensive it might cause 
a relapse, and added many other per- 
suasive arguments ; though at the same 
moment his agitation was visible, lest I 
should comply. However, as I urged 
our immediate departure, and became 
very unhappy, Don Oriso said, he could 
not oppose me any longer, and went 
out to order our horses. A little before 
twilight, we were on the road ; the 
feathered warblers had retired to seek 
repose in the leafy grove, save the 
nightingale, sweet melancholy song- 
stress of the night, who poured her 
plaintive tale on the airy breeze, that 
swept with gentle murmur the tops 
of the surrounding foliage. I lent an 
attentive ear as I passed the grove ; 
the hour was soothing to my soul, it 
was in unison with my feelings, and 
the grotesque figures, formed by the 
crimson clouds of eveniu!? on the 
dark shade of <he distant landscape, 
added to the beauty of the picture. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 159 

We travelled in silence^, I lamentins: 
my father's misfortune, and tortured 
vrith the painful remembrance of my late 
happiness ; my uncle riding by my side, 
building castles in the airy perspective 
of his imagination, with the fortune 
which should be his, as soon as I slept 
in the long silence of the tomb. It 
was about the solitary hour of one. 
when we stopped at a small hovel on 
a cross road to chans^e horses : while 
they were preparirig, I refreshed my- 
self with a short walk, and enjoyed the 
pure sea breeze ; the night was calm 
and lovely, all was silent, save the mur- 
muring of the distant waves, as they 
broke against the rocks. It was then 



the hour, 



The holy hour, when to the cloudless height 
Of yon starr'd concave, climbs the full orb'd moon. 
And to this nether world in solemn stillness 
Gives sign, that to the list'ning ear of Heaven, 
Religion's voice should plead ? The very babe 
Knows this, and 'chance awak'd, his little hands 
Lifts to the gods, and on his innocent couch 
Calls dowa a blessing."* 

Mjeyes were filled with tears of awful 

* Caractacug. 



160 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

love, and as 1 raised them towardis 
Heaven, I called down a blessing- on 
my j)arent, and fervently hesonght Al- 
mighty Providence, to look with pity on 
my helplessness, and if not yet too late, 
to restore Don Carlos to his Virginia. 
At this moment I heard myself called, 
and on reaching the spot where my 
attendants were standing, I inquired 
for my unclcj and was answered by 
a strange figure, that he had gone on a 
little before. I refused to move until 
he should be called back; but a horrid 
looking ruffian seized and placed me 
on horseback, then, with dreadful im- 
precations, threatened to assassinate me 
if I made the smallest noise or resist- 
ance. A full conviction of the terrors of 
my situation, and of Don Oriso's vil- 
lainy, instantly deprived me of motion, 
and I should have fallen from my horse, 
had I not been timely prevented by 
one of my uncle's inhuman attendants. 
T^eturning animation only served to 
aggravate my sorrow, and in an inex- 
pressible agony of soul, I called on 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 161 

my father and Don Carlos to assist, 
to rescue me, but was again threat- 
ened by the villains^ who forced me 
along at a quicker pace ; and the 
barren waste over which we travelled 
forbade a hope of relief I then in- 
treated the Father of Mercies^ to avert 
the gathering' storm which appeared 
ready to burst on my devoted head ; 
he heard my prayer^ and it was regis- 
tered in Heaven. ]My guards, in a 
short time, turned into a path that led 
directly to the sea coast., and we ar- 
rived at a gloomy old building, just as 
the sun had illumined with his first 
trembling rays the tops of the sur- 
rounding cliffs. It was much decayed 
by the all-withering hand of time, the 
left wing having already been nearly 
level with the dust; there, the pale 
father of destruction might have erect- 
ed his throne of terro.s, it was so bare, 
so barren, and so desolate, in front; 
the sea spread boundless and unfa- 
thomable, And_ scarce was the weary 
eye ever relieved by the glimpse of a 



162 ALEXENA; on THE 

distant sail; it stood in the entrance 
of a deep valley^ screened by " rocks 
on rocksj piled as if by magic spell/' 
and there my conductors stopped, and 
Mere admitted by a wretched old wo- 
man, cross, crooked, and wrinkled^ more 
by ill-nature than by age; her face was 
an index on which you might read 
her disposition ; and I was scarce suf- 
fered to aliirht, before she drove me 
into a dark miserable apartment, with- 
out fire or furniture, save a broken 
chair and a half rotten mattress, whick 
lay mouldering on the damp floor. I 
besought her not to leave me in that 
cold chamber to perish, but intreaties 
were vain; she gruffly refused, and in 
a harsh and squeaking voice, told me 
my troubles were near a conclusion ; 
then hobbled to the door, and securely 
locked it after her. Dreary was the 
scene by which I was surrounded ; left 
in the solitude of a gloomj^ and ex- 
tensive chamber, feebly lit by one 
small grated window; the panes were 
broken, and the howling blast which 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 163 

guslied through them^ agitated the 
moth-eaten tapestry that hung rudely- 
suspended on the walls; the grim 
figures of which seemed to frown on me, 
and served to increase the terrors of 
my mind, ah'eady enervated by fatigue ; 
every instant I expected death, as it 
was a place fit for the commission of 
'' midnight's pale murders/' Hopeless, 
and stupid with despair, I threw my- 
self on the mattress, and gazing, wan- 
dered over the grotesque figures on the 
hangings, 'till fancy almost gave them 
animation. I wished, yet feared, to 
withdraw my eyes, lest the gigantic 
forms should start from the canvass, 
and became terrified on observing a 
particular spot shake, which directly 
fronted the window ; however, on reflec- 
tion, I conceived there might be a door 
behind it, through which I might eflfect 
my escape; delighted at the idea, I 
crossed the room, and hastily lifted the 
drapery; but imagine my consternation, 
on seeing in anitchin the wall, a bundle 
©f linen, and a poinard stained with 



164 ALEXENA ; OK THE 

blood ; I ventured to lift the latter, 
which was rusty from the lime it had 
lain in its place of concealment^ and 
carried it to the light, where I dis- 
covered the name Oriso dc Sileno, en- 
graven on its handle. — Oh! horror — 
my uncle ! — I let the curtain drop — 
my bosom ceased to heave — -.1 stag- 
gcred_, and fell senseless on the floor. 

The sun cast his last rays into the 
chamber, before I could recal to my 
half distracted brain the recent scene ; 
ray head ached violently, and I suffered 
severely from a bruise which I received 
by falling against the old chair. i3eing 
weak, sick, hungry, and dry, it was 
with great difliculty I crawled to my 
wretched couch, where I impiously 
wished for death to put a period to my 
misfortunes. My spirits were very 
weak, and I sunk into a kind of slum- 
ber, from which I was roused by the 
sound of a footstep, and on raising my 
head, I conceived I saw a figure move 
through the dusk towards the door; 



CASTLE OP SAXTA MARCO. IG3 

trembling and agitated, 1 could scarce 
summon courage to address this un- 
welcome intruder ; to my question, a 
voice replied, 'it is I, lady; lam the 
5 owner of this old building, and you 
•^are entrusted to my care; I came into 
' the room with some bread and fish — 
' (he only food which can be procured 
' hereabouts — and was about to retire 
•^when 1 disturbed you.' I inquired 
w^here he had left my scanty meal : — * on 
' the old chair, lady ; and I shall come 
'to-morrow with some venison, if it can 
* be procured.' I thanked him, and as 
he retired, I shuddering, listened to 
his receding footsteps; and as he 
passed the window, through which the 
moon's pale rays played faintly, they 
cast a sicknin^- liijht on his visaije, 
stained with many a foul and nameless 
crime. The door was once more 
locked, and all again was silent, save 
the thunder that bellowed at a distance, 
and the raging sea that hurled its angry 
billows against the adjacent rocks. 
The night soon became awfully dark. 



166 alexena; ok the 

the rain fell in torrents, and the stornak 
shook the building to its very founda- 
tions; now and then the pale red liHit- 
ning swept through the chamber, and 
by its mazy windings, dispersed for a 
moment the gloom by which I was 
surrounded. I used every exertion to 
fright the drowsy god, but in vain; 
fatigue had administered too strong an 
opiate, and, notwithstanding my strug- 
gles, I fell asleep; it is true, sleep 
would have been most desirable from 
the moment I entered my prison, had 
not the idea of murder, and the wretch 
who had entered my apartment, haunted 
my imagination. I suspected him, 
his intentions, and the food which he 
brought ; the last I resolved not to 
touch, lest it should have been poi- 
soned. Sound was the sleep that locked 
my exhausted faculties, and scarce had 
Somnus sealed my weary eyes, ere my 
inhuman keeper returned, to execute 
his bloody purpose ; he entered softly, 
but had then nothing to fear, for it 
would have been a matter of much 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. l^f 

-difficulty to disturb me. When he 
entered, he put off his heavy shoes, 
and cautiously advanced into the apart- 
ment ; he drew the fatal dag-g^er, and 
proceeded on tip-toe to the spot where 
I lay; having reached it, he gently bent 
one knee, and stretched forth his tawny 
neck — beneath lay his unresisting vic- 
tim. The murderous weapon was 
raised, but the moon, sickning at the 
black deed about to be perpetrated, 
withdrew behind a sable cloud, and 
blushed at man's brutality, leaving the 
vile assassin in almost impenetrable 
darkness. He turned his wild and im- 
patient eye towards the starry concave, 
and muttered a curse at this momentary 
disappointment : however, the twink- 
iins: liirht of the unkind stars, served 
to shew the robe that covered my bo- 
som, and he delayed a moment to re- 
move it ; this also ho effected, then, 
for the last time, pointed the pitiless 
steel — (all the man now fled, and an 
inhuman devil assumed his form,)— 
and nerved the arm that aimed a 



168 alexena; or the 

blow at my heart ; the motion was 
made to strike, but (hat instant he fell 
a corpse at my feet. A ball, directed 
by a lover's hand, passed swift as 
lightning through his heart ; the death- 
dealing tube rattled on the floor, while 
I, amazed, started, screaming, from my 
sleep, and fled, terror-struck, to the 
door, where I sunk senseless into the 
arms of my Carlos. 

As I revived, he exclaimed, 'oh! my 

* love, my soul's joy, let us hasten from 
' those regions of sorrow, for a curse 
' rests on this house ; not without un- 
' utterable toil have I again found you, 
' and at what a time too, when the 
' poinard of the assassin was levelled at 
' your life ; how I came here, I will re- 
' late hereafter; let us now hasten to a 
' place of safety, while we have yet the 

* power.' He then led me down a dark 
tairs, through a long hall, out of the 

mansion, and at a trifling distance, 
had a trusty servant with horses in 
waiting, which we instantly mounted, 
and galloped for some miles^ as fast as 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 1G9 

our poor animals could carry us. 
When we conceived ourselves safe 
from pursuit, we slackened our pace, 
to deliberate on what course it were 
best to pursue^ and resolved to fasten 
to Madrid, being now certain of my 
fathers protection, and proceeded in 
safety as far as a little house on the 
common, within half a mile of the 
monastery of Benedictine monks, and 
within two of the Dominican convent, 
where, to my inexpressible grief, we 
stopped to sup, and procure fresh 
horses. Don Carlos went to the stable, 
and a moment after his servant came 
to say, Uhat fresh animals could not be 
'had, and that we should be obliged to 
' travel with the former : one of these are 
' lame Signiora, and my lord is gone to 

* see the shoe taken off, as he would not 
' trust me, for fear of delay .' ' How far is 

* it to the smith's?' said I : — ' about a 
' quarter of a mile down the road, 
"^Signiora; you need not be uneasy, for 

^' my lord will be here immediately.' I 
then sent him to hasten Don Carlos, as 

VOL. I. H 



/^r^ 



170 alexena; or the 

supper wailed, but he had not left the 
house two minutes, before it was filled 
with armed men, who instantly seized, 
and conveyed me to the Dominican 
convent. Thus had the accidental 
lameness of the horse rendered me 
miserable, and, I fear, the wretches sur- 
prised my Carlos, for I have never 
heard of him since. In a few horn's 
I was conveyed before the abbess, who 
pretended to compassionate my suffer- 
ings; and it was not till after the con- 
clusion of a long' lecture, I understood 
my uncle had been at the convent, and 

, informed her that I was a professed nun, 
who had broken my vows, for which 
crime, he abandoned me to the rigour 
of the clmrch, ^ You are,' said the 
abbess, addressing me, ' to be tried for 
' this heinous ofil^nce to-morrow nioht, 
' at twelve o'clock, and if you have any 
* defence to make, prepare it quickly; 
'I shall order pen, ink, and paper ; 

/write the names of 3'our witnesses, 
' and ihoy shall be summoned.* — 'Poor 
wretch,' .she continued *■ what ca n they 



CASTLE or SANTA MARCO. 171 

* avail you, when your crime is already 
' proved by numbers within these walls.' 
I was struck motionless with horror, 
and in a few nninutes found myself in 
a dark cell, where I was left to medi- 
tate on all the terrors of approaching 
ileath. 

The hour arrived too soon ; at eleven 

^ext night, I was conducted into a 

gloomy chamber hung- with black, in 

the middle of which there was a table, 

at which the abbess sat, with the prior 

of the Dominicans on the right hand, 

and two old nuns on the left. There 

was little ceremony, as in compliment 

to my connexion, my trial was what is 

called a private one, it being the wish 

of those good souls to hide my shame 

from the world. On bein"; led before 

my judges, the prior read a deposition 

of my uncle Oriso, and of two of his 

attendants, which stated, I had escaped 

from a convent of the order of St. 

Dominick, situated on the confines of 

Portugal, and lived in infamy with Don 

h2 



T72 ALEXENA : on THE 



Carlos. This, of course, I denied, and 
related with truth and accuracy every 
occurrence of my life, to which they 
listened with the utmost patience ; and 
when I had finished, the prior rose to 
pass the dreadful sentence,without even 
making a single observation on what I 
had said. The abbess drew her veil 
close, and the nuns crossed their hands 
on their bosoms, almost petrified with 
awe. He then raised his voice, and 
pronounced these words : Hija vasotros 
sufrireis aqui, pero grandes son las 
mercedes que Dios hace a los pecadores* 
They then exhorted me to repent, and 
make good use of the few moments I 
had yet to live, and instantly after re- 
tired. My imagination was then be- 
ifrildered, and 1 began to hope what I 
heard was a dream, when two horrid- 
looking ruffians hurried me to an ad- 
joining cell, where they bound my feet, 
and dragged me to the eilge of a pe- 
destal, which they removed, and dis- 

* " Daughter, you shall suffer here ; but great is 
''•the mercy which God conferii upon sinners." 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 173- 

covered the mouth of a dark yawning' ' 
pit. I guessed their intentions.and made 
tlie vaulty cave echo with my screams. 
One of the executioners drew his stiletto, 
— I trusted, for the purpose of silencing 
me for ever; and I wished it, when I be- 
held the horrid maw of the gaping 
abyss, which was partially revealed by 
the bickering light of the glaring torch 
that he held over it. ' Oh ! in mercy, kill 
' me/ I exclaimed, 'ere you consign me 
* to this tomb of terrors/ '^I cannot,' said 
this messenger of death, 'for though my 
' compassion prompts me to comply with 
'your request, prudence forbids it, as my 
' life would pay the forfeit of my lenity.' 
The death-peal now rolled through 
those caverns of misery, and I felt it 
rung the fiat of my fate, and announced 
the conviction by a wild cry of despair^ 
while the pallid and ghastly looks of 
the executioners seemed to say, they 
had already loitered too long. One of 
them held me, and the other wound my 
veil round my hands; then lifted my 
fainting form over the dark vaultj 



J74 ALEXEXA ; OR TfIB 

and both exclaiming, ' Heaven have 
mercy !' — let me fall headlong from their 
grasp into the gulph of death. When 
they heard the shock below, they placed 
the trap-door in its former position, and 
retired. I remained insensible for a 
considerable time, from the bruise, and 
a deep wound on my head ; but awaked 
too soon to the horrors of my situation ; 
on attempting to move, I found myself 
lying on the cold and lifeless corpse of 
some wretched victim, which, from its 
decayed state, must have remained there 
a considerable time. This trying mo- 
ment was, however, compensated for, 
by the timely assistance of a good sister, 
who almost immediately entered my 
tomb, and removed me to a cell which 
communicated with it, where she dressed 
my wound, and brought me food every 
night ; I was also supplied with linen, 
and other necessaries, until two days 
before our escape, when she disconti- 
nued her visits, and I am yet unac- 
quainted with the reason. Necessity, 
at length, urged me to enter the long 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. ITSr^ 

vaulty avenue^ through a sliding- pannel, 
with the secret of whicli Madeline had 
made me conversant; it bein^ imper- 
ceptible to the eye of a partial observer, 
being formed in the wall, and painted 
the colour of the stones. I roamed 
through the passage in searcli of food, 
for the want of which I was in aijonv, 
but neither could, nor dare, make my 
wretchedness known ; and I was aU 
most without hope, when I saw you ; 
then, conceiving I was discovered by 
some of the inhuman officers of tlie 
institution, I fainted, and you already 
know what followed. 

Here Virginia concluded, and her tale 
added interest to her beauty. As it was 
then almost dark. Lord Mortimer and 
bis friends returned to their rustic hotel, 
to enjoy the comfortable warmth of a 
sparkling fire, and feast on'thc game, 
procured from the adjacent mountains. 



176 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

CHAP. X. 

*' There is a tide in the affairs of men. 

Which, taken at the flpod, leads on to fortune. 

On such a full sea are we now afloat ; 

And we must take the current when it serves. 

Or lose our ventures." 

J Julius C-esar, 

v/N reluming towards the inn, they 
observed a considerable crowd gather- 
ed round a strange figure, who was 
haranguing them in an odd kind of 
gibberish. Lord Mortimer felt some- 
what alarmed at seeing so many people, 
and sent Rourke to inquire the mean- 
ing of it; in a moment he returned, 
with word, ' that a fortune-teller was 
' amusing the peasant girls, by giving 
* them a sketch of theirfuture lives. And 
' I would be glad to know,' said Rourke, 
' what time we shall find ourselves in 
'Hollywood-Castle; he shall have a 
' piece of a dollar if he can tell me that.' 
' Send him after us,' said his lordship, 
' that we may be able to judge of his 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 177 

' abilities^ and if not a very dull rogue, 
' it is possible he may afford some 
' amusement. What say you, my fair 
' friends? will you not be rejoiced to hear 
' the day and hour you are to have 
^ husbands ?' ' Oh ! yes, let us hear 
^ him instantly/ said Virginia, ' there is 
' a possibility he can tell whether Carlos 
'yet lives.' Lord Mortimer smiled at 
her simplicity, and shortly after they 
reached the house, Rourke announced 
the diviner; he was dressed in a green 
baize cloak, a belt of red leather 
round his waist, a kind of helmet on 
his head, a large black patch over one 
eye, and the lower part of his face co- 
vered with thick brown hair. When he 
made his obeisance, his lordship re- 
quested to know his name and pro- 
fession ; to which he replied, ' my name 
' is Almanarazibub, known in every 
' province of Spain, as well as in every 
' part of Africa ; I can tell things 
' past, present, and to come, and you 
' are welcome to make tlie trial.' — 'Me 
' don't like him, he be not good,' said 

H 5 



178 ALEXEXA; OR THE 

Alexena in English. ' Oh ! ho !' observ- 
ed his lordship, 1 suppor-e you think 

* he i8 a devil^ even before you hear him 
' speiik.' * Come, friend, come, I shall 
' put you to the proof, by begging you 

* will inform me in whose presence you 
' are at present.' ' Certainly,* replied 
Almanarazibub — ' you are called Lord 

* Mortimer — this. Lady Alexena — this, 

* Virginia'— and soon until he had named 
them all. His lordship then felt far from 
comfortable, an<l was almost convinced 
they were discovered by the Dominican 
officers, but resolved to ask another 
question, and said, ' Signior, has any 

* thing particular occurred to any of us 
' within these two months past?' 'Yes! 
' you were in a dungeon not three weeks 
' ago, and are only now flying from your 
' pursuers.* ' Dear me,* exclaimed the 
innocent Virginia, ' then you know we 
' have recently escaped from the Domi- 
' nican convent.' This abrupt and 
thoughtless confession excited consi- 
derable alarm ; but the artless girl 
proceeded without being aware of her 



CTASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 179 

intliscretion, by saying-, ' Pray, as 

* you seem so well acquainted v.ith 
' our affairs, tell me what has become 
' of a cavalier, named Don Carlos de 
' Herman? is he livinsf or dead? — but, 
' oh I if the latter, don't tell me so, or 

' I will instantly ' She paused, 

and blushed deeply, while the starting 
tear trembled in her eye. ' You would 
die with grief, Signiora,' observed Al- 
manarazibub. ' What ! will you re- 

* ward me handsomely, if I restore this 

* Don Carlos in half an hour?' ' Reward 

* you !' cried Virginia ; ' I will give you 
^ every thing I have in this world.' 
' Indeed ! — well, 1 take you at your 
' word ; you are now mine for ever,' 
and then clasped Virginia to his bo- 
som. Lord Mortimer's eyes sparkled 
with indisrnation, as he laid his hand 
on his sword ; and had not the beard 
of the soothsayer fallen on the floor, 
it is probable he would have shaved it 
off, and the head along with it; but a 
wild scream from Virginia, proved that 
Don Carlos himself stood before her. 



180 ALEXENA; OR THE 

Words are inadequate to express the 
satisfaction of all the joarties, at this 
most unexpected meeting ; the bosom 
of the lo\e!y Vir<jinia oerflowed with 
the iiigh tide of her feelings, and she 
momentarily sunk under the pressure; 
a shower of tears, however, relieved her 
almost bursting heart, and when once 
composed, was the happiest of the 
happy. De Herman was a cavalier of 
the first address; good-natured, brave, 
generous, and open hearted— and truly 
deserved her. After mutual cong-'atu- 
lations, he related in as lew words as 
possible, what had occurred since his 
first separation from Virginia. 

You may remember he was left 
senseless on the read leading to Orgiva, 
by the inquisitorial officers; but a few 
moments after thev were out of si»;ht, 
some of his domestics, who had fled, 
returned, antl conveyed him to a little 
village, about a league from the place 
"where he had been wounded. When 
Ids wounds were examined, they were 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAIICO. 181 

neither deep nor dangerous, and in 
about a week, he was able to set out in 
pursuit of Virginia. He arrived at Tor- 
tossa. in disguise, and soon found she 
Nvas seriously indisposed, but dare not 
make himself known ; he contrived, 
however, to introduce himself to the 
physician, who gave a minute detail 
of the progress of her disorder, and of 
her happy restoration to convalescence. 
It was the doctor who informed him of 
her sudden departure from the town, 
and he set out in two hours after, at- 
tended by a servant, who led a horse, 
ready prepared with a lady's saddle, 
in case he should be so fortunate as 
again to rfescue her from the grasp of 
tyranny ; conceiving her father was 
conducting her to some dismal con- 
vent, where she should pine away the 
remainder of her existence in despair 
and wretchedness. 

When he reached the cabin on the 



182 ALEXEVA ; OR THE 

cross road, all powerful gold enabled 
him to trace her to her prison, where, 
with much difficulty, he obtained 
admission. On his entry, he heard 
voices in earnest conversation, in a 
distant part of the old building-, and 
groped his way through a decayed 
corridore, to a small room adjacent 
to that in which the persons were 
talking, and then overheard the 
bloody agent of Oriso, telling an old 
sorceress, who was governess of the 
fabric, the amount of the reward he 
was to have for despatching Virginia. 
After emptying a flask of wine, to 
the health of his employer, he flou- 
rished a dagger, and came forth 
from the apartment, with stern intent 
to commit the barbarous deed, and 
ascended" a crazy old stairs which led 
to her chamber. De Herman followed 
at a distance, with light steps and an 
agitated heart; and observed the as- 
sassin, as he softly unlocked (he door, 
look cautiously round, and cither 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 183 

listen or consider for a moment. Car- 
los stood in the dark shade of one of 
the columns that supported the roof, 
until the villain entered the room ; then 
drew a pistol from his belt, and pre- 
pared it ; being dark, it was with much 
difficulty he could distinguish his ob- 
ject, and at all events, did not wish to 
fire, lest he should not be in the apart- 
ment in which Virginia was confined. 
As he yet hesitated, he thought he saw 
the murderer stoop, but on advancing 
a few paces, accurately distinguished 
his extended arm, and being impressed 
with the conviction of his merciless 
intention, presented his fatal machine, 
and when the wretch again raised his 
arm to strike, the ball passed through 
his bosom : — he fell — Carlos staggered 
back, and the next moment Virginia 
was senseless in his arms. The report 
of the pistol did not alarm the old 
beldame, and they got clear off. 

About an hour before day-break, 
they arrived at the inn on the com- 



2S1 alexena; or the 

mon, but as Virginia has already re- 
lated what occurred there^ it is unne- 
cessary to repeat it. 

On the return of Don Carlos, it is 
impossible to describe his feelings. 
Anselmo used his utmost powers of 
persuasion, to induce him to fly, but 
in vain ; in fact, he was incapable, for 
in a few minutes, the shock deprived 
him of reason, and in that miserable 
condition he remained concealed many 
days. When sufficiently recovered, 
Anselmo informed him of Virginia's 
escape, and many other particulars, 
which were likely to assist him in 
finding her again, and he then set out 
in quest of her. As it is impossible to 
elude a lover's eye, when in pursuit of 
his mistress, he successfully traced her 
to the little town of Estella, in that 
disguise which he had the precaution 
to adopt ; and to avoid the possibility 
of discovery, sent his servant forward 
with the horses to Pampeluna, with 
orders to wait his arrival. ' You see'. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 185 

said Don Carlos, ' I have been able to 
' find yoUj notwithstanding the dis- 
' tance ; I therefore intreat you w ill 
' leave this place as soon as possible, 
' lest we again fall into the hands of 
' our ever to be dreaded foe.' The 
prudence of this caution was too ap- 
parent, not to meet with general ap- 
probation, and in pursuance of his 
advice, the following morning the entire 
party were on their journey. 

Don Carlos wrote an authentic state- 
ment of all the recent occurrences to 
Don Vasquez, who was then in Ma- 
drid, and promised to await his arrival 
in Pampeluna. 

The ladies left Estella with some 
regret, as they had spent a few days 
there most agreeably. Nothing mate- 
rial occurred during their toilsome wan- 
dering through the mountains, and 
after the fatigues and inconvenience 
always attendant on travelling, they 
arrived at the place of their destination 



186 alexexa; or the 

in safety, and in ten days after, Virgi- 
nia's fiither had the felicity of clasphig 
his Ions: lost daiurhter to his bosom, 
whom he had mourned as dead, and 
never expected to see again in this 
world. 

The day Don Vasquez received tlie 
letter of Don Carlos, he had Oriso ar- 
rested and conveyed to the Inqiiisiiion, 
where he was accused, but denied every 
charge until lie was put to the question, 
and then torture, and the certainty of 
Virginia's safety, induced him to make 
a full confession of his guilt. He ac- 
knovvleged that he poisoned his ne- 
phew, and contrived the plan by which 
he became master of Virginia's person, 
and his orders were even issued for her 
assassination, in the spot where many 
others had fallen the victims of his 
lust and cruelty. Then imagine liis 
surprise, when he arrived, on finding' 
the lifeless body of his iniquitous agent 
in her stead, and his wretched old 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAncO. 187 

mother howling over him ; the scene 
was not so terrilic, but he resolved to 
add to its horrors^ and instantly stabbed 
the luckless parent, and stretched her a 
lifeless corpse on the body of her son. 
An infuriated rage at Virginia's eu^ 
largementj was the cause of that dia- 
bolical act, and the nnoment after its 
perpetration, he was on his courser, on 
the road to the Donriinican convent; 
there he was certain of obtaining coun- 
cil and assistance from the abbess, who 
had long been a pander to his crimes^ 
and had received many of his munificent 
presents. She, the moment he arrived, 
desoatched her officers to the cottaije 
of Anselm.o, it being the usual rendez- 
vous of lovers, where, most unfortu- 
nately, they captured the object of 
Oriso's fears, and of his hatred. Every 
exertion was used to seize Carlos, but 
Anselmo's friendship saved him from 
certain, nay, inevitable destruction ; 
and when Oriso found the search had 
proved fruitless, he hastened to^Fadrid, 
where he deposed, that Carlos had 



1S8 ALEXENA; OR THE 

attacked and killed two of his attend- 
ants, and carried off Virginia, \Tho 
had been wounded, he feared, mortally^ 
by an accidental thrust from one of the 
combatants; but the fact was, he hoped 
the abbess had, indeed, despatched her 
before that hour. By this tale, he 
trusted his brother would be deceived, 
and Carlos proscribed. But Justice, 
though slow, seldom fails to punisli the 
votaries of crime. Oiiso was consigned- 
to the executioner^ when he conceived 
all possibility of detection was buried 
in the duns^eons of the Dominican coa^ 
vent. 

Thus lie fell, and deservedly so^ 
and the following morning Don Vas- 
qucz hastened on the wings of affec- 
tion, to his lovely daughter, and on his 
introduction to Don Carlos, thanked 
him in the liveliest terms of gratitude, 
for his disinterested love. ' You de- 
serve her,' said Don Vasquez, as he 
placed her fair hand within that of 
Pe Herman's, ' and may you be long 



CA8TLE OF SANTA MARCO. 1S9 

* happy in each other's affections.' Here 
the tears of joy rolled over his furrowed 
cheeks ; the lovers fell on their knees to 
receive his benediction, and poured 
forth the grateful effusions of their 
hearts, in thanks to him and their 
friends. Lord Mortimer and Bernardo, 
to whose exertions and kindness they 
were indebted for their present felicity. 
They now basked in the sunshine 
of fortune; the brightest prospects 
dawned on their young loves, and to 
add to their joy, Don Vasquez ap- 
pointed a day, not far distant, for the 
solemnization of their nuptials. 

The sun of the next morning had 
scarce blushed on the casement of 
Lord Mortimer's apartment, ere Don 
Carlos entered to announce the hour 
which was to make Viri^inia his for 
ever, accompanied with an intreaty, 
that his lordship would attend him at the 
joyous ceremony. On the morning of 
that day, Virginia and her happy Car- 
los, with the chief nobility of the city. 



190 altixena; or the 

proceeded to the principal churchy 
where those fond lovers received at the 
Hymeneal altar, the nuptial benedic- 
tion. The cannon thundered their ac- 
clamation?, and were answered by the 
shonts of the populace^ who had heard 
their .story. Don Vasquez ordered 
them a quantity of wine, to drink the 
bride's liealth, which added to their 
hilarity; every thing announced festi* 
vity ; rockets were shot among the 
starry clouds, and night seemed turned 
into day, by the variety and brilliancy 
of the illuminations. Don Vasquez 
had fitted up one of the finest houses 
in the city for that splendid occasion, 
in the gardens of which, temporary 
pavilions were erected, lit by a profusion 
of variegated lamps, in which splendid 
banquets were prepared, consisting of 
every delicacy that could please the 
taste, or delight the imagination, of the 
guests. In the chief of these pavilions, 
a throne was erected for the happy pair, 
under a canopy of crimson satin, trim- 
med with gold, and adorned with all that 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 191 

exquisite taste could bestow; it was 
illumined by crystal lustres and silver 
tripodsj pending from chains of the 
same metal, while the air was perfumed 
Avith the scent of orangeries, of flower- 
ing myrtles, and odoriferous plants; 
and the soft music of the gardens^ 
which was wafted on the breeze, dis- 
pelled the silence of the night, and gave 
enchantment to the scene. 

Carlos and Virginia did not remain 
long in their splendid tent; they soon 
grew weary of the pomp, aisd shortly 
after the first refresliments were served, 
joined in the mazy windings of the 
dance, which, on their appearance, v/as 
renewed with animation, before the door 
of their pavilion. Several days suc- 
ceeded each other, varied by some new 
delight; but, at length, Don Vasquez 
was obliged to prepare for his return 
to Madrid, where his daughter and 
son-in-law were to accompany him. 

When Ihc liour of parting drew 
nighj the grief of Alexena and Virginia 



I'93 ALEXfeNA ; OR THE 



proved the sincerity of their affec^ 
tions, while the bright gem of friend- 
ship started to the eye of Carlos, 
and trembled there, as he squeezed 
the hand of Lord Mortimer ; and when 
the travelling equipage of Don Vas- 
quez was announced, the ladies had 
to be forced from each other's arms. 
Virginia made Bernardo a present of 
five hundred crowns, and handsomely 
rewarded both Rourke and Albert. 
Their tears evinced their gratitude, as 
they blessed the beauteous bride, and 
Rourke swore, "^ if he ever should have 
' a child, be it son or daughter, he 
' would call it Virginia.' The parting 
was extremely painful to all, and they 
felt a melancholy satisfaction when 
it was over. Lord Mortimer accom- 
panied Carlos and his bride a few 
miles towards Madrid, and before they 
bade adieu, promised to correspond 
with each other as often as possible; 
and his lordship then hastened home, 
to prepare for the recommencement of 
his tedious journey. 



CAWLE OV SANTA MARCO. 195 

CHAP. XL 

' " Expectation stood in horror." 

Milton. 

Jr A M P E L U N A had no longer uny 
charms; Virginia was i^one, and with 
her fled the vivacity that was wont to 
enliven Alexena and her friends. They 
therefore set out next day for France, 
without feeling any thing like regret, 
and were attended by four stout troop- 
ers of Biscay, well recommended for 
their zeal, courage, and fidelity ; these, 
with Rourke, Albert, and the other 
servants, well mounted, armed, and 
accoutred, formed a formidable troop. 
Their little forces proceeded in the 
following order : — first, the guides, with 
two of the Biscayans, and two ser- 
vants; each furnished with a case of 
pistols in their belts, a sabre at their 
sides, and a kind of Spanish blun- 
derbuss slung across their shoulders, 
mounted on strong fleet horses; after 
them the ladies. Lord Mortimer^ an(i 

TOL. I. c 



J94 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

Bernardo; while the other troopere, 
Rourke, and the remainhig^ domestics, 
bronght up the rere. 

They were obliged to travel at aK 
easy pace, among' the windings of 
those stupendous mountains, which 
were overshadowed by immense pine 
forests, and excluded the view of every 
object, save the aspiring cliffs that 
rose towering above them, and w4iich 
varied the gloom of their solitary 
shades; now' and then the rough breeze 
swept their summits, and those of the 
surrounding precipices, with such dis- 
cordant grow ling, as frequently affright- 
ed the timid females. 

Arabel, while in Pampaluna, appeared 
very pensive, but now became gay and 
animated; more than once she named 
France with enthusiasm, and seemed 
to recollect her former enjoyments with 
Hbpleasure; she was then returning to 
her native country, where she hoped 

to see the friends of her infancy, and 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAIICO. 195 

t>ne, who was particularly dear — her 
beloved Theodore de Montoo:omeri r 
and the surrounding scenery was cal- 
culated to inspire such soothing hopes^ 
as those that warmed her ima<?;ination. 

They now reached a level spot, on 
^vhich they stood to admire the magnifi- 
cence of the scene thct widely spread in 
gay luxuriance beneath them ; over the 
top of the forests, that seemed sunk in 
the bosom of the mountains, spread in 
Avild confusion, cities, woods, and rivers ; 
here and there the izard was observ- 
able, browzing on the dizzy ledge of a 
frightful precipice, or lightly bounding 
along these Pyrennean cliffs, while the 
imagination sickened at the idea of its 
being dashed to pieces among the 
rugged rocks in the dark abyss below; 
and the eye wandered over this sublime 
scene, until it was lost in the hazv 
mists of distance. 

Sometimes fantastical battlements 
rose in all the dreadful sublimity of 

i2 



195 alexena; on the 

gloomy grandeur, as they gleamed for 
a moment on the imagination, and were 
then lost in the shifting vapours; crags 
on tremendous crags hung impending- 
over the road, while pine forests crow n- 
ed their rough and ridgy heads; tliejr 
perpetually seemed to change as the 
splendid tints of the sun fell on them, 
and the illusions of the sight presented 
them in strange assumed forms. 

The dusky sliades of evening were 
fast approaching, as they entered a deep 
valley, rendered almost inaccessible by 
the shaggy steeps by which it was sur- 
rounded ; the guides urged tlieir weary 
and fatigued animals somewhat quicker, 
that they might reach an -inn which 
was then but a league off. Alexena 
made many observations in English, 
on the sublime landscape around them, 
and from the very imperfect manner in 
■which she pronounced the language, 
infinitely entertained Mrs. Hastings and 
Lord Mortimer. 



CASTLE OF SANTA UAllCO. 197 

At intervals, troops of mountaineers 
passed, on their return from the labours 
of the day, and gave a deep shade of 'n\- 
terest to the picturesque scenery ; often 
the hoarse barking of the shepherd's 
dog reverberated on the ear, while the 
hollow mountain answered at a distance 
with its echo. The sun had sunk in the 
horison, and as the crimson coloured 
clouds gleamed on the forests of tali 
pine, they seemed in a blaze. In the 
course of the evenini]:, a hunter, clad in 
green, met the delighted eye^ leaning 
on his bright spear, as he stood on the 
point of some jutting rock, watching 
his game with eager anxiety, and wait- 
ing the moment in which he might, with 
unerring certainty, speed his quivering 
shaft among them. 

The guides, at length, arrived at the 
door of a comfortable cottage, denomi- 
nated an iim, in which they passed the 
wight with much more comfort than they 
had calculated on, or expected among 
such solitary wilds. There were only two 



198 ALEXEHA; OR THE 

apartments in the cottage; one, a kind 
of kitchen;, the other, a chamber; the 
ladies occupied the latter; Lord Mor- 
timer, Bernardo, and the attendants, 
formed each a sort of bed of mountain 
heath in the former, on which they 
slept tolerably sound. 

They arose with the son, and break- 
fasted about ei<Aii miles from their little 
rustic hotel ; nothing could exceed the 
hilarity of the party as they proceed- 
ed, entertaining each other with merry 
tales and interesting anecdotes. Tlhe 
road grew rugged and uneven as they 
continued to ascend amongst the pines, 
over steeps piled on steeps, and crags 
upon crags; sometimes an opening 
among the mountains presented to thoi 
eye the foaming surge, as it dashed over 
the neighbouring rocks, and swept 
through the vale with unceasing fury. 
As they advanced, the prospect became 
more wild, and approached nigher a 
state of savage chaos ; almost bound- 
less forests stretched on every side^ 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 199 

and as the shades of evening fell, their 
silence was dissipated by the roaring^ 
of wolves, which struck the unprotected 
traveller with terror; and frequently, in 
the course of their journey. Lord Mor- 
timer found considerable difficulty in 
persuading Alexena and her trembling 
friends, that they, at least, were in per- 
fect security. His lordship took care 
to see the sumpter mule well provided^ 
and as the sun cast his last rays 
across the valleys, they stopped and 
enjoyed a delightful repast. A painter 
would with pleasure have ol)served, 
nay, taken a sketch of the picturesque 
appearance of their party ; the elegant 
forms of the ladies Alexena, Evelene, 
and Arabel, were finely contrasted with 
that of Bernardo, who travelled in the 
dress of a capuchin friar, as he sat by 
them on a rock, clothed with fog and 
heath flowers, and with the grotesque 
figures, and strong harsh features^ of 
th« sun-burnt Biscayans, who wore 
HI the back ground, on whose bright 
arms the light cast a strong but dusky 



SOO alexena; or the 

gleam, as they, v»'ith the attendants^ 
rested agahist the rocks^ which pro- 
jected from the steep banks that were 
overshadowed by the impending foliage. 
Their repast finished, thej pursned 
their meandering way through the 
tremendous chasms of those moun- 
tains, and as the eye roamed along the 
valley, it often caught a glimpse of a 
Pyrennean bridge, merely composed of 
one or more enormous pines, cast from 
cliff to cliff, to facilitate the hunters* 
pursuit of game, or the search of the 
mountaineer after his straggling flock ; 
underneath, there generally warbled a 
miirmurirjg rill, and the view was closed 
by the light azure-coloured clouds, that 
seemed to fall in curtain folds behind 
the tremendous arch of the perilous 
passage. 

The last gleam of departing day 
was gliding with stealthy pace over 
the wide extended landscape, as they 
slowly descended into a frightful vale, 
in which one of those dizzy bridges 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. §0k 

hung suspended from the adjacent 
precipices, and seemed to lead to a 
path among the cliffs. So high was it 
reared above the dark gulph, that ima- 
gination inflicted tortures, at the idea 
of eitlier man or beast crossina: it. 
Lord Mortimer paused for a moment, 
and beheld it in silent horror. While 
he yet stood, the distant clashing of 
swords arrested his attention ; some- 
what alarmed at this unexpected sound, 
the troopers drew close together, and 
prepared their arms. The instant after 
the combatants issued from the cliffs, 
and fast approached the airy bridge ; 
they seemed two gallant youths, and 
fought with desperate valour : now and 
then they paused to ease their throb- 
bing bosoms, then panting with ire 
and renovated vigour, flew on each 
other. They wrestled — every nerve was 
strained in the arduous contest— none 
dare name the victor — one relreated, 
while the other pressed — his lordship 
sprung into the valley, and instantly 
exclaimed, 'they are on the bridge — 

I 5 



502 ALEXENA J aR TH& 

* hard and more fierce the fiijht now 
' rasres — the slio^htest fiij^ure ffive& 
' ground, and with a Iialf averted, 
'half despairinf^ eye, seeks the cliffs 
' that lie behind — he reaches them, still 
'bravely battling, and vanishes among 
' the adjacent rocks — I yet hear the 
' faint clashing of their weapons — all 
' is silence — again they approach — 
' they rush upon the trembling bridge' — 
' death and fate are hovering roimd — 
' thick flashes the fire from the Heam- 
' inij steel, as the blows fall in torrents — 
' drooping and weary they stand, and 
' the last gleam of their eye's lightning, 
' plays faintly on the exhausted forms 
' of each other.' Here Lord Mortimer 
paused, he w^as too much interested 
to speak further of the warriors ; one of 
whom was light and active, the other 
Herculean strong: ; he that excelled 
in vi.?our, aimed at the bosom of 
his rival a desperate blow, but the 
other, quick as the bounding Antelope, 
stept aside, and fortunately avoided 
his messenger of death; then, with 



CASTtK OF SANTA MARCO. 205 

■wily cunning, placed bis foot before 
his heavy foe, and precipitated him 
headlong', down into the g-apin^- 
gulpli. The victor, like the long- 
necked heron, bent his body forward 
to view the ruin he had made, then 
doifing- his cap, gracefully fell on one 
knee, and raising his glittering hazel- 
coloured eyes towards heaven, silently 
returned thanks to that Almighty 
Power who had saved him from like 
destruction. 

While the fight raged with such 
well-contested skill on the part of 
each combatant, the ladies silently 
waited the event ; but when the van- 
quished Aubert whirled into the rocky 
abyss, their piercing shrieks instantly 
excited the attention of the noble 
victor. He heard, saw, and hastened 
towards them ; in a moment he ap- 
peared, and though flushed with con- 
quest, was much exhausted. On ob- 
serving the ladies, he sheathed his 
bloody sabre, and advanced with a 



204 ALEXENA; OR THE 

light and graceful step ; when within a 
few paces^ Arabel screamed, and dart- 
ing from her horse, flew to meet the 
handsome stranger ; he started back, 
but having gazed an instant, flung his 
cap to the ground, and clasped her to his 
heart. Oh ! Moiitogomeri ! — My dearest 
Arabel! — announced the meeting of 
these happy lovers ; she softly struggled 
to free herself from his embrace, while he 
folded her again and again to his bosom. 
The troopers capered with joy, and the 
servants, by their extravagant gestures, 
seemed stark mad — so much were the 
poor fellows delighted at the happy 
and unexpected meeting between the 
beauteous Arabel and her victorious 
Theodore. 



CASTLE OP SANTA MARCO. 205^ 



CHAP. XII. 

*'The course of true love never did run smooth ; 
Or, if there were a sympathy in choice. 
War, death, or eickness, did lay siege to it, 
Making it momentary as a sound. 
Swift as a shadow, short as any dream; 
Brief as the lightning in the collied night, 
That, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and earth 
And ere a man hath power to say — Behold ! 
The jaws of darkness do devour it up : 
So quick bright things come to confusion." 

Shakspeake. 

HE solemn duskiness of evening 
had fallen on the mountains, before 
they were able to reach a shelter; but 
at length arrived, without accident, 
before the gates of the ruin of an old 
castle, that had long been converted 
into a house of entertainment for the 
accommodation of travellers, who had 
gold to pay for the scanty meal that 
they were often obliged to be satisfied 
with. 

Before they were admitted, Bernardo 
amused them by pointins^ out what had 
constituted the strength of the castle. 



Q06 ALEXENA; OR THE 

of wLich nothing then remained but 
mouldering- ^vallp^, and half shattered 
ramparts. The gateway was defended 
by towers, united by a part of a curtain, 
(the remainder had long before fallen,) 
and underneath it stood the massive 
gates, at the wreck of which, the 
guards knocked so loud, that the noise 
rebounded off the distant rocks. In a 
few minutes, the host and a few of his 
ragged attendants forced back the 
portal folds, and they then passed the 
fallen draw-bridge, through the first, 
into what had been the second court. 
When the ladies dismounted, the 
landlord led the way through an exten- 
sive hall, supported by a vast number of 
arches, into a chamber rendered com- 
fortable by an excellent bright wood 
fire. The furniture was in good pre- 
servation, though ancient, and the floor 
was covered with a warm carpet, that 
rendered the room cheerful. While 
the females crowded round the fire, all 
was confusion in -the court-yard. The 
lord of the mansion stood rubbing his 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 207 

hands with joy, at the arrival of so 
much company, and left the manage- 
ment of every thin^^ to his servants, 
vi^ho were quarreling- with the troopers 
about the stables, which were damp, 
and, in many places, unroofed, hord 
Mortimer was at length obliged to 
interfere, when the host arranged every- 
thing satisfactorily, hi/ puttmg the 
horses to heel in the front drawing-room 
of the castle. Thus harmony was re- 
stored, and the supper being shortly 
after announced, every individual was 
in good humour. The gamiC of the 
mountains was excellent, and fortu- 
nately the landlord had abundance of 
it, on which they feasted most delici- 
ously. Soon after supper, the ladies 
expressed an earnest wish to hear what 
had occasioned the combat on the 
bridge ; Theodore instantly offered to 
gratify their curiosity, and when they 
had drawn their chairs close to his, he 
beijan in the foilowins: words : — 

''I was born in Harfleur, in France^ 



20S ALEXENA ; OR THE 

and until within these three years, con-- 
ceived I was the happiest of mortals. 
My father had a chateau, situated on 
the banks of the Seine, in one of the 
most delightful situations imaginable, 
and there my family generally passed 
the summer months. We had the ad- 
vantage of a most agreeable neigiibour- 
hood, and among the many whose 
society we enjoyed, the father of Arabel 
was my father's most distinguished 
friend ; his residence stood on the op- 
posite side of the river, sheltered by 
woods, where I often rambled, accom- 
panied by his daughter, to listen to the 
trembling of the leaves at intervals in 
the breeze, or to observe the stars, as 
they were reflected on the dark mirror 
of the waters. We were betrothed to 
each other, by the mutual consent of our 
parents, and to our own inexpressible 
happiness; therefore, partook of every 
amusement together, without exciting 
the breath of calumny. Frequently in 
thoso rambles, Arabel brought her lute, 
and as we enjoyed the sweet scent of 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAncO. ^OO 

ffowers, vvafted on the cool breeze of 
evening, she touched the chords with 
the finger of harmony, and accompa- 
nied it with several airs, which she 
sung with the utmost delicacy of ex- 
pression ; for hours we have sat listen- 
ing to every little insect of the woods 



" Where. 



At fall of eve, the fairy people throng 
In various games and revelry, to pass 
The summer night, as village stories tel!."* 

Then returnina; to the cheerins^ blaze 
of M. Santanelle's fire, we gave the 
good old man a sketch of our innocent 
excursion. Thus happily passed the days 
of our early courtship, and often since 
I have re-traced them with a sii?h of 
regret. Within a few miles oC these be- 
loved scenes of my childhood, stood the 
splendid edifice of tlie Count Macare, 
a man, reserved and haughty ; of a cruel 
and suspicious temper ; cunning and 
unsearchable in contrivance; patient 
and indefatigable in the execution of 

* It is not to be understood that Theodore inad« 
«S9 of this quotation. 



X 



210 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

his villainous intentions, when once 
conceived and determined on; he had 
perfect command of his passions, which 
were chiefly pride, lust, voluptuousness, 
revenge, and avarice ; and this last was 
the most predominant feature of his 
character — his origin was mean, and 
he owed his power and influence to his 
activity, in obliging the mother of. 
Francis, the late queen dowager, who 
so grossly abused it. When liis late 
majesty was in confinement after the 
battle of Pavia, he was one of those 
■«ho advised him to agree to dishonor- 
able terms, to regain his liberty, and-i 
after his return, said, Francis would de- 
serve to be a prisoner for ever, if he 
performed a single article of the treaty 
which he had signed. His majesty un- 
fortunately took his advice, and in- 
volved the kingdom in the recent wars, 
by which so much blood and treasure 
have been lavished; but it is to be 
hoped, the virtues of his son. King 
Henry, will compensate for the indis- 
cretion of his father. 



GASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 211 

Pardon this digression^ as it was ne- 
€essaryto point out the means by which 
the infamous Macare became possessed 
of wealth and title. The count w^as a 
bachelor, but had a nephew, with 
whom I was educated at Paris; he was 
a gay, impetuous, and extravagant 
youth, but brave and generous, until 
corrupted by vicious example; his 
person was handsome, though rather 
robust; his manners fascinating, and 
he it was whose melancholy fate you 
have this day witnessed." 

When Theodore had proceeded thus 
far, Arabel was greatly shocked at the 
death of the unfortunate young man, 
though he was one of the principal 
wretches who almost persecuted her to 
the very jaws of death; but being 
once an intimate acquaintance, she 
could not help feeling for his miserable 
exit, particularly as she felt convinced, 
however innocent, she was the cause of 
his untimely end, and therefore retired 
to her chamber, not wishing to hear 



SIS" ALEXENA; OR THE 

the event that led to the fatal catas- 
trophe. — The moment she Jisappeared, 
Theodore continued his narrative thus: 

" I often invited young Aubert to my 
father's house^, which at length led to an 
intimacy between his uncle and my 
parent, and shortly after, to an intro- 
duction to the family of M. Santanelle. 
When Arabel had attained her four- 
teenth year, the count and his nephew 
Vi^ere constant visitors, wliich began to 
give me considerable uneasiness, as I 
frequently caught his lascivious eye 
wandering over the beauties of my 
lovely intended, with a peculiar ear- 
nestness, wliich disgusted me, and was 
extremely distressing to her, his com- 
pliments were equally fulsome, and the 
consequence was, my dislike, in a short 
time, changed to hate. As 1 dreaded his 
superior power, I mentioned my fears 
to her fatlier, who smiled, at what he 
called, my jealousy, but promised to 
bestow the l-ond of Arabel on me, the 
mom.ent 1 should attain my twentieth 



CASTLE OF SANTA. MARCO. 215 

year, which Was then only two months 
distant. 1 conceited this short time an 
age, and had almost iai mediate reason 
for real unhappiness; for as I had 
foreseen, it happened — Count Macare 
demanded the hand of Arabel, and 
was peremptorily refused ; the conse- 
quence was, he left her father's house, 
breathing; revenge, and returned to 
Paris with all possible expedition, when 
M. Santanelle, to prevent a renewal of 
his preposterous suit, resolved on seeing 
us instantly married, but his designs 
were frustrated by the villainy of the 
count. That'niiiiit he was arrested, 
by virtue of a royal warrant, and con- 
veyed to the dungeons of the Bastile, 
where he suffered every privation and 
indignity, that the malice or brutal re- 
venge of IMacare could inflict; being" 
accused of co-operating in the }}lans 
of the Emperor of Germany, he was 
treated with the severity due to a 
traitor. 

*' Arabel^ from the moment of his ar- 



214 alesena; ok the 

rest, became the most wretched of hu- 
man beino'S^ and had it not been for 
the attentions of my father, would have 
eventually expired for want of nourish- 
ment and repose. Shortly after M. 
Santanelle's arrest, I set out fcr Paris, 
where, with considerable difnculty, I 
was admitted to see my much-respected 
friend ; he was confined in a lonely 
damp cell; the furniture of which con- 
sisted of a small worm-eaten table, 
while the faint glimmering of a soli- 
tary lamp served to shew its narrow 
boundaries, occupied with a small por- 
tion of half-rotten straw, and the re- 
mains of a pitcher, which contained 
a little stagnant water. I could only 
deplore his misery — to relieve it, was 
not in my power; the only favour I 
could procure, was liberty for him to 
write a letter to his daughter, subject 
to the inspection of the governor, 
which he did, and in it commanded 
her, as she valued his peace, instantly 
to bestow her hand on me; then con- 
cluded by saying he was unconscious 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 215 

of crime, and felt convinced, the jus- 
tice of his sovereign would speedily 
release him. 1 returned with all pos- 
sible haste, with this letter, and a few 
moments after I delivered it, there was 
another put into Arabel's hands, by 
a courier from the Count Macare, in 
which he offered to release her father, 
if she consented to bestow her hand 
on his nephew Aubert. This renewed 
her distress, and in the most deplorable 
state of agony, she resolved instantly 
to proceed to Paris, and if every other 
alternative failed, nobly determined to 
sacrifice her future happiness, to insure 
the safety of her parent. She, however, 
was not allowed to execute this pious 
design, for in two hours after Macare's 
messenger had departed, (without an 
answer,) she was seized by a band of 
ruffians, who carried her off, having first 
placed a strong guard on every pass 
to my father's house — (he scene of 
their outrage; yet notwithstanding 
their vigilance, 1 contrived to effect my 
escape, and proceeded on foot towards 



^16 alexena; or the 

Paris, in a state little short of distrac* 
tion. I travelled uiitii dawn, and then 
lay concealed in a village adjacent to 
the road, until the sun's rays were no 
longer visible, and then pursued my 
journey. It was about three o'clock 
in the morning, and yet very dark, 
when 1 reached the suburbs ; so 
much so, that I could scarce discern 
the way ; the clouds appeared charged 
with thunder, as they moved rapidly 
along the heavens, revealing, at inter- 
vals, tlie trembling stars; and in a short 
time I entered a wood that surrounded 
the country villa of the count. The 
thunder growled hoarsely at a distance, 
and the lightnings played faintly round, 
frequently, though partially, revealing 
the deep recesses of the groves, or, for 
an instant, illumined them with a glare 
of fiery splendour; and while I wan- 
dered on, the moon, at intervals, cast a 
glimmering light through the dark 
foliage, as she struggled with the black 
clouds, which contended to obscure her 
brilliancy. The path which I pursued. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 217 

led directly to the chateau, and com- 
municated with several others, which 
wound through the groves in various 
directions; in one of these, parallel with 
that in which I was, the lightning re- 
vealed the figure of a female, dressed in 
white robes, which waved in the wind. 
The thunder, whose deep volley was 
lately heard afar, at this moment burst 
with a tremendous crash over the place 
on which I then remained immovable^, 
and undetermined how to proceed. 
Between the boles of the trees, the blue 
and angry fires quivered, and swept the 
surrounding boughs, which, with the 
distant mansion, appeared clothed in 
livid flame ; another and another flash 
blazed round the figure, which rapidly 
approached, and 1 then felt convinced 
I saw the wandering perturbed spirit of 
some ill-fated mortal ; I tried to speak, 
but my tongue refused utterance ; I 
murmured something, and leant against 
a tree for support. The pitchy dark- 
ness excluded further view, until a 
lengthened flash crossed the path, and 
voi,. I. K 



218 ALEXENA; OR THE 

discovered us as we almost touched 
each other ; — a wild scream announced 
the woman, as she sunk senseless to 
the earth. Poor, helpless female! I 
exclaimed, as I raised her, what cru- 
elty has exposed you to the rigorous 
inclemency of this night? she answer- 
ed not; her delicate frame was con- 
vulsed, and I was oblised to hold her 
tight to my bosom. Again, the light- 
ning hissed through the rain, which 
fell in torrents, and discovered, to my 
inexpressible anguish, that it was the 
almost lifeless form of Arabel that I 
strained in my embrace. 

*' The murmur of many voices now 
sighed on the breeze, and lights moved 
round the chateau, which were the 
torches of the count's attendants, who 
were in pursuit of his wretched fu- 
gitive. As they approached, the red 
glare of light rendered their figures 
.distinguisliable, hastily moving through 
the distant trees : fear, and the anxious 
hope of escape, lent nie renovated 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. S19 

strength, and having lifted my hjvely 
burden on my shoulders, hastened 
through the woods I knew not whither, 
and after considerable fatigue, arrived 
,at a cottage about a quarter of a mile 
from it, where, being quite exhaust- 
ed, I was obliged to convey Arabel. 
Her garments were drenched throuoh 
with rain, and the wind havini; carried 
away her hat, her hair hung in wet and 
matted tresses about her shoulders, 
the coldness of the night had stiffened 
her limbs, and the only comfort I could 
procure for her in that miserable place, 
was a fire, at which the cottager's wife 
chaffed her frozen figure, and, with dif- 
ficulty, restored animation. When as- 
sured of her safety, she grew composed, 
and the moment her weary eyes were 
closed in a deep sleep, I flew towards 
Paris to procure proper refreshments, 
and to despatch a messenger to my 
father, with the joyful tidings of my 
success, and then returned to Arabel, 
who was much better from the repose 

she had enjoyed. 

k2 



•220 ALEXEXA; OR THE 

" In that poor cottage, we were maf" 
ried the next day bnt one, in presence 
of my parent, and in compliance with 
a second earnest letter of intreaty from 
]M. Santanelle; but the fleeting; mo- 
ments of my felicity were short, for in 
half an hour after the ceremony, I was 
arrested, and conveyed to a prison, and 
have not since beheld Arabel, until we 
so fortunately met in the mountain. 

" My gaoler, the second month of my 
confinement, inliniated I was only taken 
up on suspicion, and if there were not 
absolute proofs of mv guilt before the 
^f / following day, I would be discharged. 
I instantly conceived Count Macare 
had me detained, for the purpose of 
depriving Arabel of my assistance, and 
remained tortured with the most racking 
pains of suspense, pacing up and down 
my dungeon, lamenting the cruel des- 
tiny that had been the cause of my 
introduction to young Aubert, or his 
infamous uncle. Thus I passed (he four 
first weeks ; on the fifth 1 was liberated^ 



/> 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. i?2i 

without any cause beiiit^ assigned, and 
ordered to quit Paris within two hours, 
on pain of perpetual banishment. 

" The first use I made of my reco- 
vered liberty was, to hasten to (lie Bas- 
tile, to inquire for M. Santanelle, but 
could neither obtain access to, nor any 
information concernhii^ him, and as I 
was' refracitig my way back to the cot- 
tage, where I had been so cruelly torn 
from Arabel, I met an old soldier, who 
was formerly a domestic of my father's, 
and to wiiom, when a boy, 1 had been 
much attached ; the veteran saluted me 
as 1 passed, and I instantly recognised 
him, and inquired after his welfare. " I 
have," said he, " been seeking you these 
three days past, that I might commu- 
nicate some particulars about the fate 
of Mademoiselle Santanelle, who is at 
present in the power of Count Macare. 
Please follow me to the dark shade of 
yonder piazza, where we wilj be se- 
cure frohi observation, and I shall let 
you know the particulars." On reach- 



522 ALEXCNA ; OR THE 

ing the spot^ he continued, " IMy sister 
Jeanette is in the service of Count 
Macare, and through lier I have ob- 
tained some information relative to 
you. which is briefly this: — the mo- 
ment you were arrested, and securely 
lodged in prison, the emissaries of the 
count seized Mademoiselle Santanelle, 
and conducted her back to his chateau; 
on their arrival, they carried her into 
the saloon, from which she first con- 
trived to escape. The count was 
already there, and for some time 
regarded her with a look of scorn, 
mingled with malicious joy, at having 
lier again in his power; then insulted 
the dear young lady with a formal 
declnration of his passion, and said, 
as he had been contemptuously treat- 
ed by a former refusal, he v\as re- 
solved to compel her to accept his 
liand, or bury her in the seclusion 
of a convent for life. Mademoiselle 
Arabel answered him with much spi- 
rit, declaring she would rather perish 
than become his wife^ alleging she 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 223 

was already married. Thus ihe lirst 
ten days passed — tlie count continu- 
ally persecuting her; one day alleg- 
ing you were dead — the next, that 
you should be released from prison, if 
she should consent to bestow her hand. 
At length he told her, he resigned all 
hopes in favour of his nephew Aubert, 
who, he commanded her to receive 
as her future husband. This young 
man became latterly one of the most 
dissipated youths in Paris, and being 
<?areless how he procured money, 
squandered vast sums, until he jifound 
himself deeply embarrassed, and con- 
sequently entered with avidity into 
his uncle's plans, for seizing the for- 
tune of M. Santanelle. He also made 
a declaration of pretended love to 
Mademoiselle Arabel, and met with 
the same success; but his infamous 
uncle sent for a priest, devoted to 
his purposes, and in defiance of the 
young lady's tears, screams, and in- 
treaties, the ceremony was performed ; 
Aubcrt answering the responses. A 



^4 alexena; or the 

iTiarriage contract was drawn up, and 
the count held Mademoiselle Arabers 
Jiand until her signature was written 
to it; this was done in the presence of 
some of his domestics, on whom he 
could depend. One of them, named 
Roberto, is my sister's lover, and im- 
parted this to her, under promise of 
the most inviolable secrecy. Instantly 
after this sham ceremony. Mademoi- 
selle Santanelle fell into strong con- 
vulsions, and for many days her life 
was despaired of; but as soon as she 
was able to move about her apart- 
ment, the count determined to carry 
lier to a convent in Spain, and confine 
her for life. It is said her father is dead, 
and that by virtue of the marriage con- 
tract, which has been already proved, 
young- Aubert is in the peaceable en- 
joyment of the entire of his immense 
possessions. A few days ago, he in- 
formed his vassals he was about 
to accompany his wife into Spain, 
for the benefit of her health, and 
has actually set out, attended by 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 225 

the count and Mademoiselle Santa- 
iielle. for the purpose, Roberto says, 
of gettin^^ rid of her for ever/' " My 
dear young master/' continued Launce- 
lot, " 1 could not learn the name of 
(he convent, but I trust they have not 
yet reached the Spanish side of the 
Pyrennees, and if you take proper pre- 
cautions, you may not yet be too late 
t-o save your Arabel. 

"Judge the agony of my soul, when 
I heard tins recital ; I almost flew to 
Harfleur, where my disconsolate parent 
furnished me with money, horses, do- 
mestics, and every necessary, and early 
next morning I was on the road to 
Spain, and had arrived thus far, when, 
in ascending the neighbouring moun- 
tain, I met Aubert, accompanied by a 
single domestic. In a moment we re- 
cognized each<)ther, and it is unneces- 
sary to say, we itistantly commenced 
that combat, which has terminated th'e 
existence of my detested foe; and 
Arabel mu5<t now inform you of any 

R 5 



:226 ALCXENA ; OR THE 



further particulars,, as I am utterly 
unacquainted with the means by which 
she contrived to escape from the mer- 
ciless count ; but conceive she is in- 
debted for her safety, to your kind- 
ness." 

Here Theodore paused, and Arabel^ 
who had recovered from her slight 
indisposition, resumed the sequel of 
their story: — 

"She had been conveyed to thecount^s 
chateau, on the night her father was 
dragged to the dungeons of the Bastile, 
and insulted by the count, who made 
many professions of love, and unalter- 
able aflbction ; but at length he pro- 
ceeded to rudeness, and after a severe 
struggle, she escaped from his grasp, 
into a green-house adjoining the room, 
one oi" the wiiidows of which being 
open, she leaped from it into the wood,, 
unconscious of itsheijrht.and re<i^ardless 
of every danger, except that of bein^ 
retaken by the count ; in her fligh!| 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 227 

Jihe fortunately met Theodore, who con- 
veyed her ahnost lifeless to the cottage, 
where they were married in a few days 
after. 

*' When she became the count's cap- 
tive a second time, he treated her with 
the utmost brutality, and after the ini- 
quitous ceremony had been performed, 
(mentioned by Launcelot,) he resolved 
to sacrifice her to his safety, and that 
of his nephew. Instigated by revenge, 
avarice, and diabolical cruelty, he con- 
veyed her to the convent of Domini- 
cans — that infamous receptacle, where 
the most wanton and savage crimes 
and cruelties were daily perpetrated, 
under the mask of religion, and where 
the abbess and the count beino; old 
friends, soon came to an understand- 
ing. Arabel, as usuni, was tried as an 
apostate nun, and in less than a month 
after his departure, was condemned to 
terminate her wretched existence in 
that horrid den of carnage, from whicli 
she was rescued by Bernardo and Lord 
Mortimer." 



S28 alexena; or the 

CHAP. XIII. 

" Tho' plung'd in ills, and cxercis'd in care, 
Yet never let the noble mind despair ; 
When prest by danger, and beset with foes. 
The gods their timely succour interpose; 
And when our virtue sinks, o'erwhelm'd with grief. 
By unforeseen expedients bring relief.'' 

Philips. 

Wll E N Arabel and Theodore haf! 
concluded, Evelene resumed the sub- 
ject, and gave her attentive auditors, a 
detail of the events that led to her cod- 
fiuemnent in the cell of the convent. 

She was the daughter of a rich mer- 
chant, of Cordova, who was both proud 
and ambitious; as he had_, by industry, 
amassed great wealth, he wished to 
enoble his family by some splendid 
alliance, and, thus influenced, he left 
the place of his nativity, and went to 
reside at Madiid, where he hoped to 
bury the remembrance of his past life, 
and the name of merchant, in eternal 
oblivion. Conscious he wordd not be 
able to form an alliance with any noble 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 229 

family that were equally wealthy, he 
souirht those to whom his riches would 
be an object, and soon found Don 
Vitelli, a cavalier descended from the 
ancient Hidalgo; but, by thoughtless 
eictravagance, considerably embarrassed 
in his pecuniary engagements. They 
became acquainted, and in a very few 
months, were on such terms of intimacy, 
as promised the speedy completion of 
Siffnior Pedro's wishes : but the heart 
of Evelene had not been consulted on 
this important occasion, nor was she 
acquainted with her father's intentions, 
until he commanded her to consider 
Don Vitelli as her future husband. 
She was shocked, and overwhelmed 
with ffrief and consternation at this 
cruel command, as her heart had been^ 
prior to this event, engaged to Antonio,, 
the brother of Alexena, who she had 
been intimately acquainted with, while 
in Cordova with his regiment. Some 
months after his introduction, he made 
a declaration of his passion, and was 
favourably received. Overjoyed at his 



SSO ALEXENA; CttTIIE 

good fortune, he rashly proposed the 
affair to Signior Pedro, who refused his 
consent, because he was a younger 
brother, without title ; and to prevent 
all further intercourse between the 
lovers, instantly set out for Madrid, 
leaving Antonio the most wretched of 
human beings. Evelene, however, was 
constant, and neither threats or en- 
treaties, could prevail on her to consent 
to marry Vitelli ; not that she enter- 
tained any dislike to his person, but 
because she nobly resolved never to 
give her hand without her heart, and 
the latter was not at her disposal. 

About this period, Don Vitelli had 
given offence to the Holy Tribunal, by 
some heretical opinions, he very un- 
advisedly gave, in some affairs of par- 
ticular consequence, which brought him 
under their heavy displeasure, and an 
order was issued for his arrest. Signior 
Pedro heard of the circumstance, and 
instantly waited on the Vicai* General, 
his most particular friend, to whom h« 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO, 231 

unburtheiied his distressed heart, and 
earnestly implored mercy for Vitelli^, 
and the Vicar's influence Avith his 
disobedient daughter. Both requests 
were granted, and his friend promised to 
seize Vitelli and Evelene, and have 
them immediately married. 'I will 
* have your girl accused/ said he, ' of 
' imbibing Vitelli's heresy, and give 
' her the choice of marriage, or the 
'^ stake ; fears of a death of tortures, 
' will speedily overcome her pretended 
' aversion, and I will impress on Vitelli 
' the idea, that his marriage with 
' your daughter, saved him from the 
' effects of our most dreaded wrath.' 
Siirnior Pedro was delighted with this 
arrangement, and as a testimonial of 
his satisfaction, fell on his knee, and 
placed a brilliant of immense value 
on the finger of the crafty incpiisitor, 
who knew as well hov/ to estimate, as 
to distribute his favours. This scheme 
was, however, frustrated by the poinard 
of the assassin Scalto, who killed the 
tiiifortunate Vitelli, when his dagger 



f J2 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

and the blow, were intended for the 
bosom of Lord Mortimer. 

This accounts for Evelene's appear- 
ance before the tribunal, and her in- 
troduction to his lordship. 

Signior Pedro was excessively grieved 
by the untimely death of his intended 
son-in-law, and Evelene, for the pre- 
sent, relieved from persecution ; but in 
the course of two months, a new suitor 
renewed her sorrows. Leopold, Coiuit 
Baretto, a profligate Italian noble, had 
the address to gain the good will of 
her father, and soon made her a tender 
of his hand and heart. Fortune, he 
had none; the Cassino's of Italy, and 
their gaming tables, had swallowed 
every ducat, long before his arrival in 
Spain. His connexion, however, was 
unexceptionable, and among others, 
the abbess of the Dominican convent 
was one, whose power and riches made 
no contemptible fiofurc ; she was his 
miut, and if there vras a possibility she 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 233 

liad affection for any object on earth, 
Leopold was the favoured mortal. He 
was to be, with the institution of which 
she was the cruel superior, joint heir 
to all her immense wealth, and there- 
fore looked forward to a marriao;-e of 
convenience, until the expiration of 
that much desired event. 

Evelene was every way interesting- ; 
she possessed both beauty, fortune, 
and every accomplishment necessary for 
an elegant female ; he, therefore, re- 
solved to make her a countess, but with- 
out once consulting her inclinations, 
and as soon as he could, with dis- 
cretion, proposed for her in due form. 
Most unfortunately for Evelene, he 
obtained her father's consent, and she 
was a second time commanded to pre- 
pare to receive a husband whom she 
detested. The sudden death of Signior 
Pedro, however, released her from this 
engagement, and left her mistress of 
her hand, and a large fortune. 



SS4 alexena; or the 

Though her father was the most 
arbitrary of mankind, yet she mourned 
him with sincere atfection, and shorty 
after his interment, retired to a small 
country seat, a few miles from Madrid, 
where she might indulge her feelings, 
free from the intrusions of the unfeelins: 
or impertinent. But even this sacred 
retreat was unable to protect her from 
llie assiduous, though detested Leopold, 
and his visits at length became so fre- 
quent and troublesome, that Evelene 
dismissed him wilh the most solemn 
assurance, that she never would consent 
to be his wife. 

The count departed, convinced he 
had nothing to hope, but determined to 
use stratasrem to effect his wishes, and 
marry her by force. Having once con- 
ceived the design, he resolved to carry 
it into immediate execution. Every 
thing was to be apprehended from de- 
lay ; and Antonio, her favoured lover, 
might return and defeat his plans. It 
was necessary to be assisted by some 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARGO. 235 

powerful fiiencl^ and who more likely 
to forward his views than his aunt, 
the Dominican abbess ; to her he in- 
stantly applied, and Mas most cordially- 
received. Every thin«^ was arranged 
that could ensure success, and a few- 
days after, Evelene was a prisoner 
within the convent's gloomy walls. 

It would be a tedious task to detail 
her sufferinijs. or to follow her throuii^h 
the scenes of misery and insult, which 
she suffered in that abode of sorrow ; 
let it suffice, that the abbess made use 
of every threat, as well as every per- 
suasion, to induce her to become the 
Coimtess de Baretto, but in vain. 
Leopold, at length, infuriated at his 
rejected suit, resolved to make her sue 
for that title, which she had hitherto 
refused, by violating every law, human 
aufl divine. The abbess consented to 
this diabolical arrangement, as Evelene 
was instantly aRer to become his bride, 
and appointed a lonely chamber, in a 
distant gallery, where her cries and 



256 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

entreaties would be vain; there she 
was ordcredj unconscious of the medi- 
tated attempt, and had scarcely entered 
the room, till Leopold fastened the 
door, and once again, offered himself 
to her acceptance. The unfortunate 
Evelene had a fatal presentiment of 
his infamous intentions, and tried to 
effect her escape, but found that an 
utter impossibility. She then pretended 
compliance^ but he was aware that it 
was her fears, and not her inclination, 
that answered him. However, resolved 
to put her to the proof, he told her 
there wiis a monk in the adjoinins: 
chamber, who would that instant unite 
them. The feelino:s of Evelene were 
now wound up to the agony of despe- 
ration, and she refused, with the ut- 
most firnuiess of voice, and upbraided 
Leopold, for his unmanly and savage 
conduct. This was the siirnal for 
iniquity; he seized her panting and 
agitated form in his arms, and en- 
deavoured to force her down on a 
-fopha. The die was cast — he set his 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 237 

soul upon the throw — and drowned 
her prayers and her screama with the 
blasphemous expressions of exulting 
villainy. Her little strength was almost 
exhausted ; no help, no assistance nigh; 
she called on God to aid^ to rescue her, 
from the grasp of a ruffian monster. 
The count mocked her, by saying, ' his 
majesty was too far off, and too busily\ 
engaged to attend: besides,' he con- 
tinued, * he never looks towards this 
blessed receptacle of puri'y,' Evelene 
had sunk on her knees, and despair 
had dravYn his last dark fold round her, 
when she obseiTed the glittering hilt of 
the count's stiletto; she seized it, and 
then summoning the last particles of 
her expiring strciigth, sheathed it in 
the side of the almost trium.phant 
Leopold. lie groaned — and fell; — the 
thick mists of death rapidly advanced, 
to close his career for ever. Evelene 
stood over him, transfixed with horror; 
footsteps advanced along the gallery ; 
the door was flung open, and the abbess, 
attended by several nuns^ entered the 



233 alexexa; or the 

chaiTiber. It had been precoiiceited; 
that she should discover Evelene and 
her nephew together, and then, death or 
marriage would be inevitable. Con- 
ceive her consternation, on beholding 
him writhing in agony, and welter- 
ing in his blood ; he could yet speak, 
and his last words were, in entreating 
Evelene's forgiveness, and beseeching 
his annt not to avenge his death 
on the innocent cause of it. ' I 
have deserved my fate,' said he, ' but 
I jet hope there may be mercy.' 
Surgical aid was instantly summoned^ 
and one of the father^s to administer the 
last consolations of religion; the latter 
was in time — but all the povvcrs of 
medicine and surgery were vain ; the 
deadly point was envenomed, ajtd the 
consequence was instant mortification. 
Lcojiold expired in two hours after he 
had received the awful rights of the 
chu;ch, and the fo!i;iveness of the al- 
most distracted Evelene. 

The grief of the abbess was extreme^ 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 239 

a« slie kept her chamber many weeks ; 
but then issued forth, full of cruelty 
and deadly vengeance, which she re- 
solved to let the luckless Evelene feel, 
and every other victim subject to her 
power. The last request of her nephew 
was disregarded, and she resolved to 
inflict the most cruel torments on her 
who had been the cause of his death. 

The horror of having deprived a 
human being of life, though under 
such circumstances of dire necessity, 
inflicted a terrible punishment on the 
susceptible mind of the lovely mourn- 
er ; but the abbess was resolved she 
should perish by lingering torments. 
The fatal day was appointed, and she 
had the form of a trial. To deny that 
the count died by her hand, wass as 
vain as to recite the cause ; her sen- 
tence was speedily pronounced, and 
the next ni^ht, she and Arabel were 
consigned, with all the usual ceremo- 
nies, to that mansion of misery, from 
which they were rescued by Bernardo. 



340 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

When Evelene concluded, she was 
charmed to find the near affinity that 
subsisted between Alexena and her 
lover ; and Lord Mortimer felt rejoiced 
at Antonio's good fortune, as he had 
heard much of his transcendent virtues, 
and was delighted that his Alexena 
had, at least, one worthy relative. 

The night was far spent before our 
weary travellers sought repose ; but 
fortunately had the satisfaction of find- 
ing well-aired beds, in which they en- 
joyed all the balmy comfort of refresh- 
ing sleep, and awoke the following day 
with renovated vigour, and in high 
spirits, anxious to pursue theirjournev. 



CASTLE OP SAXTA MARCO. 241 

CHAP. XIV. 

"Eye me, bless'd Providence, and square my trial 
To my proportioned strength." 

Milton. 

W H I L E at breakfast, the report of 
fire arms in the court-yard alarmed 
Lord Mortimer and his friends, and the 
former, attended by Bernardo, rushed 
out, to ascertain the cause, when thev 
found the Biscay troopers re-loading 
their carbines, and arranging their 
ammunition with particular care, ac- 
companied by many significant nods 
to each other. His lordship having 
observed them, requested to know the 
meaning of this unwonted caution, and 
was answered by tlie troopers, that a 
few leagues farther they would be 
obliged to pass one of the favourite 
haunts of Beizo Carracci, a notorious 
captain of the most merciless banditti 
that ever infested the wilds of the Pyren- 
ti ees, or the Spanish doniinions. '* You 
^vould do wellj my lord/' said one o^ 

▼ OL. I. L 



M? ALEXtNA ; 0& THE 

them, '' to hasten the departure of jour 
friends, that we may pass the mountain 
in safety; for though Carracci himself 
is not fond of attacking females, if the 
command is entrusted to any of the 
subordinate officers of the gang, thejr 
will shew little, if any mercy, and he 
seldom accompanies them on petty 
excursions." Bernardo observed, "the 
bandit me'ationed, was the most dreaded 
robber that had ev€r existed ;" and 
pressed Lord Mortimer to make the 
least possible delay. Half an hour was 
therefore scarcely allowed for break- 
fast, &c. ere they were once more 
clambering over the pyramidical steeps 
of those wilds. 

As they proceeded among the heights, 
the gloom of the surrounding objects 
struck the fancy with horror, and 
served to increase the terror and gloomy 
forebodinirs that the name of Carracci 
had awakened. Rocks, grey and bar- 
ren, piled on each other, until they 
formed stnpendcus walls, stood as 



0AST1.E OF SANTA MARCO. 243 

Isoundariesiothe narrow glens, through 
which scanty patches of shrubs strug- 
gled for freedom, while their roots 
sought shelter in the shallow crannies 
of the precipices. 

In two hours they were on a spot 
that overlooked the dreaded haunts of 
the robber, which were by no means in 
unison with his character ; as plan- 
tations of olives, palms, and almonds, 
together with the gayest hues that can 
be awakened into life, were beautifully 
intermingled with most luxuriant culti- 
vation ; while the ripe fruit glowing 
among the foliage, perfumed the air, 
as the clouds floated silently along 
the blue concave, forming themselves 
into innumerable fantastical shapes and 
airy forms — now seen — then lost the 
next instant. 

They descended into those lovely 
Vallies, without injury, and the terrors 
of Carracci's name would have seem- 
ed solely seated in the brains of the 

h2 



214 ALESENA ; on THE 

Biscayans, had they not now and then 
encountered the mouldering- skeleton of 
those who had served him, and whose 
bones rattled in the blast, as they 
hung dangling from the height of 
some frightful precipice, that cast its 
long shadows across the road. 

About six o'clock in the evening, 
they arrived at a woody deule, throngli 
"which it was absolutely necessary thr^y 
should pass, and had not proceeded 
far beneath the gloom of its shades, 
before they heard the moans of some 
person in distress. Compassion was 
one of those Christian virtues which 
Tvarmed the bosom of Lord Moriimer* 
and being then actuated by those feelings 
which prompted him to relieve the 
wretched, he sprung from his horse, 
and hastily entered the wood, a little to 
the right of the road, where he found a 
cavalier lying vionnded and bloody, 
with two of his faithful domesticsi 
stretched lifeless beside him. His 
lordssliip instantly called on BcrnarxJo 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAUCO. 215 

for assistance, and between them, they 
carried the wounded stranger to the 
road, having resolved to remove him 
to the adjacent village, where there 
was a possibility surgical assistance 
might be procured ; but imagine their 
consternation and surprise, on finding 
that the dying cavalier was the bro- 
tlier of Alexena, and lover of Evelene. 
The cries of his distressed sister 
awakened him to life, while joy, at once 
again beholding the latter, revived 
him, tliou^li his wounds were man\r 
and he was greatly exhausted by loss 
of blood ; yet, assisted by a good 
constitution, and matchless care, little 
tk)ubts were entertained of his recovery 
when they reached Bayonne, where 
they arrived about two days after. 

Bayonne had many allurements to 
induce Lord Mortimer to remain some 
time, and there Alexena consented 
to be led a second lime to the hyme- 
neal altar. Antonio, who was ra- 
pidly recovering, under the care of his 



ici6 alexeka; or the 

assiduous nurses^ was blessed with the 
assurance of Eveler.e's unalterable at- 
tachriientj and had obtained a promise 
of her hand, as soon as he should be 
able to enjoy the blessing. Thus 
every thing promised a speedy ter- 
mination of all their hardships, as 
Theodore, assisted by the influence of 
a favourite minister, was likely to ob- 
tain possession of the property of M. 
Sanrtanelle, in right of his wife, and the 
treacherous Count Macare was already 
imprisoned in the dungeons of the 
Eastile. Things were in this favour- 
able train ; the day was appointed for his 
lordship's marriage; Evelene was al- 
ready the wife of her beloved Antonio ; 
and all their friends happy, when the 
unexpected appearance of Montano 
gave birth to the most unpleasant and 
alarming sensations. 

Lord Mortimer beins: a stranjrer toi 
the laws and customs of France, knew 
not how to act; his enemy, he found 
on inquiry, was chaplain^ and under 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 247 

the immediate protection of a Portu- 
guese noble, who was notorious for his 
immense wealth, and for the infamy by 
which he had amassed it. 

Don Philip Acasto, this new friend of 
Montano, was a villain from early habit, 
and neglected education; he had been 
an only son, and heir to immense riches^ 
surrounded by minions and parasites, 
who flattered his every wish from the 
early dawning of reason, and led him 
to believe the world was created for his 
enjoyment. Thus nurtured in sloth- 
ful indulgence, with every wish gratified 
as soon as conceived ; he was impati- 
ent under the slightest controul, or most 
tritling disappointment, and in a short 
time became a burthen to himself, and 
an object of terror to his dependants, 
As he had not the stay of education to 
support him, his mind was a dreary 
blank, and to fill up the worthless va- 
cuity, had recourse to gaming, to which 
he devoted his entire time ; and never 
leeling any of*' the compunctious visit- 



^48 alexena; or tre 



ings of nature/' cheated, whenever he 
Gould do so with impunity. 

Among the passions that influenced 
this worthless man, sensual love was 
not the least ungovernable, and it was 
rumoured there was a residence of his 
in the most savage and dreary wilds of 
the Pyrennees, where he had long been 
accustomed to sacrifice the luckless 
victims of his lust, yet much uncer- 
tainty existed as to its exact situation ; 
but it was known to have been, in past 
ages, the noble mansion of the Santa 
Marco family; won by the present pos- 
sessor from one of its late descendants, 
who was shortly after found murdered, 
and under such circumstances, as fixed 
a suspicion, that Don Philip was the 
diabolical perpetrator of the inhuman 
deed ; particularly, as the beautiful sis- 
ter of the deceased Don Miguel de 
St. Marco disappeared some time after, 
and her husband, Don Selib, was said 
to have shared his brother-in-law's 
hapless fate. 



CASTLE OP SANTA MARCO. f49 

When Lord Mortimer learned those 
particulars, he carefully shunned all 
possibility of an introduction to Don 
Philip, and Alexena remained a close 
prisoner in her hotel, lest some new 
misfortune should once again place her 
in the power of the detestable Montano, 
who seemed to live only to plague her. 

In about a month after their arrival^ 
and the day previous to that fixed ,on 
for the celebration of his lordship's 
marriage, Alexena and he were induced 
to accompany Theodore and Arabel 
on a party of pleasure, a little way from 
IBayonnc, They travelled in an open 
carriage, unattended, except by the 
coachman and postilion, and returned 
after having spent a very pleasant 
day, without encountering any accident 
that could excite suspicion ; but were 
inexpressibly distressed on their arri- 
val, at finding a note from Antonio, 
stating, that Evelene was seriously^ 
indisposed ; so much so, that her 
physicians were alarmed for her safct)^ 

l5 



^50 ALEXENA ; on THE 

and requesting bis immedia(G aftend- 
nnce, accompanied by Alexena. — 
Lord Mortimer commrmicated this un- 
welcome news, and the latter instantly 
hastened to her chamber, to change her 
travelling dress, where she requested to 
see Mrs. Hastings, but was informed- 
she had gone to Don Antonio's. Our 
heroine then hurried on an evening 
dishabille, and descended to join his 
lordship, who said he would wait in 
the hall, where he wished to give 
Roiirke some orders. It was quite 
dark when she reached it, but a man 
advanced, and drew her arm through 
his, and without speaking they entered 
the street; walking on at a quick 
pace for some time; Alexena lament- 
ing the indisposition of her friend at 
such an unpropitious moment, until 
surprised at her companion's taci- 
tru'nity, she begged to know the cause 
of his silence, and not receiving an 
answer, stopped. Imagine her dis- 
tress and amazement, on finding her- 
self ^^i^h a stranger, in an unfre- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAIICO. 251 

^uented street ; the first impulse of her 
heart was to fly, but that, her conductor 
prevented, by seizing her in his arms, 
and the following- idstant she was sur- 
rounded by a band of ruffians, who 
muffled her in a cloak to prevent her 
cries, and bore her swiftly along to the 
beach, where she was put on board a 
boat that lay in readiness; and in a 
very few moments after, carried into the 
cabin of a brigantine, which instantly 
got under weigh. 

When the cloak was removed, the 
unfortunate Aiexena found herself seat- 
ed between the detestaljle Montano and 
Don Philip ; at which she expressed 
her despair and terror by a })iercing 
shriek, and fell senseless into the arms of 
the latter. On her recovery, the monk 
wounded her feelings by bitter taunts, 
and, with horrible execrations, doomed 
her to perpetual misery. ' Where now,' 
said he, ' is vour English hero to res- 
' cue you from my power? Would you 
-' know? — Yes! — that look is suihcient. 



^5*2 alexexa; or the 

i and I answer it thus : — his manffled 
* carcase lies in the briny waves of 
' this bay.' 

'Oh! monster!' exclaimed Alexena, 
' an All-just Providence has yet, I make 
' no doubt, saved him from your vile 
' intentions/ 

' Certainly/ replied Montano, with 
a sarcastic grin, ' and will, doubtless^ 
' save you the pain of the present 
' intended journey to the Castle of 
' Santa Marco/ 



'iv 



Merciful heaven ! defend me/ said 
Alexena, as she fell on her knees, 
* save me, oh ! my God, . from this 
' wretch, and protect my friends from 
'' his machinations/ Here, the tears 
streamed from her beauteous eyes, 
und the hardened Acasto could not 
behold her unmoved. In the gentlest 
tones of persuasive eloquence, he en- 
deavoured to cahrs her fears, and most 
solemnly promised to protect her from 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAIICO. 253 

kijury and insult of every description. 
She, however, was acquainted with his 
character, and put little trust in his pro- 
mises : yet clung to him rather than be 
left with Montano, even for a moment. 

In about an hour, Don Acasto 
shewed her a bed, and intreated her 
to seek a few hours repose, then left 
her to the solitude of the cabin, 
the door of which she secured with two 
strong iron bolts ; then fell on her 
knees, and besought that Beneficent 
Being, unknown to whom a sparrow 
cannot fall unnumbered, to save her 
from the power of Don Philip, and hii^ 
vile associates. She did not undress, 
nor did sleep seal her weary eyelids 
through the long and anxious night; 
day was only to bring new sufferings; 
and wlien Montano next morning 
knocked for admission, she felt the 
blows on her heart; however, she sum- 
moned courage to admit him, and 
shortly after, breakfast was served. 
When her bitter meal was finished. 



S54 ALEXEXA ; OR THE 

Don Philip invited her to walk on 
deck, as the air of the cabin was close 
and unwholesome; having- no choice, 
she slowly followed him, where, with 
horror, she beheld the few mariners 
that were suflicient to man the vessel. 
Their countenances were charts, dis- 
playing all the shoals and quicksands of 
iniquity — every furrow in their cheeks, 
a harbour of crimes — every movement 
led to destruction — their voices, thun- 
der — their eyes glare lig^htning — their 
breath, pestilence — their religion, athe- 
ism — their hopes, perdition. Such were 
the seamen that guided the vessel of 
Acasto through the liquid deep. Alex- 
ena shuddered, as she mentally de- 
manded, " Are these the inmates of 
Santa Marco?" Alas! her thoughts re- 
plied,— ''even so." Were those wretches 
to supply the place of her late friends? 
Again, her tortured imagination an- 
swered in the affirmative ; but had not 
the cruel, the bloody Montano assured 
her, Mortimer was no more. Oh! yes, 
but pitying heaven contradicted his 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. So5 

assertion, and in her lieart she felt con- 
vinced his lordship was then anxiously 
seeking her^, assisted by his friends. 

Day after day passed in the same 
horrid routine; the wind continued 
fair, and Acasto informed his lovely 
captive, that by sun-set next evening 
he hoped to land at the foot of the 
Pyrennees, where horses were to be in 
readiness to convey them to his castle; 
'^ though somewhat gloomy. Lady 
Alexena," said he, •' I trust, wants 
for nothing that can make solitude 
agreeable, and where, after a little time^ 
I hope to see you perfectly happy." 

Again she shuddered. — " Happy! 
oh! yes, Don Philip, if your inhospi- 
table grounds will afford me even a 
scanty grave, I shall then, indeed, think 
myself so," 

" Lovely innocent!" exclaimed Mon- 
lano, ironically; ''there are many secrets 
in the castle, which you, as a woman,, 



^6 ALEXENA; OR THE 

must have curiosity to see, and, surely, 
the pursuit of such inestimable know- 
ledge will sooth (lie solitary hours of 
Lady A lexena ; particularly, as she will 
find many objects of compassion, whom 
Don Philip will be charmed in assist- 
ing her to relieve." 

There was much more meanino- in 
the countenance of Montano than in 
his words, which were riddles too diffi- 
cult for the victim of his malice to 
expound ; but she felt convinced the 
latter were not without some dreadful 
import, though, as yet, she thanked 
Heaven, inexphcable to her. 

On the second day of her captivity, 
tlie brii::antine came to anchor in a 
small creek, between St. Sebastian and 
Fontarabia; defended from the storm 
on every side, by inaccessible rocks;, 
however, as it was almost dark, they 
continued on board that night, but 
disembarked early the foilowing morn- 
in^; and after a most faliguin<j scram- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 257 

ble over rii^j^id precipices, they arrived 
at the entratice of a wood, where the 
ahnost exhausted Alexena was placed 
on a horse by Don Philip, and in- 
stantly surrounded by his fierce and 
savage attendants, who led the way, 
through almost pathless wilds, to the 
dark and weather-beaten towers of 
Santa Marco. 



258 alexeka; on the. 



CHAP. XV. 

** Ob ! can you think of nothing dearer to me ? 
Dearer than liberty, my country, friends, 
Much dearer than my life, that I have lost.'* — 

On the night when Alexena went to 
change her dress, for the purpose of 
visiting Evelene, Lord Mortimer sum- 
moned Rourke, to whom he gave some 
necessary directions, and when his ser- 
vant retired, crossed the hall to the 
vestibule, where he waited for Alexena. 
In a few moments, a female, her exact 
height and figure, appeared, and he, 
not doubting she was the beloved ob- 
ject of liis affections, drew her arm 
through liis, and sallied into the street ; 
having been much amused during the 
course of the day, he proposed a re- 
petition of their country excursion, as 
soon as Evelene would be able to par- 
take of the enjoyment, and walked 
on, without noticing her silence; his 
mind occupied with a diversity of 
agreeable sensations, and his thoughts 



fjASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 250 

dwelling on the ecstacy that should be 
his the next day, when he was awaked 
from his dream of happiness, by his 
companion exclaiming, '' I fear, friend 
Pedro, you have mistaken your way." 
" Pedro! — Pedro!" cried his lordship, 
as he became deadly pale, '* in the name 
of Heaven who, or what are you?" 

'^ Who should I be, but Helen, M. 
Duval's housemaid?*' — " And where is 
Lady Alexena? How did you get hold 
of my arm, you sorceress?" said he, 
as he grasped her hand, " Say, tell me, 
who induced you to deceive me thus? 
But, Merciful Powers ! while I am tri- 
fling away time so precious, it may be 
Alexena needs my assistance." Then 
letting his prisoner go, flew back to 
the hotel ; but his wily guide took 
the precaution of making that no easy 
task, and it was not without infinite 
trouble he regained it in about two 
hours after. 

Alexena was then many leagues at 



260 alexena; oh, the 

sea, while her unfortunate lover ran 
from house to house, in a state of dis- 
traction, making' fruitless inquiries, and 
sending persons to search for her^ in 
every direction; hut, of course, they 
all returned unsuccessful. On arriving 
at the hotel of his friend Antonio, he 
there found Evelene in perfect health ; 
nor had she been unwell; neither had 
Mrs. Hastings been there; and in an 
instant every domestic of the family 
were sent to join in the pursuit; the 
entire nisrht was spent in vain search; 
and the following day found Lord Mor- 
timer, instead of the happiest, the most 
miserable of men. Being at length 
convinced she was again in the power 
of Montano, he consulted the friend 
who had so forcibly drawn (he cha- 
racter of Don Philip, and begged to 
know in what direction the Castle of 
Santa Marco lay ; that he might in- 
stantly proceed there, as he felt as- 
sured Alexena would shortly be a 
prisoner within it's walls. M. Dubois, 
gtive him written directions, describing 



GASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. SGi 

its situation willi much accuracy ; but 
at the same time attiimirii^ his belief, 
that it would be utterly impossible to 
enter it by force, and that his lordship's 
only hope was in overtaking Lady 
Alexena, before she could arrive. He, 
therefore, hastened to seek some useful 
assistants, and in three hours after set 
out, attended by his faithful domestics 
Rourke, xVlbert, and two trusty guides, 
who were well acquainted with the mazy 
windings of the Pyrenean paths. One 
of these men was remarkably strong 
and handsome, while his language and 
address clearly evinced he iiad not 
always been in such an abject situation; 
havitig once understood his lordship 
wished to arrive at Santa Marco as 
soon as possible, he led him by the 
most ujifreq<iented paths and by-ways, 
throuirh the rude bosom of those 
wilds; and on the third day, a little 
before the shades of evening fell, they 
discovered Don Acasto and Alexena 
ascending the mountains, about a quar- 
ter of a mile before them. Lord Mor- 



262 ALEXEXA ; OR THE 

timer, at the first glimpse, had not a 
doubt of her identity ; and his first im- 
pulse was to attack the vile ruffian, and 
rescue her by force ; but Don Philip had 
more than twice the number of attend- 
Imts, equally well armed, and, therefore, 
such an attempt could not possibly 
be attended with the slightest chance of 
success ; besides, should defeat ensue, 
he was aware Montano would have 
him instantly put to death, and then, 
who would rescue Alexena from their 
accursed power ? To assail them 
openly would be little less than mad- 
ness, and it became necessary to use 
the utmost caution, to keep at a conve- 
nient distance, that he might be able to 
seize the first unguarded moment, if 
one should occur, to carry her off. 

About half an hour after dusk, Don 
Acasto arrived at a convent, where he 
rested for the night, and his lordship 
at a little cottage, where his guide was 
known, and mjde heartily welcome. 
There was some venison boiling on the 



CASTLH OF SANTA MARCO. 2^3 

fire, and every appearance of connfort 
in this sequestered spot, the owner of 
which was a stout athletic man, with 
an open, generous countenance, and 
from his attention to Monfrane, seemed 
to be under some particular obligation. 
When they had been about half an 
hour in the cottage. Lord Mortimer 
took his guide aside, and expressed his 
most anxious wish to obtain some in- 
formation respecting Don Philip's im- 
mediate intentions, and whether there 
would not be a possibility of attacking 
him with success. Before Monfrane had 
time to reply, two of Acasto's domes- 
tics entered, accompanied by a monk 
from the neighbouring monastery, who 
having apologized for the intrusion, 
begged a shelter for his companions^ 
ulleuins: his house was so full, that there 
was not a single spot with which they 
<jould be accommodated. The cotta- 
ger said he could afford them a shelter 
and food, but had not a bed to olTer; 
however, if they would sleep in chairs 
^y his ftre, they were heartily welcome. 



864 ALEXENA; OR THE 

The men gladly assented, and the 
wonk shortly alter returtied to his 
monastery, wlicre one of the guides 
offered to accompany him ; his lord- 
ship's fears led him to believe there 
was some treachery intended, but hovr 
to avoid it he knew not, and contented 
himself by giving his domestics a sign 
to be on the alert, then turning to 
the strangers, endeavoured to enter 
into conversation. 

The elder of the two was deaf, or 
pretended to be so, and spoke not three 
words during the entire evening, but 
his companion seemed resolved to make 
amends for his taciturnity, by giving 
Lord Mortimer a long-winded detail of 
his journey through the mountains, and 
the number of leagues he had yet to 
travel before the termination of it. 
His lordship, marking his inclination 
for talking, prevailed on him to drink 
a considerable quantity of wine, that 
he might obtain all the information in 
Larco's power to give. The stratagem 






CASTLE OP SANTA MAHCO. 265 

had the desired effect, and as soon 
as the latter observed his companion 
had fallen asleep, he drew his chair a 
little nearer to that of his lordship, and 
in a low voice said, "you musf know, 
Siijnior, I have the honor to serve one 
of the most liberal masters in Spain, 
and who would be in every way unex- 
ceptionable, only for his rambling dis- 
position ; he is here to-day, for instance, 
to-morrow, if possible, he might be ia 
Madrid, and absolutely wearies his 
servants to death, trudging after hirn 
through wild desarts, such as these; 
crossing the seas, and for ever pending 
us with despatches from one place to 
the other, as if we were embassadors ; 
but thank my stars, I believe something 
has now fallen in his way, that will keep 
him quiet for a few weeks. Some time, 
ago he changed his chaplain, and I 
believe in my conscience, gained little 
by the bargain ; but be that as it 
may, father Montano became a part of 
our family a few weeks since, and ac- 
companied my lord to Bayonne, where 

VOL. I. M 



266 ALEXENA; OR THE 

he had some particular business, and 
there happened to see a beautiful 
Spanish lady, with whom he tell dee[)ly 
in love; so, as usual, became restless 
and unhappy, till father Montano found 
out the cause, and contrived a plan for 
gettini^ the lady into his power, which, 
though very simple, succeeded to a mira- 
cle, and they are now at the neighbour- 
ing monastery, on their journey to the 
Castle of Santa Marco ; a fine old place, 
I am told, only there is one great ob- 
jection to it; being haunted these ages 
past, by the Spirits of its former owners, 
who were a great family of warriors, 
and it appears, they haTe not forgotten 
their old sports yet, for they often raise 
such an uproar, as it resolved to have 
the whole place to themselves again ; 
yet they never do any harm, nor have I 
ever heard that they so much as knocked 
one person on the head; but the ghosts 
outside are not quite so peaceably dis- 
posed ; — there's Belzo Carracci, who 
sometimes pays a visit to the neigh- 
bourhood, and makes araeuds, with sk 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 267 

vengeance, as he generally cuts the 
throats of some dozens of travellers 
before he shifts his quarters; and not 
one of the holy brotherhood, have been 
able to get as much as a glimpse of 
him ; but should he attack us, you may 
rely on it, he will be warmly received, 
as we are all extremely well armed, 
and, I trust, would die like men, should 
there be occasion." 

While Larco yet continued to talk, 
Monfrane returned, accompanied by 
the cottager, who had followed him, 
and, in a few minutes, expressed a de- 
sire to speak to his lordship apart ; to 
which the latter assented, and they 
retired to a little room, adjacent to the 
kitchen, where, after a few prefatory 
words, the former said, he was aware 
that his lordship was the lover of the 
lady, the then captive of Don Philip, 
and as it was utterly impossi!)le to res- 
cue her by force, he would recommend 
strataii:em. '' Our best method, I con- 
ceive," he continued, "is to follow them 

m2 



^S ALEXENA ; OR THE 

the castle ; collect a few trusty brave 
spirits ; enter it by storm ; kill the vile 
lord of itj and his infamous chaplain ; 
and carry oft' the lady. I will procure 
the assistants, and you can have little 
compunction in exterminating two vil- 
lains, who are, and always have been 
capable of committing the most atro- 
cious and deadly crimes." 

Here Monfrane paused, and his lord- 
ship beheld him with surprise and 
Avonder, as he appeared perfectly ac- 
quainted with the private character of 
Don Philip and Montano, but feared 
his friendly advice was the foundation 
of some deep plan laid for his destruc- 
tion. Monfrane beheld the varying 
emotions of his lordship, which were 
strongly jnarked on his countenance, 
and on seeing doubt depicted there, 
appeared hurt, nay, grieved, that his 
iionesty was suspected, or his word 
questioned, and impatiently demanded, 
whether his odered services w^ould be 
^accepted. Lord Mortimer at that mo- 



eAS-TLE OF SANTA MAHCO. ^69 

ment caught his eye, which was so ex- 
pressive of sincerity, that he laid his 
hand on that of Monfrane, and said, 
** I trust to your honor and discretion, 
and though a total stranger to your 
motives, feel that you are not the per- 
son you wish the world to think you ; 
my fate heretofore has been rather ex- 
traordinary, and should I now be in- 
debted to you for the escape and safety 
of Lady Alexena de Guzman, believe 
me you will find I have a grateful heart, 
as well as the means to make you 
ample compensation." 

" Well, then, my lord, rest assured 
you have found a trusty friend, and that 
Monfrane will prove himself worthy 
your confidence. In the first place, 
I know who you are, and your recent 
advontures^ and am charmed that you 
have the good fortune to be attended 
by two truly brave and faithful domes- 
tics. As to myself, a superior power 
prevents me giving you any informa- 
tion, and you are merely to look on^ 



270 ALEXENA : OR THE 



and command me as your g-uide; but 
at the same time, your safety depends 
on }our complying \Yitb my advice in 
every instance. I am acquainted ^Yilh 
Santa ^larco, audits terrors; but fear 
not, Providence has raised a powerful 
friend for your beloved Alexena, and 
1hou:ih she may be doomed to sufier 
many trials, before the liour of her de- 
liverance, yet rest assured, her safety is 
imqueslionable. I shall now wish you 
good nigjjt, as I must give Larco a 
jjlausiiiie story to tell, should he be 
questioned by Don Philip; as meeting 
\\\*\\ stranoers in those uninhabited 
"•.vikls, v.oidd naturally excite alarm and 
suspicions, tliat might, in a great mea- 
sure, defeat our purposes. This Larco 
is a talkative, simple fellow; I will 
fn-st draw lilm into conversation, then, 
as a matter of course, account for 
your appearance in the best manner 
my ingenuity will suggest. 1 believe I 
wi]| say you are a Spanish merchant, 
on your way to France; — yes! yest 
that, with some etceteras, will answer 
charmiui'lv." 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 271 

Monfrane then left his lordship al- 
most bewildered by amazement ; his 
whole conduct had been so extra- 
ordinary, yet so respectfnl, and so 
"apparently sincere, that he felt pcr- 
snaded Providence had raised a new 
frietid in the person of a stranger, to 
assist in rescuing' the lovely Alexena 
from the grasp of the inhuman Acasto, 
and his detestable coadjutor. He re- 
tired to rest, lost in wild conjecture, 
>vho this new friend could be, but of 
thecertainty^ hnd not the sliglit^st idea., 
and shortly aft-er, fell into a sound 
sleep, while Rourke and Albert lay on 
a mattress beside his bed, fully accou- 
tred, with their carbines in their hands, 
ready to defend him at a moment's 
warning; and Lion, the canine compa- 
nion of tlie former, from his attention 
on the sliglitest noise, appeared to be 
consiable of (he watch. 

At sun-rise next morning, Monfrane 
entreated admission, and informed his 
lordvJiij), that Don Acasto was already 



272 alexena; or th£ 

on the road. " You may remain here 
an ho r longer/' he continued, " and 
by that time, they will be far enough in 
advance." Lord Mortimer instantly 
dressed, and a few moments after, par- 
took of an excellent, though homely, 
breakfast, prepared by his kind host, 
whom he offered to reward ^with a con- 
siderable purse, but of which the latter 
would not accept a farthing. '' No, 
uo, my lord," said the cottager, " I 
have received orders for what I have 
done, and could not accept any thing, 
if I was even inclined, which 1 assure 
you is not the case." 

His lordship thought this still more 
strange, but made no comment, and 
shortly after departed, attended by his 
guides and domestics. 



CASTLE OF SlNTi. MARCO. 273 

CHAP. XVJ. 

*' He i« gracious, if he Is observ'd; 

He hath a tear for pity, and a hand 

Open as day, for melting charity : 

Yet, notwithstanding, being incens'd, he's flint ; 

As humorous as winter, and as sudden 

As flaws congealed in the spring of day,'* 

MoNFR ANE was perfectly well ac- 
quainted v>itli the mountainous roads 
through which they traveled, and often, 
in the course of the day,, pointed out 
those situations which partictdar inci- 
dents made interesting ; they frequently- 
observed stone crosses erected on the 
heights, by which the spot was marked, 
where some lorn and hapless wanderer 
perished by the remorseless hands of 
the ferocious bandit. On Lord Morti- 
mer demandino' the meanini»; of those 
signals, his guide, for the first time, 
mentioned Belzo Carracci, that dreaded 
name, which spread universal con- 
sternation wlienever mentioned. The 
' nci<rhbourin<j; states had offered iin- 
nieiise rewards for his apprehcnsior^. 



M 5- 



274 ALEXENA ; on THE 

ar.d it ^Yas lous: considered a matter of 
wonder, tliat (be enormous price set on 
liis head, l)ad not oj)erated as an irre- 
sistible inducement \Tith some of liis 
Ijardj band to })c(ray him ; but, on the 
rontrarvj he often appeared in open 
da}', perfectly secure in tliose solitary 
Avilds, \\hose simple inhabitants feared 
and respected him. He was the avowed 
friend of the fatherless and widow, and 
was never known to oppress the de- 
solate, the unprotected, or distressed : 
the clergy of every denomination were 
his averpiion, and seldom had rea- 
son to praise liis clemency ; but even 
amon:j; the priesthood there were ex- 
ceptions, and more than once, lie was 
known to have treated with disfino'ujsh- 
ed kindness, a few who Mere eminent 
for their virtues and benevolence His 
poWi^rs of obtainiuii' local knowledge, 
of persons, and of circumstances, were 
conceived most astonisliMi<2:, and lie 
moved from place to place wilh incredi- 
ble celeritv. The peasants in the vici- 
Tiity of his favourite haunts, were large 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 275 

jyarlakcrs of his boniUyj and (his libe- 
rality, accotnpanied by llie terror which 
his very name inspired, impressed on 
their uninformed minds^, silence relativ^e 
to every action of lus^ wliich fell under 
their observation, and precluded the 
})0ssibility of indncini»" them to betray 
him; he was known by reputation in 
every habitable part of Spain, as a most 
terrible l)andit, from whose power there 
was ahnost an utter impossibility of 
escaping, if he once resolved to punish. 
His retreats were situated in the most 
savage wilds of thePyrennees, whereno 
jiower dare pursue him, and from those 
ahnost impenetrable Iiaunts, he ven- 
tured into eilicSj many leagues from 
his native glens, where he spread (error 
among the worthless, rich, luxurious, 
or mercenary, lie was in person tall, 
iUhletic, and graceful; his hair black as 
the pbimes of the raven; liis eyes full, 
bright, and penetratitig ; his teeth white 
as ivory; his every movement majestic, 
and had he not been a ro'ober, would, 
by the fair^ have been accounted one of 



276 alexena; or the 

Nature's noblest master-pieces. Sucli^ 
however, was Belzo Carracci, the terror 
of the surrojincliii"^ country ; little was 
known of his real disposition, as he 
was obeyed with the most riscid ex- 
actncss by his band ; but when roused 
by those passions which agitate man- 
kind, particularly anger, the boldest 
of his troop trembled beneath his frown, 
and none cou'd bear unabashed, the 
piercin*^ glance of his eye, when level- 
ed with agaze of penetrating inquiry. 
His voice was full, deep, and sonorous, 
and, when pleased, plaintive, sweet, and 
persuasive; but this rarely happened, 
never, except when soothing the dis- 
tressed, and yet, extraordinary as it 
may seem, many felt happy, when as- 
sured of his protection. 

To the character of such a man. 
Lord Mortimer could not be inatten- 
tive, and he listened with wonder to the 
detail of his virtues and vices. ''In the 
power of this singular bandit," said he, 
mentally, '' I may be in a few day&j 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAHCO. 277 

nay, hours, and yet the idea is not attend- 
ed with any sensation of uneasiness." 
Thus he remained some time lost in 
thought, and then resumed the con- 
versation, as it amused him : to Mon- 
frane he was indebted for many curious 
and entertaining anecdotes of this 
wondrous bandit, and listened with 
eager attention, often starting at the 
relation of events that were odd, horri- 
ble, and ambiguous. Conversing on this 
subject, he followed Don Philip towards 
the Castle of Santa Marco, preserving 
a necessary distance, until at length 
they arrived in the bosom of tremen- 
dous mountains, piled on each other 
in rude deformity, where savage chaos 
reigned among deep and shaggy glens, 
whose rocky caverns formed secure 
haunts for Carracci, and his formidable 
banditti. 

The dark sides of these mountains 
were covered with vast forests of pine, 
from whose thick shades, the veils of 
beasts of prey smote the ear of the 



278 alexena; or the 

alarmed antl (rcinblitiglraveiler; aiUltliC 
road freqiiciiliy \vound aloi)i»' tiie IcN'lj^e 
of the most ftigijUiil and dizzy ])rcci-' 
piccs, ^vitllOllt balustrade or battlement, 
and so narrow too, that the sickenino; 
fancy shuddered at the idea of stumbling' 
on the sharp and rui^o'ed path, as such 
an event would most likely be attended 
uith destruction; yet the peril of 
wandering over them was often com- 
pensated by the exquisitely romantic 
scenery, that at every tin-ning, burst on 
the astonished sense of (he weary ex- 
plorer of their beauties ; frequently, the 
meandering road led into the bosom 
of an enchanting- valley, while above, 
the huls of {feasants were rudely 
erected on the point of some hanging- 
})recipice, in airy dreariness, threaten* 
ingto tumble, with every blast, into the 
almost fathomless glen, whose frightful 
4ind yawning chasm gaped to receive 
the totterino;' mansions. 



o 



Lord Mortimer beheld such scents 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 270 

as these \vi(li cnlliusiasin; they suited 
the disturbed state of his reeH!i5z;s_, aud 
streniitheued it to bear succeeding- trials 
with becoming' fortitude; his busy and 
fearful imagination, often presented 
the bold and stern form of Belzo 
Carracci, standing on the brow of a 
commanding clifF, pointing Acasto to 
his bandits. Such thouohts as tliese 
frequently caused him to start, as for 
an instant lie believed the illusion real. 

As the third evenin*? cast her sable 
mantle across the rouoh shoulders of 
the mountains, Monfrane descried the 
distant sea, and pointed out the neces- 
sity of being doubly cautious, as they 
were fast approacliing tiie castle, and 
as the frequent occurrence of liills and 
vallies rendered it unsafe to be Milhin 
a mile of Acasto or his attendants, lest 
they should be recognized, as they de- 
scended into the glen, or on the rising 
brow of the mountain. Lord Morlinier 
assented to tlie truth of the observation, 
and ordered his domestics to proceed 



280 ALEXESA ; OR THE 

slower, as he would stop at the first 
place that offered a slioltcr; shortly 
lifter, they heard the chime of a con- 
vent l)ell, which was a signal that Don 
Philip would proceed no farther that 
night; and the chill air of the moun- 
tains becoming very unpleasant, his 
lordship heartily wished for the cheer- 
ing blaze of a wood fire, to reanimate 
his almost congealed and stififened limbs. 
His guide observed his anxiety, and 
instantly informed him, there was such 
another cottage as that in which he 
passed the former night, a quarter 
of a mile farther, where orders were 
already issued, to have a supper and 
a bed prepared for him. Again, Lord 
Mortimer felt astonished, but finding 
inquiries for his mysterious friend Were 
fruitless, he thanked his guide, without 
making any observation ; and on his 
arrival, found some excellent fish, with 
abundance of choice wine, bread, and 
dried fruits, on which he and his 
attendants supped with vast saiisfac- 
tion, as being unexpected, made i-t 
doubly acceptable. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MATICO. 281 

Next morning, afier breakfast, Moii- 
frane observed, that before the sun 
bathed his fiery coursers in the glossy 
waves of the Atlantic, they should see 
the grey towers of Santa Marco. His 
lordship, who was already much 
fatigued, was not a little rejoiced at 
the prospect of so speedily terminating 
a wearisome journey, and proceeded 
with renovated hopes; as they ad- 
vanced on the castle, the mountains 
became more w ildly terrific ; while, from 
behind each projecting rock, Rourke 
expected to see the grim faces of the 
robbers peep forth, in the act of spring- 
ing on (hem ; indeed, the craggy steeps 
which tJiey were every moment obliged 
to pass, were sufficient to inspire 
Carracci himself with awe. 

At length the hour arrived, which 
was to find Alexena a prisoner within 
the walls of Santa INIarco ; every mo- 
ment Lord Mortimer strained his sia^ht 
to see that dreaded spot, which he now 
wished, yet feared, to behold. " What?"^ 
he mentally exclaimed, '' What shalJ 



28f alexena; on the 

I dOj if til is castle be impregnable to 
outward attack, and proof against stra* 
tao-em? Oh 1 what then will be the 
fate of my beloved Alexena? To what 
perils, to wliat insults, may she not be 
exposed?" As these last thoughts flash- 
ed on his tortured brain, they almost 
caused distraction ; until Hope, that 
gentle soother of all onr griefs, whis- 
pered comfort, and lulled his fears; 
fche promised to restore his Alexena, 
assisted by love and friendship. Oiice 
more the cloud of anxiety was chased 
from his brow; care retreated, and 
liope encouraged, while she pointed 
to the haven of his viishes. They had 
just then descended into a frightful, 
deep, and rugged s^^cn, which grew 
narrower as they advanced, and up 
which the storm whistled, and swept the 
black and horrid rocks that were piled 
to the clouds, foruiitifr a narrow wind- 
ing defile, at the first turn of which, 
the Caslle of Santa Marco was revealed 
to their view, frowiiinir on the "rim and 
frighlfid landsxape by which it was 
surrounded. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAIICO. 283 

The moment his eye caught its grey 
moss-clad battlements, he involuntary 
started, but endeavoured to suppress 
his emotion ; and as he continued to 
gaze on its antique and gloomy tower?^ 
bis countenance became pale and agi- 
tated ; Monfrane observed his varying 
sensations with evident concern, and 
represented the necessity of turning 
out of the direct path to the cottage, 
Avhich was discernible through the open 
vista ; but Lord Mortimer refused to 
stir until Alexena should cross the draw- 
bridge, which was already lowered to 
receive her; the following moment he 
caught a view of her light drapery as 
she emerged from the wood ; and when 
t^he was received into the court-yard 
by Don Acasto's attendants, his heart 
throbbed with agony, and he passion- 
ately exclaimed, " Oh ! my Alexena, 
I fear 1 have seen you for the last time. 
Alas! beliold what a numerous train 
of soldiers and domestics are already 
on the ramparts; now, how can 1 hoj)e 
for success," Again Monfrane urged 



2M ALEXENA ; OR TIIE 

him to hasten to the cottage, as there 
was a possibiHty he might be discovered 
by the bands on the castle walls, whick 
would insure inevitable destruction, 
and reminded him of the power of his 
unknown friend. " Recollect/' he con- 
tinned, ''that he haspromiscd toprotect 
the object of your affections, and will 
be equally- careful of your safety, unless 
you forfeit his kindness, by wilfully 
disobevinij his wishes." 

The manner of Monfrane was im- 
pressively solemn; his words impressed 
conviction on his lordship's heart, and 
when he arrived at his rustic hotel, felt 
considerably relieved from those chill- 
ing apprehensions, which had so hitelj 
driven him to the brink of despair. 
After supper, he requested to know was 
there a possibility of ascertaining the 
exact situation of the castle, as, notwith- 
standing his fatigue, he felt assured he 
could not be easy in his mind, until its 
strength, and the possibilities of sur- 
prisino: or storminij^ it, were accuratelv 



CATTLE OF SANTA MAIICO. 3^5 

understood by him. His guide promised 
to gratify his wishes the following night, 
and lead him through all the private 
paths, that by inspecting them, he might 
judge of the difficulties which were to be 
encountered ; but absolutely refused to 
go until his lordship's strength and 
spirits were restored by repose; to this 
the latter was obliged to assent, though 
much against his inclination, and waited 
with the utmost impatience, the ap- 
proach of the following evening. 

When the hour arrived, he set out, 
accompanied by Monfrane, Rourke, 
and Albert, well armed. The moon 
shone with peculiar brightness, which 
was very fortunate — the road in many 
places being almost impassable. As 
they proceeded, they heard the waves 
beating against the adjacent rocks, 
^nd the screams of the wild sea birds; 
and after considerable labour, gained 
the summit of one of the frightful pre- 
cipices, from which they had an excel- 
lent view of the castle, and beheld with 



28o ALEXENA; OR THE 

-wonder, its asloiiisliing extent. It stood 
on a vast rock, which rose perpendicu- 
larly out of the bosom of one of the 
most frigbUiil glens the sportive hand 
of nature ever formed, and was uncon- 
nected with the ridgy sides of the adja- 
cent valley, except by the draw-bridge, 
when it chanced to be lowered. The 
rock had few projections, and to fasten 
either rope or ladder, was utterly im- 
possible, even if there had not been 
strong ramparts built on its rude brows, 
whose walls were flanked with small 
round towers, at equal distances, which, 
with a tremendous portcullis, iron- 
barbed barriers, and draw-bridge, effec- 
tually crushed the hopes of intrusion ; 
and should those obstacles be sur- 
mounted, there was a strong guard to 
contend with. Every thing pointed out 
its formidable strengrth — hiii'h black 
walls, small gothic windows, frowning 
towers, and rude battlements — convey- 
ed a deep conviction of its stability, 
which seemed to hold the idea of assault 
in scorn. Lord Mortimer gazed on it 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAnCO. 287 

in hopeless despondency, yet resolved 

to inspect the forrnidabie rock which 

supported it, as the shades of night 

promised to favour and screen him from 

/ " observation. He inquired from IMon- 

rri^r^cL fi'ane, was there a possibility of ^ainin^ 

^'"*' its base, and was answered in the 

affirmative, with an offer to conduct 

him to it, t!ie moment darkness would 

admit of their approach. 



tKD OF THE FIRST VOJ.UME 
ALEXENA; 

OB, THE 

Castle of Santa Marco* 

A ROMANCE, 
IN THREE VOLUMES, 



i 



Vi>/.I[,Fi7(7(: 205. 




f^rl^mi ca '-'If 



/'(/ USrC'CiJj 



ALEXEN A ; 



OB, TUB 



Castle of Santa Marco, 

A ROMANCE, 
IJV THREE VOLUMES. 

EMBELLISHED WITH ENGRAVINGS. 



«« Ye gods of quiet and of sleep profound! 
Whose soft dominion o'er this castle sways ; 
And all the widely silent places round. 
Forgive me, if my trembling pen displays 
What never yet was sung in mortal lays." 



VOL II. 



lontJon: 

Printed at the Minerva Press, for 
A. B.. NEWMAN AND CO. LEADENHALLST. 

1817. 



'-it. 






ALEXENA; 



OR THE 



Castle of Santa Marco. 



-»<♦♦♦» » 



CHAPTER I. 

'" 'Ti» now the very witching time of night, 

When church-yards yawn, and hell itself breathe* out 
Contagion to this world.'* 

Hamlet. 

i\S soon as the " iron tongue of mid- 
night had tolled twelve," the moon re- 
tired, leaving Lord Mortimer and his 
attendants in almost impenetrable dark- 
ness ; Monfrane then led the way, and 
they proceeded towards the castle's 
base, with speed, anxiety, and caution. 

VOL. II. A 



ALEXENA : OR THE 



The path they followed was unincum- 
bered by obstacles of any sort; so they 
reached it in safety, and waited with 
impatience the return of the lamp of 
night, which shortly after burst through 
a mass of sable clouds, and tipped with 
rays of silver, the tops of the surround- 
ing cliffs; her light then served to show 
the utter impossibility of scaling the 
rock, and his lordship examined it with 
minute attention; he went round every 
projection,, peeped into every crevice 
accessible to him, and turned from it 
in despair ; while the sound of the 
heavy foot-falls of the guards on the 
rampart above, insured certain destruc- 
tion, in the event of the slightest noise. 
Thev' therefore were extremelv cauti- 
ous, keeping in the shade as much as 
possible, until Monfrane, in a low whis- 
per, required their return^ expressing 
great anxiety at the delay that had been 
already made, and hinted there was a 
strong probability they would be sur- 
prised, if they contiimed longer in such 
a perilous situation. Had Lord Morti- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 3 

mer at that moment observed the ex- 
pression of his j^uide's features, lie 
would have seen much (o excite his 
suspicion ; the countenance of Monfrane 
Avas marked with the deepest anxiety, 
accompanied by the exulting looks of 
successful cunning ; but liis lordship 
was otherwise engaged ; liis every 
thought was Alexena's, and he was then 
equally inattentive to every other ob- 
ject under heaven; not so Albert, he 
had the penetration to see the change 
that so forcibly marked the manner of 
their guide, and determined to shoot 
him on the spot, should any incident 
occur, which would justify his fears, 
and prove Monfrane a traitor. 

A condense cloud at that instant 
again obscured the moon, which was 
considered a favourable moment to retire 
from their dangerous situation ; they 
therefore followed Monfrane through 
the narrow defile, into an angle in the 
glen, (the most lonely and gloomy spot 
which lay between the cottage and the 
castle;) the road on every side was 
overshadowed with clustering shrubs^ 

A 3 



4 :ALEXENA ; OR THE 

whose foliage cast a deep shade across 
the narrow path, and Albert, in vain, 
endeavoured to catch a glimpse of his 
p-uide's countenance, but the darkness 
frustrated his design, and in eager en- 
deavours to effect his purpcse, he stum- 
bled, and fell; his lordship stooped to 
raise liim, when, to his incredible dis- 
may, Monfrane plunged into the shade, 
v^histlina: so shrill, that the distant 
rocks wrung with the echo, and before 
our hero and his servants could prepare 
their arms, they, to their infinite terror, 
observed upwards of twenty carbines 
levelled at them from every direction ; 
to move, was to incur inevitable destruc- 
tion, as they were completely sur- 
rounded by banditti. The only alter- 
native was submission ; but Lord Mor- 
timer hoped to make conditions before 
he gave up his arms, and desired their 
chief to come forward, to whom he 
would surrender. A robber then ad- 
vanced, who, from the dark plume that 
waved in his cap, and the purple cloak 
which enveloped his figure, appeared 
to be their captain. He commanded 



tASTliE OF SANTA MATICO. S 

(he g^n^^ to sufround their prisoners, 
but promised they should not sustain 
either injury or insult^ and desired 
the troop to treat them with civility. 
"However/* he contiiiued, ''should 
they attempt to escape, recollect your 
orders." The bandits bowed slightly, 
and having disarmed their captives, 
bes^an their march throui»h the most 
desolate wilds imai^inablc. 

They travelled the whole night, and 
as soon as the first tints of morniuir en- 
abled them to disfinguiah objects. 
Lord Morliiner found himself in a most 
horrible romantic glen, between two 
black barren mountaijis, which seemed 
to lead to a forest, and on approaching, 
the idea was confirmed by those of 
the banditti who were mounted alight- 
ing, immediately after they entered a 
thicket, raising the branches as they 
proceeded, forming an arch, under 
which their comrades passed ; and when 
the whole" group were assembled, the 
umbrtijfeous shade resumed its wonted 
position, eilectually securing the en- 
trance to this leafy prison. 



6 



AT.KXKMA ; OR TUli 



CHAP. 11. 



For the love of all thegods. 



Li'l's li'uvc llu- h''riuit pity with our jnothprs ; 
Aiu? wl^ni we li;ivf our .irnuuir InicklM i>n, 
The vfiioiii'il vingcuiicc riilc upon tuir swonh !'* 

Tttoii.. t^ Cats. 

X [\V. haiuliUi tuommI loiward in a 
zi«>'/.a^" ilirnlion. until ihcy rcachrd a 
small cavity in a iDik, of jetty black- 
ness, into uhich thov cicj>t, accompa- 
i»i(Hl bv his lordship; but. haviui;' once 
cnt(M(Hl. the cavern became more spa- 
cious, though the (^\treme darkness 
precluded the possibility of ascertainin«^' 
its extent. In a tew moments, one of 
tlic rob!>ers made the vanity cave riuij 
■with asi«;-nal whistle, and instantly iaint 
Hashes oi' lii;ht oleanuMl in the misty 
obscurity, accompanied by the mnrnuu' 
of voic(\s, and tlu^ distant sound of 
lootstt^ps. Lv)rd INKntimer was now 
lunried forward by his conductors, but 
^Inunk back in tenor, on observing; 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 7 

their srrim shadows reflected in a dark 
pool, whose waters made a mournful 
sound, as they gently washed the cre- 
vices of their stonv boundaries : which 
one of the ruffians perceiving, flung a 
rocky fragment into its glossy bosoms- 
causing a noise like distant tliunder — 
addins: horror to the scene. The bri2:ht 
glare of torches soon displayed the si- 
tuation of thecavern, and countenances 
more terrible than Satan's representa- 
tives ; who, as they approached a mas- 
sive iron grating that impeded further 
progress, welcomed their comrades with 
curses ; swearing, their chief expected 
them two hours before. Mis lordship 
on hearing this, found he had not as 
yet seen the captain of these predacious 
bravoSj and liis imagination instantly- 
presented the form of Belzo Carracci; 
but the ruffians gave him little time for 
reflection, having ordered him to ascend 
a short flight of sfeps, which led to the 
iron grate, that the banditti within were 
movi.jo bv the assistance of a windlass, 
and as it slowly rose into the rocks 



ALEXENA ; OR THE 



above, made a most disagreeable gra- 



ting noise. 



• While a passage was thus preparing, 
the robbers rudely jested with each 
other. "Hark yon, Bondello/' said 
one of tiie villains vvitiiin the grating, 
''1 wish this damned portcullis was after 
coming smash on your toes, as we 
should then see the prettiest face in 
Christendom, eh! what think yon? 
would vou look as blue as the u'vAit 
you sa'v the black knight in the gallery 
of Santa Marco." To this the other 
answered, with a muttered threat, and a 
deep growl : — " I, I, Signior ; you would 
hop, but not run quite so fast as you 
did previous to your ttmibling down 
the great stair-case." Bondello's eyes 
glared fury ; but on laying his hand 
on the hilt of his sabre, he who was se- 
cond in command ordered the mischiev- 
ous wag to be silent, and in a rage de- 
manded, " were they to be admitted 
before the day of judgment?" The 
bandit now became less talkative, and in 
a few moments the grate was suffici- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 9 

ently raised to ailinit Lord Mortimer 
witli his j^uards, who proceeded for- 
AYard, while the portcullis fell with a 
liideoiis crashj irito a deep groove cut 
in the rock for its reception^ and its 
bolts were iuiinediately replaced in their 
respective fastenings. The ruffians for 
some time advanced in a straiirht line, 
until they reached the top of a flight of 
stairs, cut in the solid rock; they then 
descended, and passed through a vast 
number of winding passages, which led 
to a kind of octagon hall^, from which 
others branched oflf in various direc- 
tions. Here they paused for a few mi- 
nuteSj as if waiting for orders. Again 
the cavern run"- with the si2:nal whistle 
and again they proceeded, following 
tiie direction to the ri2:ht, which brou^'ht 
them to a second hall, larger than the 
first. This terminated in a fliglit 
of steps, leading to u slone gallery, 
sirrounded on every side by small 
chambei's, which his lordship conceived 
to be the apartments of the banditti ; 
and at the end of this thev entered n 

m 

A 5 



JO ALEXENA ; OR THE 

large square vault, slill guarded by ten 
of the most ferocious of the troop. 
Here his lordship was informed his 
eyes, and those of his attendants, must be 
covered, and on his remonstrating, was 
ao-ain assured no violence was intended, 
but his unwillingness encreased, which 
Bondello observing, exclaimed, " Come, 
come, Signior, no folly; were we or- 
dered to send you to hell, we should 
blow your brains about your ears, with- 
out all this ceremony." Ilis lordship 
felt the truth of this sava»e rcmon- 
strance, and being convinced further 
resistance would only serve to irritate 
those wretches, quietly submitted to 
liave tlje bandage placed on his eyes; 
Rourke and Albert were also hood- 
winked, and Ihe operation seemed to 
afford great mirth to the ruffians, par- 
ticularly as Tom's face was nigh as 
ruefnl as that of Don Quixote. The 
poor fellow believing the following mo- 
ment should be his last, made an at- 
tempt to pull the handkerchief from his 
brows, as he vociferated ''damn it^ if I 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. II 

am to die, let it be like a man, with my 
eyes open." Down iell the bandage^, 
and judge Rourke's surprise, on finding 
the floor had sunk several feet, leavins" 
(he robbers above gazing at tliem as they 
descended ; he was too much astonished 
to be able to articulate, and on looking 
down, observed several of the banditti 
below, waiting to receive them ; the 
moment after, the platform rested se- 
curely on the floor of a comfortable 
apartment, where there was an excellent 
fire, and a plentiful repast; the floor 
was carpeted, and the furniture of ex- 
cellent workmanship. Tom instantly 
whispered the satisfaction he felt at this 
unlooked-for change, and began to be 
somewhat reconciled to his situation, 
when the robbers poured into the 
chamber, from various apertures in the 
wail, each placing his hand on the back 
of the chair which he intended to oc- 
cupy, and invited Rourke and Albert to 
sit with them. Lord Mortimer was 
conducted to the upper end of the 
room, where he observed the anxious 



12 



ALEXENA ; OR THE 



looks of the troop, which seemed to say^ 
tliey either expected tlie entrance of 
their chief, or p3rmission to partake of 
the inviting repast before them. In a 
few moments a bugle sounded^ and the 
instant after, Monfrane entered, habited 
as a bandit, to conduct Lord Mortimer 
into the presence of liis chief. His lord- 
ship beheld him with surprise and in- 
dignation, at which tlie latter smiled, 
and taking his hand, said, " IMy lord, 
I told you a powerfid friend promised 
protection to your Alexena, I now come 
to lead you to him, and in BelzoCarracci 
you i^hall behold a man, who, I trust, 
^rill prove worthy your confidence." 
His lord^ihip, still more surprised, suffer- 
ed himself to be conducted into an ad' 
joining cliamber, which was most splen- 
didly decorated, and where he found 
Carracci. IMonfrane introduced him, 
and he was received by the chief, with 
all the ease and grace of the finished 
gentleman. Lord Mortimer beheld 
the martiid form of this extraordinary 
iiee-Looter, with evident admiration; 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 13 

his intelli^^ent countenance indicated a 
promptitude in action, and a fund of 
inexhaustible resources ; his arched 
brows gave the stronf»est expression to 
his every action, and his face, though 
extremely handsome, bore the marks of 
the rude elements to which it had long 
been accustomed. When agitated by 
any great exertion, his whole form 
seemed dilated and marked with an air 
of inexpressible ardour; his height 
added grace to his athletic figure, which 
seemed to have been cast in the mould 
of symmetry itself, and though a robber, 
with perverted principles, yet had a 
more gentle heart than many of those 
held up to the admiring world as pat- 
terns of virtue and morality. 

His lordshio, in a short time, forirot 
his imperfections, and in the graces of 
his conversation, found amusement, if 
not information, and before breakfast 
was removed, felt charmed that he had 
found so powerful an assistant in such 
an extraordinary man as Carracci. 
About noon, tlie banditti were ordered 



14 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

to assemble in the great hall of this 
subterranean world, to attend their 
chiefj on business of particular import- 
ance; and when the bugle announced 
they waited, he led his lordship into the 
midst of that horrible assembly, where 
he was certain his wishes would be 
complied with, and the moment he en- 
tered, the banditti evinced their respect 
by a loud cheer of welcome, and by 
uncovering their heads. Carracci waved 
his sabre, and in an instant all was silent 
as the tomb ; then taking his lordship's 
hand, he said, " Behold the friend of 
the man whom you have voluntarily- 
named your chief, and as such receive 
him ; swear thai his cause shall be your 
own, and that to the utmost of your 
power, you will avenge him — swear to 
exterminate the vile Acasto and his in- 
famous agent, the implacable toes of 
Carracci and his band. The day that 
gives him to destruction, insures ye the 
treasures of the castle, and for this 
I pledge my failh. The hall now re- 
sounded with wild huzzas, and in a 
moment out fiew/Mhcir flaming iaul- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. J5 

cliions." — " We swear/' they shouted, 
^' We sweai\to send his soul to hell at the 
first signal." A thrill of horror shot 
through the form of Lord Mortimer, as 
he raised his eye to that of Carracci, and 
started on beholding the terrors of his 
visage ; his gentleness had fled^ and 
was succeeded by the most envenomed 
vengeance ; his lordship then recollect- 
ing his late words, mentally exclaimed, 
" May not Acasto have been his bit- 
terest foe, may he not have driven 
him by his wiles, to his present dread- 
ful situation? It must be so, and 
what punishment is too great for a 
wretch that has, perhaps, wantonly 
destroyed one of Nature's fairest 
works. Oh ! Carracci, I feel convinced 
you have not always been a villain, 
and from ray soul I pity the despair 
which drew you into this whirlpool 
of vice ; is there yet a possibility of re- 
claiming you? I know not, but the 
attempt is worth the trial; and if fated 
to remain your captive any length of 
time, every exertion of mine shall be 
expended in the endeavour, and may 



16 alexena; on the 

the powers of mercy grant me success.'* 
He was now called on to return thanks 
for promised assistance,, which he did 
with such a winning^grace^ as created in 
the minds of the robbers, a particular 
desire to render him service. 

When they retired from the hall, 
Carracci recommended a few hours re- 
pose, after which, he promised to com- 
municate the plan he had formed in his 
behalf, but until then, determined to be 
silent. Monfrane was now ordered to 
conduct him to the crimson chamber. 
^'See," said Carracci, "that it is well 
air<>d, and let no noise disturb that 
quarter. Farewell, my lord," he con- 
tinued, " may you enjoy that repose, 
which never can revisit the unfortunate 
man you have honoured with your con- 
fidence." Lord Mortimer beheld him 
with compassion, and with difflculty 
concealed his emotion, as he replied, 
"trust in Providence, mercy always 
waits with extended arms to rc( eive a 
repentant sismer.'' "Hush! In^sh !" 
Belzo softly exclaimed, " sucjj precepts 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 17 

insure destruction here ; but you are 
fatiijued — "ood ni^^ht — "ood niiirht." 
He then hurried away through a distant 
door, and his lordship followed Mon- 
frane in melancholy silence, attended 
by his domestics. 

As they proceeded, they were asto- 
nished by the various winding pas- 
sasres, which seemed cut in the solid 
rock, and were secured at the different 
turnings by iron gates, whose massive 
strength, and solid fastenings, seemed 
to defy the power of every intruder. 
After wanderiniir some time in those 
chill vaults, tlioy entered a chamber 
containing several gigantic figures of 
warriors, in various attitudes; while 
his lordship paused to examine their 
grim countenances, Monfrane picked 
up a long forked instrument from the 
floor, and with ils points, pressed 
against the eye-balls of one of those 
statues; instantly the wall behind them 
rent asnnder, forming a breach a few 
feet from the ground, and disclosed to 



18 alexena; or the 

his astonished lordship, tlie chamber to 
which Carracci had ordered liim to be 
conducted. A small ladder was placed 
against the aperture, which he ascend- 
ed, and entered a spacious apartment, 
aired by a cheerful fire, that diffused 
light and warmth. The room was 
hung with crimson velvet, trimmed with 
gold, and the hangings of the bed cor- 
responded with the rest of the drapery; 
the style of the entire was magnificent, 
and increased his lordship's wonder. 
Monfrane now entered into conversa- 
tion, and in a few words informed him, 
he was first lieutenant of the troop, 
and had been sent by Carracci to 
Bayonne, for the purpose of conducting 
him to the Castle of Santa Marco, 
being himself in a cottage at the foot 
of the Pyrennees, where, from some of 
his band, he had intimation of Don 
Philip's outrage, the night it had been 
committed. He was about further ex- 
plaining the conduct and intentions of 
his captain, when one of those whistles 



\ 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 19 



summoned biin away, and he hurried 
from the chamber, attended by his 
lordship's servants, notwithstanding 
their earnest entreaties to the contrary, 
as they wished to sit by the fire, and 
watch while he slept; but to dispute 
was vain — the orifice closed — the lad- 
der was removed — and Albert, with 
Rourke, securely locked within an 
adjoining chamber, and then Monfrane 
flew off to obey the well known signal. 
We will now return to Alexena, who 
had no conception of the vicinity of her 
lover on her arrival at the castle, nor of 
any circumstance relative to him, since 
their unfortunate separation at Duval's 
hotel, or the reasons which induced 
Don Philip to visit Santa Marco, a 
place, even the name of which, he could 
not hear with composure, and disliked 
more than any other spot on earth. 



20 alexena; or the 



CHAP. 111. 



There's more gold : 



Do you damn others, and let this damn you, 
And ditches grave you all !'* 

TiMON. 

Immediately after the escape of 

Lord Mortimer, Montano robbed the 
Dominican convent and monastery, 
which he etisily eft'ected, bein«^ trea- 
snrer, and then, with his ill-gotten 
wealth, made all possible haste to the 
nearest sea- port, where he engaged a 
vessel, and sailed for France. Being* 
addicted to o'amin£ir from his earliest in- 
fancy, and now having the power of 
gratifying this darling passion, he soon 
became a conslant attendant at the 
tables of Bayonnc, where his acquaint- 
ance with Don Philip was renewed. 
Montano had been the early instructor 
of his youth; but the austerity of 
' his manner disgusted the parents of 
Acasto, who dismissed him; and he did 
not again meet his pupil, until this 
eventful period. They, however^ soon 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 21 

r>ecognized each other^ and shortly 
after found their sentiments congenial. 
Don Philip, n^tvvithsfanding-, won 
ahnost every pistole from the monk, who 
becafne ahnost frantic with repeated 
losses, and tortured himself with 
devices, how he should reicain his lost 
property. Being well acquainted with 
the passions of Acasto, he was forming 
many diabolical projects, when all his 
ideas were suddenly turned into a new 
channel, by discovering Alexena. On 
the wings of a daemon, he flew to 
Acasto Miih this intelligence, and in- 
flamed his imaijination with a gclowins: 
description of her charms, and when 
he found him ripe for his purpose, 
she was represented as an easy 
victim ; and as Montano had foreseen^ 
Don Philip only beheld her to be ena- 
moured ; thus his villainy was, for 
the present, crowned with success; 
Acasto rettnned every ducat of his 
money, and added some thousands 
more to bribe those who were likely to 
prove successful agents. In a short 



2S alexexa; or the 

time a brigantine was prepared, and 
some of the vile domestics of the castle 
were ordered to attend on the coast of 
Fontarabia, with horses. Money pur- 
<;hased the wavering honesty of Duval 
and Ills servants, but the capture of 
Alexena, made ample compensation for 
the trouble and expended treasure. 

It is useless to enter into a detail of 
her journey to Santa Marco; let it 
suffice, that Don Philip was particularly 
attentive, and Montano as brutal as he 
dare be; she suffered the civilities of 
the one, and the cruelty of the other, 
with the same apathy ; and had it not 
been for her firm reliance on the good- 
ness of that Providence which had 
always supported her, under the hea- 
viest afflictions, she must have fallen a 
rictim to despondency and grief 

While her conductors led herthrouah 
the wild passes of the Pyrennees, she 
doubted the possibility of Lord Morti- 
mer's ever being able to trace the foot- 
steps of Acasto; and the farther she 
proceeded, the more those fears were 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. ^3 

likely to be realized. But what tongue 
can tell, or pen describe, her agony, 
when she beheld the terrible fortress 
in which Don Philip informed her she 
should remain, until he had the felicity 
of calling her his for ever. They were 
then before the gates, the draw-bridge 
was about to be lowered, when Alexena 
gave a wild^ desponding glance around. 
" Oh ! merciful God," she exclaimed, 
in the greatest misery, " what shall I 
do? Oh! "will you not save me from 
those fiends ? — is there no friend nii]:h ? — 
alas! no, no — all is gloomy barrenness^, 
and I am, indeed, lost." 

Montano's eves flashed fire — he 
caught the reins of her horse's bridle, 
and, with a curse, flogged the poor 
animal into the grassy court of the 
castle. Her spirits now forsook her; 
objects became indistinct; and she 
fell faintirig into the arms of Acasto's 
Stewart, Torquo, whose savage ap- 
pearance was more than suihcient to 
cause a relapse. When respiration 
restored her exhausted faculties, she 



2i ALEXENA; OR THE 

found herself in a large gloomy chain* 
bcr, supported by black marble pillars, 
lit by a large gothic window, whose 
painted glass emitted a dim light, that 
rendered objects confused, and led her 
to believe the pale emaciated form of 
old Margaret, who sat by her, adminis- 
tering restoratives, was some spectre; 
conjured up by an over-heated imagi- 
nation. ''My poor dear lovely child," 
said this good creature, '' I trust you 
are now better, and though you have 
the misfortune to fall into the hands of 
Don Philip, I think he will not be per- 
mitted by Providence to injure so much 
goodness; there is Larco, who has 
made all the servants cry, by relating 
your sorrows, and the patience with 
which you suffered the cruelties of that 
savage monk." Here she was inter- 
rupted by a loud, yet hoarse voice, 
vociferating, ''Margaret! hollo! old 
hulk, I say, where have cast anchor?" 
'* Merciful Heaven," exclaimed the 
agitated Alexena, '' who is this?" 



CASTLE OP SANTA MARCO. 23 

''Who is this?" echoed the hollow 
wall. 

-'TisI, Bill Williams— eh! what 
cheer ? how fares our little scifi ? — 
What ! wrecked by a broadside of 
sorrow — foundered in an inhospitable 
port !" 

" Silence, for heaven's sake !" said 
Margaret, " dear William, Donna 
Alexena is very ill, but not so much as 
your kind fears lead you to believe/' 

" Well, well, there's hope abaft — 
AVhat cheer, young lady, what cheer? 
Damn me if e'er Bill heaves a billovT 
against a vessel, already half shattered 
in the gale of misfortunes." 

" My friend, I thank you," said Alex- 
ena, with bewitching softness, " but I 
wish to be left to the solitude of my 
chamber the remainder of this evening, 
as I am really very unwell." 

" God steer you into the harbour of 
safety," rejoined Williams, as he wiped 
away a starting tear. " But come, old 
Weathergale," addressing Margaret, 
''you are wanting to heave dinner on 

VOL. II. B 



2S ALEXENA; OR THE 

deck as fast as possible. May the Itrst 

bit our chaplain stows^ stick in his 

hatchway, and run him into a snug 

mooring- in hell." 

Margaret, to prevent Alexena being 

alarmed by the sea vocabulary of 
honest Bill, as he called himself, hur- 
ried him from the room, still mijlteriug 
curses on Don Philip and Montano. 

'' D — 1 founder them and their yellow 
rhino," he vociferated, as they descend- 
ed the stairs; "Do you think it will 
purchase a passport to Heaven? — ill 
none of it." 

'' For mercy's sake, I beg you will 
lower your voice, or you may be over- 
heard," observed Margaret. 

" D — n me! who's afraid?" cried 
Williams. " 1 wul save this dear little 
bark, or perish." 

When their voices were no lonirer 
distinguishable, x\lexena slid from the 
bed; and while the pearly tears fell fast 
on her bosom, she besought her Divine 
Father to grant her fortitude to bear her 
trials wilh Christian resignation, and 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 27 

rose from her knees considerably re- 
lieved ; the pure spirit of religion arnned 
her mind with fortitude, and promised 
to preserve her from every impending 
danger. Shortly after, INlargaret re-ap- 
peared with a tray of refreshments, and 
with the pleasing information, that she 
had obtained Don Philip's permission 
to remain that night in her chamber. 



■^♦•♦•►4- 



CHAP. IV. 

" A devil, a born devil, on whose nature 
Nurture can never stick ; 

And as with age his body uglier grows. 
So his mind cankers." 

Tempest. 

HE moment Margaret awoke, she 
gently stole to our heroine's bed, who 
had fallen a few minutes before into a 
deep sleep, having watched during the 
night, and did not seek repose until day 
dispelled her fears, but was then en- 
joying a temporary relief from her many 
sorrows. Her kind attendant, who was 

b2 



28 alexena; or the 

obliged to look after the affairs of the 
houshold, with light steps crossed the 
chamber; the door of which she softly- 
closed after her, at the same time 
breathing a fervent aspiration for our 
heroine's safety; and on entering the 
gallery, to her surprise and satisfaction, 
met Donna Louisa on her way to 
Alexena's apartment. 

" Dear Donna/' said Margaret, while 
she almost shrieked with joy, ''when 
did Don Philip release you V' 

" Very lately, my kind friend, and I 
understand am indebted for the indul- 
gence, to a fair captive, in w^hose cham- 
ber you have passed the night." 

*• I, Heaven bless her, fair, good, 
gentle, lovely— every thing amiable. 
— oh ! you w ill be so pleased with her. 
Donna — but she j^et sleeps, and it were 
a pity to disturb her repose." 

'' Fear not, my good Margaret, I 
will go in and watch by her, and do 
you bring breakfast to her chamber, 
which we will partake of together." 

'•That I will. Donna, and serve every 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 29 

dainty in the larder^ with chocolate and 
coffee, of some of which, I trust, yoa 
will induce the poor dear child to par- 
take, as food has not yet been tasted 
by her within these walls." 

Margaret then hurried away^ and 
Louisa glided into Alexena's roonn, 
where she watched and admired her as 
she slept. " Sweet, lovely girl," she 
softly murmured, "you are as yet 
unconscious of the terrors of this hor- 
rible castle, and of the crimes of its 
detestable owner; and may you never 
experience the bitter pangs that have 
rent my bosom within its walls. Oh ! 
you angels of purity, guard, I be- 
seech ye, this your representative, and 
save her from the fiends of lust! Oh ! 
avert the storm, and let her not have 
cause to bewail the hour of her birth." 

The last words of Louisa were not 
lost on her who had caused them, and 
the tears which rolled down her pale 
cheeks, proved they had found the way 
to her heart. 

" Dearest lady, I thank you," said 



so ALEXENA; OR THE 

Alexena, " and if not an intrusion, 
may I entreat the name of her to whom 
my gralitude is so justly due." 

Louisa answered not — her respira- 
tion was suspended — the paleness of 
death stole over herlovelj^ countenance, 
and she sunk senseless on the bed. 
Our heroine was pitiably alarmed ; 
she sprinkled water on her face ; applied 
Tolatiles, and after considerable diffi- 
culty, fortunately succeeded in restoring 
animation. When somewhat recovered, 
in accents of the most touching woe, 
she said, " Oh ! tell me, interesting 
stranger, are you a daughter of the 
house of Guzman?" 

'' Yes," said Alexena, " of Velasco 
dc Guzman, late of Castile : I am his 
only, and unfortunate daughter. 

"My cousin, my dear cousin!" ex- 
claimed Louisa, clasping her to her 
bosom, " in me you behold the sister 
of Henri Count Bolerno, the dearest 
friend of your father." 

This sudden and unexpected disclo- 
sure, almost reduced Alexena to the 



€ASTI.E OF SANTA MARCO. 31 

estate from which the moment before 
she had restored her friend ; and Mar- 
garet made her appearance with break- 
fast before they had regained any 
tolerable share of composure. Louisa, 
though greatly agitated, was not for- 
getful of her relative, who she induced, 
by the most winning entreaties, to par- 
take of the morning's repast, and when 
it was removed, proposed a walk in 
the adjoining gallery, ^' The air blows 
fresh in it, my lovely cousin," she said, 
" and while we enjoy its coolness, I 
will give you a slight idea of this castle, 
and of its imnates; but as you value 
your peace, conceal our relationship; 
for had Don Philip the slightest intima- 
tion of that circumstance, we should 
instantly be separated, never again to 
behold each other." 

Alexena promised to be advised by 
her in every respect, and they wandered 
into the gallery, from thence into seve- 
ral suites of apartments, which looked 
down on the ramparts, examining the 
furniture of each room as they passed. 



32 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

Having entered one^ the shutters of 
which were half closed, Louisa ven- 
tured to open them, that they might 
have a full view of the chamber, the 
half of which was veiled in obscurity ; 
and whilst she was endeavourin<r to 
effect her purpose, her foot accidentally- 
pressed a spring, and a door instantly 
flew open, a little to the right, discover- 
ing a narrow flight of stone steps, up 
which, the sound of voices were borne 
on the chill breeze that was generally- 
felt in every direction of this dreadful 
mansion. 

" Let us retire," said Alexena, timid- 
ly, '' lest those people we hear are 
Acasto and that vile monk ; otherwise, 
in the event of being discovered, he 
may conceive us guilty of the meanness 
of listening." 

"I approve of your advice," replied 
her friend, '' but should this be Acasto, 
you, doubtless, are the subject of their 
conversation; and however criminal in 
other respects, it is a virtue to seek 
self preservation ; and may it not bs 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. B3 

h\s;h\y probable, were we acquainted 
with the subject now in discussion, tliat 
it nniorlit enable us to avoid or defeat 
some plan, at present in agitation, for 
the destruction of your peace." 

" Then ! then !" exclaimed our terri- 
fied heroine, " you have heard of some 
dreadful design. Oh! let me hear the 
worst at once, and don't wreck the little 
fortitude I have yet remaining, with 
the tortures of suspense." 

*' Be not alarmed," said Louisa, 
'• I have heard nothing to justify your 
fears, I only meant to guard you against 
those that our common enemy may be 
induced to attempt; therefore, let us 
descend, as we are not yet prohibited 
from wandering where fancy leads ; and 
I assure you. it is probable our time 
will not be mispent." 

She then drew the arm of Alexcna 
within hcr's, who reluctantly sufTered 
herself to be led down the stairs, into a 
stone gallery of amazing length; at 
the further extremity of which, a door 
stood half open, and they timidly ap>f 

E U 



34 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

proachcd it. Whon about to enter^ 
they distincliy heard voices in earnest 
conversaiionj and Alexena instantly 
turned to fly, but was detained by her 
more courageous companion, who 
ventured to peep into the chamber; 
then desired our heroine to approach, 
as it was equally devoid of inliabitants 
as of furniture. They were making; 
observations on the probable use of 
this apartment, when they heard foot- 
steps approaching-, and Acasto con- 
versing- with Torquo, in no very 
gentle manner. Our adventurers list- 
ened for a moment, when Alexena 
heard her name repeated in a half 
whisper, and Louisa drew her nigher 
the postern door, tliat they might hear 

accuratelv. 

" We have a right," said she, in a 
suppressed voice, " to listen, since we 
are the subject of their tete-a-tete, and 
as this door is well secured, we need 
not fear intrusion." 

"Yes, but is it not detestable to 
pry into the secrets of any person. 



C ASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 0& 

parficulaily in this clandestine man- 
ner?" 

" Certainly/' replied Louisa, ''I feel 
conscious it is almost inexcusable, but 
trust, if ever it were pardonable, it is 
so at this juncture, particularly when 
our situation is considered/' 

The persons outside were now quite 
close to the door, and spoke loud 
enough to be distinctly heard within. 

*' I say, my lord," said a voice, which 
Louisa recognized as that of Torquo, 
" it rains violently ; had you not better 
enter the chamber of this tower? But 
now, I rt'coilect, it is fastened on the 
inside, yet it affords a shelter in the 
thickness of its walls; pray stand in 
this nitch, which offers protection from 
its violence." 

" 1 will take your advice," said Don 
Philip, " and now that I am sheltered 
from this rude element, will you inform 
me the exact time you last saw Belzo 
Carracci, for I am told that horrible 
robber often frequents tliis neighbonr- 
hood.' 



50 alexena; or the 

*' Most assuredly he does/' rrplietl 
Torquo, " and very shortly since, plun- 
dered Don Cerasco, whom he treated 
with the utmost barbarity; — not con- 
tent with the immense booty, he flogged 
him most unmercifully, for al tempting 
to seduce the daughter ot one of his 
own vassals, who, forsooth, the robber 
said he had promised to protect." 

''And did the bandits presume to 
inflict sucli disgraceful punishment?" 
demanded Acaslo, in evident alarm. 

" Aye, that tlicy did, and with savage 
cruelty , for they literally flayed him 
alive ; it is now two months since, and 
his medical attendants have not vet 
pronounced him out of danger," 

" Was the girl han<]some?" inquired 
Don Philip, carelessly. 

" 1 have heard she was, and accom- 
plished, as Carracci paid for her educa- 
tion in a convent, where Don Cerasco's 
mother saw her, and was so pleased 
with her, that slie invited her to spend 
a few months at her mansion, during 
^hich time bis lordship became intimate 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 37 

—promised her marriage — substituted 
his servant for a priest — accomplished 
his wishes — completely ruined — and 
then — deserted her for another beauty. 

" We wander from the point," re- 
plied Acasto, evidently disconcerted. 
*' I wish to know when you last saw 
that infamous villain Belzo?'* 

" About a month agO;, on ray re- 
turn from St. Sebastian, (where I had 
been to purchase necessaries prepara- 
tory to your return,) he galloped after, 
and being belter mounted, easily came 
up with mc. Ah! ah! Mr. Steward, 
is this you? What news from Don 
Philip? What infamous knavery is 
now brooding?" 

"Impudent rascal! — but proceed, 
Torquo.'^ 

" 1 dare say," continued Carracci, '' he 
would be vastly the better of a little cor- 
rection; just such another tickling as 
I lately ordered his neighbour who, by 
the bye, 1 am sorry I did not hang. Good 
Mr. Torquo, tell your worthyXovd^, 1 un- 
derstand his present intentions; he had 



58 alexena; or the 

better let the hidy remain with her 
friends, or I vviil feel inclined to roast 
him alive. Hark ye, do you hear me, 
you iniquitous hoary-headed old arch 
scoundrel, was it not for your i',Tey pate, 
and that I am certain you would bed — d, 
I'd blow you to the devil this instant; and 
take care you don't provoke my indifj. 
nation by taking an active part in the 
present infernal plans of your master, 
or I will positively put you to a cruel 
death." 

*' Speak lower," said Don Philip. 

'' There is no fear of us being- over- 
heard in this lonely spot," grumbled 
Torquo ; " as you are at the door of 
the stone gallery, which never was en- 
tered since the night I poignarded the | 
Lady Clarissa, for which act I forfeited 
all hopes of mercy — it was a heavy 
deed — she pleaded so hard — and cried 
so piteously— was so handsome too; 
her child, poor thing, it went the same 
way, long before ; yet, her last w ords 
were, petitions for mercy on the mur- 
derers of both," 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAnCO. 59 

'' Torquol Torquo! I can't }>ear 
ihis, 3'ou are growing- childish," said 
Acasto, faulteriiigly ; '' despair not ; 
hope th€ best ; you only did a charita- 
ble act, knowing she was a burthen to 
her own existence/' 

" Yes^ there is something in that; 
yet what right had 1 to deprive her of 
it/' growled the assassin. " But what 
signifies snivelling, it can't now be 
helped." 

Here Alexena and her friend were 
greatly shocked, but rennained motion- 
less. 

" Well ! well ! Belzo Carracci/' con- 
tinued Don Philip. 

" Oh ! he stabbed me with his fiery 
eyes, for I felt the pains of terror in- 
flicted by them, long after he disap- 
peared, and have not ventured across 
the draw-bridge since." 

'' Nor through the subterranean dun- 
geons," rejoined Acasto. 

" Only once, for the purpose of gra- 
tifying my curiosity about Geraldina^ 
the peasant's daughter." 



40 alexena; or the 

" And what became of lier ?" 

" Belzo Carracci, it is said, carried 
iier away, and she has not since been 
heard of." 

" I believe you mentioned," conti- 
nued Don Philip, clian^iiig- the sub- 
ject, " that you had somewhat to relate 
concernins^ the apartments leadin<^ to 
the north tower." 

''Yes," replied Torquo, in a lower 
tone, " I believe Satan has taken pos- 
session of them, for on ^oin^^ the other 
evening to Iioht the fire in Donna 
Alexena's chamber, accordini*; to Mar- 
garet's orders, I had scarce laid the 
wood on the hearth, before I heard a 
great noise in the picture gallery, but 
thought it was only Ihe wind that threvr 
down some of the old portraits ; and so 
was heedless about it, until it was re- 
peated with greater violence. I then 
instantlj' pushed aside the panncl, and 
beheld the fiirure of a beautiful lady, 
standing in the long passage. My hair 
stood uplike bristles — my blood froze — 
and every limb refused motion^ being 



1 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAHCO. 41 

stifFened with horror, and I am con- 
vinced it was the spirit of the unfortunate 
Signiora Clarissa. She sighed deeply — 
I groaned, and staggered back — the 
pannel flew into its place — shut her 
from my sight — and the next instant 
I fell senseless on the floor. As this 
was no delusion, I feel rejoiced that 
you have brought a good Jather to the 
castle, whose sanctity will prevent a 
recurrence of such horrible incidents." 

Here Acasto laughed at the satirical 
manner Torquo made this observation, 
which emboldened him to say, 

" I suppose he is a rare one — is he 
not?" 

'' Yes," replied Don Philip, " a va- 
luable acquisition." 

" Aye," observed Torquo, " better 
at the stiletto than his prayers." 

'' I ifisist you may speak lower,'* 
said Acasto. 

" Fear nothing," replied this agent 
of iniquity, "I shall not oflTend his 
reverence ; am I to suppose he has 
been brought hither to marry you to 



i2 A-LEXENA ; OR THE 

the Lady Alexena, who, in good faith^ 
is not only extremely handsome, but 
mild, gentle, and condescending; at 
least, Margaret says so; and if nothing 
more advantageous offers, why not 
really make her your wife. These 
fine estates require an heir, and should 
you tire of her hereafter, a dose of 
gunpowder will send her to sleep with 
the Lady Clarissa." 

''Savage!" muttered Don Philip, 
much displeased. 

Here their voices became so indisr 
tinct, that their expression was utterly 
uniatGlliiril.le ; however, in a few mo- 
ments, Torquo proceeded in a louder 
tone : — 

'' My lord, wliat induced you to 
bring that blustering son of Neptune 
here; — I mean Williams — he is always 
disturbing the domestics, and most 
likelv, will induce tlie creio in the 
kitchen to mutiny; always bawling, 
shiver my timbers but Lady Alexena is 
this, and Lady Alexena done that : 
allow me, and I will shiver his brains 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 4S 

out, otherwise I foresee he will be a 
trouhlesome guest. 1 hate those Eng- 
lish dogs, as it is more difficult to in- 
duce them to betray an old friend, 
though in rags, than burn and sink an 
enemy's squadron/' 

"He is an excellent seaman," re- 
plied Don Philip, " and until I have 
good grounds to believe him a traitor, 
shall remain unmolested ; but come, 
the rain is now over, and I wish to 
pursue my walk." 

Shortly after, they disappeared among 
the distant towers, and when their 
footsteps had sunk into silence, Alexena 
threw her arms round Louisa's neck, 
in the greatest agony imaginable. — 

"Oh! my friend," she sobbing, cried, 
"what will become of us? whither 
shall we fly to avoid the cruel grasp of 
those merciless wretches. Oh ! Heaven 
o;rant me strength to bear the dreadful 
trials to whicli 1 am doomed. Unfor- 
tunate Clarissa ! — wretched mother ! — 
thy cares are long since hushed in th« 
silence of an early tojnb." 



44 alexena; or the 

" My dearest girl,** said Louisa, 
^' let your reliance be firmly placed in 
your Almighty Protector, he never 
abandons innocence; though the vir- 
tuous, it is true, have their trials; they 
only add, when borne with Christian 
resignation, to their purity and lustre. 
Therefore, despair not ; for great as 
the apparent danger appears to be, 
yet I have formed the most sanguine 
hopes of escape, through the inter- 
ference of that terrible robber; for why 
may he not be an instrument of the 
Divine Will to save us. Report cer- 
tainly affirms he is cruel, though I have 
never heard of any particular enormity 
of which he has been i:ruiltv, thouG:h \ 
remember many of the generous acts 
he is said to have performed. But 
come, let us now retire to our apart- 
ment, if we can regain the way; and 
by 3upplication to the Throne of Mercy, 
obtain fortitude to meet our tormentors, 
without leading them to suppose we 
know more than they wish ; and have 
we not reason to be thankful, that 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 45 

Montano does not, as yet, enjoy the 
confidence of Don Philip ; so we have 
little to apprehend from his vicious 
inclinations." 

CHAP. V. 

" O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright! 
Her beauty hangs upon the cheek of night. 
Like a rich jewel in an ^thiop's car ; 
Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear !'' 

Rom. & Jul. 

J\ FEW moments after Alexena and 
her friend reached their clianiber, Mar- 
g-aret attended with the key of an ad- 
joining- apartment, in which she pointed 
out a handsome wardrobe prepared for 
each, containing the most beautiful 
dresses then worn, and delivered a 
casket, in which were several sets of 
jewels for our heroine, with Don 
Philip's orders, that she sliould use 
them. While the ladies examined their 
new robes, they were much pleased 
with Margaret, from her attention, and 
wishes to oblige them. 



4® alexena; or the 

" Dear heart/' said tliis good crea- 
ture, " I hope you will not droop in 
this lonesome place ; it is now a long 
time since there was either joy or com- 
fort in it ; but I will try and make it as 
agreeable as possible ; yet my endea- 
vours will prove useless, unless you 
obey my lord. Beware, don't contra- 
dict him ; and, above all things, be 
cautious, lest you name Belzo Carracci_, 
as that alone is sufficient to irritate, 
nay, enrage him ; but, it may be, you 
have never heard of that dreadful man." 

Louisa nodded, significantly, to 
Alexena, to conceal their knowledge 
of the bandit, and then said, " What 
of him ?" 

'' Oh ! he is the greatest villain on 
earth," rejoined Margaret, '' since I 
came here, he assassinated my lord's 
sister." 

'' Don Philip's sister !" exclaimed 
Alexena — '' oh, horrible !" 

Again the eye of Louisa met that 
of our heroine, and she felt ashamed 
of her precipitancy ; but the late con- 
versation between Torqno and his 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAIICO. 4f 

master struck her mind so forcibly, and 
so many confused ideas of Acasto's 
villainy crowded on her imagination, 
that, for a moment, she was inclined 
to believe he had murdered his own 
sister ; but the speaking look of her 
prudent friend, recalled her scattered 
thoughts, and she timidly demanded 
when the fatal event had taken place. 
'•' Some years ago. Donna," 
" And is the poor lady really dead," 
said Alexena. 

*' 1 believe so. Donna, but I did not 

see her afjer she was wounded, as the 

misfortune happened some miles from 

the castle, and after the lady Clarissa's 

wounds vrere dressed, she was sent to 

a cotfage higher up the cliffs, for the 

benefit of her health, but has never been 

heard of since. Toiquo, says Carracci, 

carried her off out of revenge, as he 

hates Don Philip, because he refuses to 

wink at his diabolical outra^.;es. But, 

heavefi bless me ! ladies, how pale you 

both are ! I fear we have continued too 

long in the chill air of this apartment." 

Margaret was far from being aware 



48 



ALEXENA ; OR THE 



that her auditors had overheard her 
master deliberately discuss that atro- 
cious murder; for when they heard her 
name — Clarissa, every doubt on the 
subject vanished, and they were then im- 
pressed with the conviction, that the 
inhuman Acasto, for some sinister view, 
had barbarously sacrificed his sister, as 
they had no doubt, but that Clarissa 
named by Torquo, was the identical 
person then mentioned by Margaret. 

When Alexena somewhat recovered 
her usual presence of mind, she begged 
to know was Donna Clarissa married ? 
" Oh, yes, Signiora ! though she was 
very young." " Had she any chil- 
dren 1" " Yes, one fine boy ; but Don 
Philip sent him away from her, when I 
was on a visit to some of my friends. 
On my return, I found my dear lady 
so sad, that she almost broke my heart. 
She was so mild, so beautiful, and so 
kind-hearted, that the greatest savage 
in this castle would not willingly in- 
jure her. Indeed, she then was what 
you are now^ but not quite so beau- 
tiful." 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 49 

'' Did she ever complain of any par- 
ticular injury ?" said Louisa. 

" Oil, yeSj Signiora! she bitterly la- 
mented the unkindness of her brother,, 
and yet seemed angry with herself for 
conceiving a thought prejudicial to his 
brotherly affection ; but, as she never 
told her sorrows to any one within these 
walls, I could not be acquainted with 
the real cause of them." 

Shortly after, Torquo summoned 
Alexena and her cousin to the dining* 
parlour, which was sufficient to dispel 
the fortitude the former had endea- 
voured to collect, within the last few 
hours, and the moment Don Philip's 
messenger departed, she burst into 
tears. 

" My dear lady," said Margaret, " if 
you give way to this weakness, however 
justifiable from the cause, I fear you 
will, indeed, be very wretched. Come, 
have the goodness to accept the support 
of this old arm : though weak, it is 
willing to assist you ; and Signiora 
Louisa will also lend a little aid." 

VOL. II. c 



50 ALEXENA : OR TIFE 



She now led her along the gallery, 
almost enfeebled by terror, while 
Louisa, whose arm trembled violent- 
ly, proved she was not a whit less 
dismayed. As they approached the 
apartment, their apprehensions in- 
<;reased, and when Don Philip rose to 
receive Alexena, weakness had com- 
pletely subdued her, and she sunk to 
the ground. On reviving, she found 
Louisa kneeling beside her, and Don 
Acasto leaning over the sopha on which 
she had been placed, while Montano, 
who had already sat down to table^, 
gruffly exclaimed : — 

" Confounded nonsense ! are we to 
lose our dinner, by the afiected fears 
of an artful vixen ?" Then addressin"' 
our heroine, he continued, '' Let ms 
see you at this table in a very few 
minutes, or I possibly may induce you 
to wish you had complied with Don 
Philip's invitation, without using the 
unnecessary ceremony of fainting." 

'' Don't be brulalj I leg- of you. 



CASTLE OP SANTA MARCO. 51 

fatiier/' said Acasto, visibly enraged, 
'' you are now to respect this lady as 
my wife. Believe ine, my intentions 
are greatly changed since we met 
this morning, and your authority over 
Lady Alexena ceases from this mo- 
ment, unless her folly may induce me 
to withdraw my protection, which I 
sincerely hope will not be the case." 

Montano felt this rebuke, but did not 
choose to reply, otherwise than by a grin 
of demoniac malice, expressive of the 
most savage cruelty, and immediately 
after, requested to know *' whether he 
should, or should not, have dinner ?" 
Don Philip, though excessively disgust- 
ed, did not wish to irritate the monk 
further, and in a few moments, led the 
reluctant Alexena to the table, where 
he placed her at his right hand . Louisa 
occupied the seat opposite ; Montano 
sat at the bottom of the table; and 
the place on his left was filled by a 
stranger, who, before dinner was re- 
moved, was understood to be the captain 



52 ' alexena; or the 

of the guard, whose business it was to 
place proper sentinels^ and assign their 
different posts. He had the appearance 
of a gentleman^ though his countenance 
was of that order which excites dis- 
trust ; and his was strongly expressive 
of deep cunning; but though he spoke 
little, his words, and the subject of 
them, were well chosen, Fernandez 
marked the savage manner of Monta- 
no, and during the remainder of the 
evening, assisted Don Philip in his 
endeavours to tranquiUize the mind of 
Alexena. She observed his kindness, 
and felt <jrateful ; but to sooth her dis- 
tracted thoughts, at such- a moment, 
would have been' on absolute impossi- 
bility. The presence of Moiitano was 
an antidote against comfort, and not- 
withstanding her terrors were somew hat 
diminished, yet she shuddered with 
horror, when her eye met that of the 
ferocious monk. Tlie cliamber also, 
from its gloomy architecture, served to 
increase her terror; its lofty ceiling 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 53 

was supported by twelve pillars of jet 
black marble^ on which were engraved 
many Moorish devices. The windows 
were high, and of ihe Gothic order, 
adding a sombre hne to the entire of 
the apartment^ easier to be conceived 
than described ; but the bright glare 
of a tremendous wood fire, together 
with a profusion of wax-lights, in a 
great measure, dispelled its natural 
gloom ; and had its inmates been other 
than Acasto and the monk, Alexena 
would have admired it for its antiqui- 
ty, and the beauty of its structure, but 
their detested presence perverted everj 
object, and rendered those things hor- 
rible, vvliich, at another period, and 
under diiTercnt circumstances, would 
have appeared fascinating. 

Don Philip exerted his utmost pow- 
ers to dispel the fears of Alexena, and 
she could not avoid acknowledging, 
that his address, at least, was that of a 
gentleman ; and her fears of insult 
w^ould have, in a great measure, been 
tlispelled, had not the savage inuendos 



54 alexena; on the 

of Monfano, almost every instant, 
awakened tlie painful recollection of 
her lamentable situation ; ])ut her 
brutal tormentor seized every oppor- 
tunitv of increa^in": lier distress ; and 
had he not now and then been re- 
strained by a stern glance from Acasto, 
she could not, consistent with delicacy, 
remain in tjie room a momeut, nor 
would she^ on any account, had not 
her fears deprived her of the power 
of motion. Thus situated, our heroine 
impatiently looked forward to the hour 
when old Margaret should attend to 
conduct her and Louisa to their apart- 
ment, while Acasto gazed on her 
beautiful form with increasinij admira- 
tion. Her tall and graceful figure, the 
paragon of symmetry, was habited in a 
white figured muslin of the finest tex- 
ture, which admirably displayed the 
perfections of her shape ; her long 
and polished neck, stripped with ever 
graceful modesty, partially revealed a 
lovely bosom, which rivaled the snow 
in delicate whiteness ; her hair^ of 



i 

CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 58^ 

glossy blackness, played in sporting" 
curls on her shoulders ; her dark 
brows were beautifully arched ; her 
eyes, inexpressibly brilliant, blue, 
mild, and expressive, beaming; with the 
softest sensibility; her nose, inclining 
to the Roman ; her teeth, the most 
delicate pearl, inclosed by lips of 
glowing ruby ; her arms, whiter than 
polished marble ; her hands, beautiful; 
her ^v.et, small, supporting limbs 
every way exquisitely proportioned ; 
and her carriage, the emporium of 
grace, elegance, and dignity. Such 
was Alexena, then seventeen, a trea- 
sury of charms — of puritj^ — of good- 
ness — endowed with every grace, with 
every virtue, and with every attainable 
female accomplishment. — Such was the 
captive of Don Philip Acasto, a wretch 
Toid of feeling, insensible to pity or 
remorse: a monster, whose passions 
disgraced the man — dissrraced human- 
ity — and wounded the feelings of every 
honourable member of society. In 
saying thus much, few will find it 



56 ALEXENA; OR THE 



dilficuU to conceive the meaning — the 
intent — the wishes, conveyed in the rude 
and insulting glances^ directed by his 
eyeSj bnt which the genuine innocence 
and spotless purity of Alexena, saved 
her tlie painful task of expounding". 
Had she been acquainted with the 
wiles, the deceit^ the villany, of tlie 
world, her fears would have been ex- 
cited, her peace of mind dreadfully at- 
tacked ; nay, her own shadow would 
have -excited alarm, and every thought 
conjured up a villain ; but heaven saved 
this spotless votary of transcendent 
virtue those bitter pangs, and frighted 
th^ demons of suspicion, who wistfully 
hovered roimd, watching a favourable 
moment for wounding her bosom with 
the poison of torturing suspicion, 

Margaret, at length, entered to con- 
duct tho ladies to their chamber, and 
Don Philip permitted them to retire, 
but attended Alexena to the foot of the 
great stairs, where he reluctantly wished 
Iyer a good night, and then sighing 
deeply, slowly returned to his compa- 
nions. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARGO. Sj? 

CHAP. VI. 

'^■Tetchy and wayward was tUy infancy ; 

Thy school-days frightful, desperate, wild, and furious ; 
Thy prime of manhood, daring, bold, and venturous ; 
Thy age confirmed, proud, subtle, sly, and bloody. 

Richard III. 

v/UR heroine had been dreadfully 
as^ifated by the dis<:^nstin£^ attentions 
of Don Philip ; his si;^h at partino*, 
eonviiiced her she had everv thititr to 
fear from the effpcts of his detestable 
passion, and foiind much difficulty ia 
supportinjjj her totteriniij frame to 
her chamber, where, the moment 
she entered, she burst into tears* 
Louisa was quite low spirited, and for 
some time incapable of using' any en- 
deavours to reassure her weeping' friend; 
while poor Margaret, who had beea 
busily engaged at the fire, or pretend-d 
to be so, could not restrain her feelings, 
and as she wiped away the fast fallini^ 
tears, murmured : — 

"Alas! nlas ! this is the very cham- 
ber ia which my lovely lady Clarissa 

c 5 



58 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

used to take on so, and weep by the 
hour. Poor mourner ! many is the sad 
and solitary day have I «af by her on 
this bed, where she invoked the spirit 
of her husband to watch over and )n'o- 
tect her from the cruelties of Don 
Philip ; she would then fondly press 
iier dear babe closer to her bosom, and 
bathe his infant cheeks with tears, 
while I vainly endeavoured to sooth 
her griefs, though Heaven knows, ill 
able to bear my own. Oh ! ladies, 
this castle is sadly altered since my 
dear lord, Don Miguel's death, oh ! 
may a curse rest on the heads of hisyils 
murderers." 

''Merciful Providence!" exclaimed 
Alexena, ''was he murdered? Oh! 
how? when? and by what means did 
Don Philip become the owner of this 
mansion ?" 

Margaret shook her head, then gazing 
wildly round, in a low voice said, 
" Those walls have ears, !iay, mouths ; 
therefore, my dear ladies, let us change 
the subject, for I have reason to fear 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 59- 

tny own shadow ; not from any crimes 
I have committed, thank Heaven, but 
because such strange sights are seen 
here, that the idea of them has otteii 
ahnost froze my blood." 

'' What sights ? what do you mean?" 
^<3manded Louisa, fearfully. 

*' Why," replied Margaret, " I have 
more than once seen the spirit of Don 
Miguel, in the armoury, and several 
times, in the library, clothed in com- 
plete mail; but though he always, at 
those times^ carried a naked sword, he 
never looked fiercely on me; his coun- 
tenance was pale, and expressive of 
pity, but 1 never had more than a mo- 
ment's time to observe it. Indeed, I 
wonder I have not been more terrified. 
The first time we met, was in the north 
corridor, and I instantly informed Don 
Philip, who threatened to shoot me, if 
ever I again mentioned guch folly; so 
since that period I have been silent ou 
this dreadful subject, arid, I trust, you 
will never repeat what I have now com- 
municated. Should my lamented lordi 



CO alexena; or tiir 

cross your path, fear him not : he w«i» 
too kind, too religious, and too tender- 
hearted, in his life time, to excite any 
fears now that he is dead, except those 
which awe naturally iiispires." 

"I fear the living- only," said Alexcna, 
"from the dead I have nothing to fear; 
yet Heaven, I trust, will not put my 
fortitude to the dreadful trial of en- 
countering a wandering spirit, as I feel 
my strength would be unequal to the 
<ask." 

The castle clock now mournfully 
tolled eleven, and Margaret hastily rose 
to retire. She was surprised at the 
lateness of the hour; but had not the 
idea of her late lord, pressed on her 
recollection, she would willingly have 
remained some time lon^-er. After be- 
stowing her blessing on Alexena and 
her friend, she reluctantly retired, and 
hastened, with all the speed her age and 
strength would admit of, through the 
long ciescrted gallery, that lay between 
their chamber and the apartments be- 
low. Her words made a considerable 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 6i 

•impression on the minds of her late 
aiKlitors ; for althoiig-h they believed 
Margaret's fears had created a spectre, 
jet the murder of Don Miguel, and the 
mysterious circumstances attending that, 
event, impressed on their minds a sad 
conviction, that Don Philip was a 
villain. 

While Louisa's thoughts were thus 
eno'aged, she i^azed with all the fond 
'"solicitude of sisterly affection, on the 
beiiuteous form of Alexena, who, she 
felt ass'ured, was the most lovely of 
women ; but the conviciion was accom- 
panied with trie painful idea, that she 
was likely to fall Ji victim to the cruelty 
of Acasto, or dro<i^p under the unpro- 
'^'oked insults of the\mfeeling' Montano, 
unless rescued by the immediate inter- 
position of an Almi<i^hty Providence. 
'' What are we not both doomed to 
suffer," said Louisa, " from those un- 
relenting" barbarians? and if insulted, 
to whom are we to look for redress? 
io fly beyond those walls is impossible, 
iind who will protect us wjthin? — 



ALEXENA ; on THE 

Torquo, the at^sassin of Clarissa !— - 
Oh! horrible." 

Witli streaming eyes she now took 
the hand of Ah^xena, and then kneeling- 
together, their s[)irits sought the Father 
of Purity, whose Heavenly protection 
they earnestly iiitreated. Their orisons 
soothed their spirits, and hushed the 
agitation of their minds, which, by 
degrees, obtained their wonted serenity, 
and they retired to rest, confidently re- 
lying on the protection of Heaven. 

Not so Don Philip, he sought his 
downy couch, wearied with the rude 
contest of conflicting passions, and 
seldom slept. I)ut to awake in horror. 
The dreadful images which guilt pre- 
sented to his sleeping fancy, inflicted 
torments of the most terrible descrip- 
tion ; and when once awake, he feared 
to sleep again. The terrors of his. 
blood-stained conscience, compelled 
him to keep an attendant constantly ia 
his chamber ; for he often started from 
his bed, when labouring under those 
torturing illusions, and frightened his 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 63 

watcliful domestic with Lis terrifying 
cries, or deep and lengthened groans^ 
which threatened to rend his h.eart. 
If the lamp in his chamber chanced to 
expire dnrin<^ the night, either by ac- 
cident, or the heedlessness of his ser- 
vant, he was in a;^ony until its light 
iigain restored fancied secnrily, and 
£lare not allow his eye to wander over 
the gloomy expanse of hischamber, lest 
some horrible sliadow would start from 
its shade, to blast his sight, or reproach 
him for the crimes which he had the 
hardy barbarity to perpetrate. Yet, 
while the sun's vivifying rays were 
visible, none were braver or more de- 
termined than Acasto; but when en- 
compassed by the shades of night, he 
was a very coward, and never passed 
through the unfrequented parts of the 
castle, without torches, pistols, and his 
shadow— the merciless Torquo. 

Montano's reflections were not a whit 
more agreeable than those of his aban- 
doned lord ; he was nightly wrecked 
f' with the sling's and arrows of a guilty 



Qi ALEXENA; or Ti5E 

conscience." The most whimsical and 
extraordinary fears disturbed his repose; 
but they were not of the supernatural 
kind ; he dreaded the just vengeance 
of the injured Mortimer; and there 
^as no alternative that he was not pre- 
determined to embrace, fur the final 
extinction of this dreaded foe, whom 
he continued to hate with the most 
unbounded and diabolical malevolence; 
but the designs of Providence are as 
just as they are inscrutable, and the 
fabric he had raised for the destruction 
of the innocent, fell, at length, with a 
dreadful crash on his guilty and self- 
devoted head. Devoted, because he 
was the voluntnry slave of every guilty 
and baleful passion — avarice, hatred^ 
lust, ingratitude, roi;)bery, and_, at lengthy 
oh ! fatal ejects of sinful induli^rence — 
murder! Prom that hour, peace and 
mercy fled to Heaven, and never again 
visited liis guilty bosom Indeed, not- 
withstanding the enormity of his of- 
fences, they often held out the olive 
bra!ich ; often besought him to repent ; 
but he despised their wholesome admo- 



tJASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 65 

iiitions, and continued to pursue the 
broad and beaten path, leading to 
endless woe ; and, at length, ignomi- 
niously passed from this life into awful 
eternity, without pity, without remorse, 
without hope; cursing and accursed; 
each day of his hideous existence 
brought new torments; he slept to 
awake in that misery which he had not 
only the means, but the choice of avoid- 
ing; yet his uncontrouled and evil pas- 
sions hurried him from crime to crime, 
until the idea of repentance became 
dead within his iron bosom, and from 
that moment his feet appears to have 
received wind's, to waft him with "greater 
celerity to those scenes of infamy, dis- 
grace, wretchedness, and vice, in which 
he became a conspicuous actor. But 
the awful period approached, when his 
guilty life should be offered as an atone- 
ment to the outraged laws of his of- 
fended country, and in expiation of the 
almost numberless offences which were 
written in characters of blood, and 
etitercd in the book of fate against 
him. 



66 alexena; or the 

CHAP. VII. 

** Thou shalt be punish'd for thus frightening mj, 
For I am sick^, and capable of fears, 
Opprest with wrongs, and therefore full of feats 

With my vex'd spirits I cannot take a truce. 
But they will quake aad tremble all this day.'* 

King Johr. 

W^FIEN the receding footsteps of 
Mar«^aret were no lono^er distinnruish- 
able, Louisa securely fastened the door 
of their chamber, and shortly after 
joined Alexena in fervent prayer to the 
Akniglity; retnriiinj^ grateful thanks 
for his gracious mercies, and intrealing 
a continuance of his protection; then 
undressed, with the soothing reflection, 
that they had always strenuously en- 
deavoured to deserve it. The follow- 
insc morniniT, onr lovely heroine was 
much more composed than could be 
expected ; her mind had gained consi- 
derable strength from her intercourse 
with the Deity, and she trusted she 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 67 

would be able to bear future trials, 
with fortitude and resignation. Louisa 
was the most affectionate of friends, 
and felt inexpressible pleasiu'C, on ob- 
serving- the serenity of her fair cousin, 
and used every exertion to nnake it 
permanent. To her fine natural un- 
derstanding was added, a considerable 
share of beauty; lier hair black, her 
eyes bright, animated, and sparkhng", 
her figure that of the middle size, ele- 
ji;antly formed, her temper rather warm, 
her disposition gentle, yet when roused 
by injury or oppression, assumed a 
<3egree of steadiness, of fearless reso- 
lution, rarely found in woman. She 
quickly resented an olTence, but as 
speedily forgave one; her birth v^as 
noble, and she had been taught every 
accomplishment suitable to her high 
rank; but there was a something so 
peculiarly engaging in Alexena's every 
word, look, and action, which insensi- 
bly attracted our warmest affection; she 
gained our esteem, nay, our love, with- 
out being aware of her power, and 



68 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

generally found that admiration witliout 
seeking, which others often seek in 
vain. Louisa was at this period, 
twenty; Alexena only seventeen. — 
The former had experienced many of 
the disappointments of this world, and 
was able to form a just estimate of the 
interests which sway men in i^cneral, 
by which she often avoided misfortune, 
or derived advantage. Alexena, on 
the contrary, was unacquainted with tha 
perfidy of mankind, and willingly be- 
lieved those^ wliose professions were 
kind and specious,, wM'il bitter experi- 
ence convinced her of I he fallacy of this 
erroneous opinion. The last (en months 
had witnessed a variety of cruel dis- 
appointments, to which she had been 
exposed ; but in enumerating them, 
her heart N^liispered they were only 
trials of her patience, which, if borne 
with Christian resignation, would one 
day be compensated -for, by future hap- 
piness. Louisa frequently told her, 
those unpleasant occurrerjces were 
wisely allowed, to give a greater relish^ 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 69 

a. higher zest, for future enjoyments; 
but those promised joys were yet far 
distant. The cup of sbrrow was pre- 
pared ; but she had j^et scarce tasted 
the baleful draught; her fortituJe and 
patience were about to be called on 
to support her through a scene of 
calamitous circumstances, which the 
impatience and uncontroulable passions 
of Acasto, and the inordinate avarice 
of Montano, promised to bring to a 
speedy and fatal conclusion. 

Durinij the three first weeks of Alex- 
ena's confinement in the caslle^ she had 
been exposed to the most cruel insults 
from Montano, accompanied by the 
fulsome and repeated declarations of 
Acasto's love ; and one evening that 
his preposterous suit had driven her to 
tlie solitude of her apartment, at an 
unusual early hour, she informed 
Louisa that it was her determination 
to explore every accessible pari of the 
castle that night. " 1 may," she said, 
" find some outlet by which we may 
cescape. If not, I will, at least, have 



70 ALEXENA ; on THE 

the consolation of thinking I left no 
means untried to effect our emancipa- 
tion." 

*' I annrcve of your' intentions/' re- 
plied Louisa, " and shall, if you are 
resolved, procure torches, and accom- 
pany you. I am acquainted with 
many passages of this horrible abode, 
long since deserted, and should we 
not be able, as you say, to discover 
some mode of escape, we may, at 
least, find a secure, though temporary, 
retreat, which will protect us for the 
present from any infamous attempt 
Don Philip may be induced to make ; 
and as we have nothing to fear from 
supernatural enemies, I see no reason 
why we should delay a search (hat 
may have the most beneficial ten- 
dency." f 

Elated with hopes of speedy enlarge- 
ment, they resolved the terrible in- 
vestigation should take place that very 
night, as there was a possibility it 
might deliver them from the tyranny 
and cruel persecution of their implac- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAKCO. 71 

able foe. Therefore, pursuant to llicir 
arran2:emerit. as soon as the irrcat 
clock of the castle tolled that dismal 
hour " ^YheIl church-yards yawn,' 
(twelve,) they stole forth from their 
chamber, with fluttering- hearis and 
cautious steps, enterinj^ that long and 
dreary gallery which led to the great 
stairs; but they turned to the left, and 
traversed a corridor, which, from the 
narrative of Margaret, promised to 
conduct them to the south tower, once 
the residence of the unfortunate Cla- 
rissa. As they moved through the gloom 
of those antiquated passages, their 
hearts trembled at the noise of their 
own footsteps. Sometimes they stood 
mute as statues, convinced they heard 
groans ; but in those moments, when 
fear threatened to conoeal our heroine, 
Louisa would represent the cause of 
their alarm to be nothins: more than 
Ihesighingof the night breeze, through 
those uninhabited and forsaken cham- 
bers ; and though almost torpid with 
unaccountable awe herselt^ she tried 



72 ALEXENA ; OR TUB 

to calm the agitation of her lovely 
friend. 

" Providence," she said, '' seems to 
have granted this terrible moment for 
our attempt, and if we neglect to seiz6 
it, we tnay never again have the same 
opportunity; therefore, I beg you will 
not allow your fortitude to be subdued 
by idle fears, but let us, assisted by 
heaven, proceed in this our arduous 
undertaking." 

Thus encouraged, the timid Alexcna 
advanced through innumerable suites of 
/desolate apartments, supported by the 
arm of her trembling friend, and after 
pursuing their lonely search through 
many dismal branches of this immense 
pile, they found themselves at the foot 
of a spiral stair-case, which seemed to 
lead to some lone and solitary tower. 
The chill air, extreme dreariness of 
the spot, and solemnity of the hour, 
almost forbade the trembling wander- 
ers to ascend ; but to return was as 
painful as to proceed. They beheld 
each other, in shivering silence, and 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 73 

feared to trust their own voices, lest 
they should summon some horrible 
spectre ; but after a few minutes 
passed in hesitation and dumb show, 
they ascended, and on reaching- the 
landing place, found one solitary door 
half open, which presented an obsta- 
cle that fear made almost insurmounta- 
ble — as some dreadful sight might await 
them within its gloom. Louisa ven- 
tured to touch it, and raise her torch, 
that light might reassure her ; but 
nothing was discernible in its profound 
darkness. She again hesitated, and 
looked wistfully at the stairs ; but tha 
lower steps were lost in obscurity, and 
she resolved to enter the room. The 
dampness had removed the curl from 
their hair, which now hung in loose 
tresses on their necks ; death's pale 
shadows played on their counte- 
nances ; their trembling knees knocked 
against each other, and yet they 
ventured to enter the chamber. It 
was a square apartment, without fur*- 
iiiture, from which there was aji 

VOL. II. U 



74 ALEXE!^A; OR THE 

entrance into a long--neglected corri- 
dor, that was apparently situated in 
the attic story of the castle. Again 
fear opposed further research ; but 
triumphant curiosity impelled them 
forward : it was irresistible ; and with 
palpitating- hearts, and eyes ready to 
burst their sockets, they advanced into 
the deserted passage, and from thence 
wandered into an immense raui^e of 
apartments, whose decayed furniture^ 
and mouldering tapestry, proved the 
neglect in which they had been suf- 
fered to remain, while it also evinced 
the power of the all-withering hand of 
time. They were, at length, about 
to enter the last of those desolate 
chambers, when their fearful and at- 
tentive ears caucrht the sound of 
receding footsteps. Instantly every 
limb became motionless; every pore 
distilled cold perspiration ; unnerved 
and trembling, they stood in ghastly 
expectation, unable to fly ; each tleet- 
ing moment, in breathless agony, con- 
vinced tliat the next would present to 
Iheir inhorrid view^ the musty bones 



CASTLE OP SANTA MARCO. 75 

of some decayed skeleton ; but con- 
ceive their emotion and surprise, on 
heariu": the dulcet notes of the most 
delicate and soul-reviving harmony. 
The sounds seemed celestial, and the 
sensations of our truants were those 
of awe, wonder, fear, and astonish- 
ment. Firmly transfixed — every nerve 
unstrung — their late pliant limbs now 
stiffened ; how was it possible to 
move. They seemed spell-bound — 
rivited to the spot on which they stood. 
To advance was horror : the glare of 
their flaming, bickering torches, cast 
dark red gleams on the damp and 
obscure walls of this desolate chamber, 
raising in their imagination, figures 
flitting through the distant shade.— 
The music advanced — footsteps were 
again distinguishable — a distant rumb- 
ling noise increased their terror. Alex- 
ena, frantically, caught the arm of 
Louisa, who was scarce able to sup- 
port her own tottering frame; while, witli 
distended eyes, strained almost to con- 
vulsive agonv, and which seemed ready 

T)2 



76 ALElfENA; OR THE 

to start from their expanded palling, 
they anxiously watched the decayed 
and worm-eaten door at the opposite 
extremity of the apartment. '' Oh ! 
horror!" faultered Louisa^ '' it shakes 
— the bolts recede from their rusty 
fastenings." 

Unable to support themselves, they 
sunk on their knees, clasping each 
other's trembling waists, and the fol- 
lowing moment, the door slowly re- 
vealed to these astonished and terrified 
friends, the lovely form of one of their 
own soft sex. Surprise held them in a 
trance of silent wonder; their sensa- 
tions became insupportably painful, 
and a minhte almost elapsed before 
Alexena could summon courage to 
raise her torch, that it's strong light 
might give a more accurate view 
of the motionless 6gure before her. 
All doubts of the form being real, 
having vanished, she, in a low faint 
voice, apologized for trespassing on 
her solitude, and assured the stranger, 
that her intrusion did not arise from 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO; 7T' 

idle impertinence, or inexcusable curi- 
osity. The fair, unknown, seemed 
totally insensible to this address, and 
when Louisa ventured to rise from her 
kneeling posture, the door, which but 
a moment before discovered her, now, 
with a horrible crash, shut her from, 
their sight, and all again was vacuity 
and silence, 

" May God protect us!" said Alex- 
emi, fervently. 

''Anienl" ejaculated Louisa. Amen! 
lolled along the distant gallery — Amen! 
echoed the surroundin;^ chambers. — 
Louisa shook like an aspen : ngaia 
Alexena clung to the arm of her friend. 
" Let us retire from this scene of hor- 
ror ; we may yet reach our chamber," 
said the former. " 1 am ready," whis- 
pered her agitated companion. 

Almost petrified with fear, they slowly 
retreated backward, still keeping their 
labouring eyes fixed on the horrible 
door, which they were firmly persuaded, 
led to some gloomy sepulchre. At 
length they reached the spot where 



fS alexena; or the 

Ihev bad entered, and turned to leave 
the chamber ; but imagine their sensa- 
tions on beholding the door-way filled 
by the gigantic figure of a gloomy 
warrior ; his armour was black, which 
uas partly concealed by a mantle, and 
whose colour it was impossible to ascer- 
tain. The dark nodding plumes that 
waved over his brow, added somethins: 
awfully horrible to his martial appear- 
ance, and increased the agitation of 
Alexena, then amounting almost to 
frenzy. Though what could be distin- 
ffuished of the black kni^rht's counte- 
nance, was the reverse of frightful; 
■yet it was utterly impossible either of 
our terrified adventurers could sum- 
mon courage to address him. He 
appeared to wish to advance, but 
seemed unwilling to add to their ter- 
rors, which were increased by some new 
noise. The castle bell tolled one ; the 
sound was like the melancholy and dull 
note of a death knell. The fiijure 
raised his head — started from his po- 
sition — cast a look of the deepest 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 79 

interest on Alexena^ and stalking by her, 
vanished through a door adjacent to 
that which had so mysteriously closed 
on the female figuR?^ a few minutes 
before. 

Terror of the most alarming kind, 
now deprived Alexena of respiration, 
and, with a deep groan, she sunk sense- 
less on the floor, leaving Louisa iri 
indescribable agony. Her fall, which 
the latter was unable to prevent, shook 
the old chamber, and added terrors fov 
her personal safety. 

*' Oh ! heaven have mercv : she will 
perish for want of assistance !" ex- 
claimed Louisa, '' and I have neither 
volatile or water. Alas ! I am unable 
to bear her back to her apartment, if 
I should be even so fortunate as to find 
my way." 

Again the door, the frightful door, 
opened, and again the female appeared. 
She paused for a moment, and then 
advanced into the chamber. Louisa, 
conceiving she was a spectre come to 
bear away the insensible form of her 



80 ALEXENA : OR THE 



} 



friend, stood gazing on her in motionless 
horror ; but was quickly and agreeably 
undeceived, when the lovely' stranger, 
in a most plaintive voice, begged to 
know conld she render any assistance. 

*' Alas !" said Louit^a, whose idle 
apprehensions then vanished, '' I know 
not ; my friend has been overpowered 
by the damp air of those apartments, 
and has sunk into insensibility. 

'' I am extremely unhappy, lest my 
unexpected appearance has added ter- 
ror to the other sufferings of Lady 
Alcxena," replied this unknown, " and 
I feel distressed, lest fear may have 
occasioned her present indisposition. 

' Louisa, now delii»hted aiid encou- 
raged by this address, acknowleged 
that extreme timidity was really the 
cause, " and my inability," she conti- 
nued, " of affording her immediate 
relief, induced me to call so loudly; 
indeed I became quite alarmed, lest I 
should not be able to either restore 
animation, or convey her to our cham- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARC0. 81 

ber, \vliich is situated in a very distant 
part of this buildinj^/' 

" Very distant, indeed," said the fair 
stranj^er, " but I cari conduct you to it 
xvithout ditliculty, as soon as your friend 
is somewhat better." 
- Alexeua's deep si^hs, at the com- 
mencement of this conversation, gave 
the joyful assurance, that she was fast 
revivinji: ; her head rested on the bo- 
3om of Louisa, while the unknown 
applied volatiles, and used every pos- 
sible exertion to restore animation. 

" She will be quite well presently," 
observed the latter, '' but lest my un- 
expected appearance should cause a re- 
lapse, I will retire imtil she is satisfied 
her fears are groundless. Lovely, in- 
terestirjg girl! 1 am an unfortunate^, 
isolated, persecuted female, like your- 
self, from whom you have nothing to 
fear; and were you acquainted with 
the story of my life, you would find 
there are others in this world still morv'^ 
wretched than you at present can pos= 
sibly be." The stranger then hastened 

3 5 



82 ALEXEXA ; OR THE 

under the shade of one of the stately 
columns which supported (he ceiling", 
"Nvhile Alexena, who had indistinctly 
heard the latter part of the conversa- 
tion, without being able to recal the 
late events, raised her eyes to those of 
her friend, and in accents of the bit- 
terest woe, demanded had she seen 
the shade of Mortimer. *' Good hea- 
ven !" exclaimed Louisa, dreadfully 
ai^itated, " your mind wanders ; Lord 
Mortimer is well. Look up, my dear 
Alexena, and let your fears vanish. 
The lady who has been the innocent 
cause of our recent terror, is an unfor- 
tunate stranger, to whom lam indebted 
for that assistance which has restored 
you to animation." 

*' Oh ! where is she ? — where has she 
vanished V said Alexena, wildly — still 
in evident terror. 

" She has withdrawn, to give you 
a moment to recover your scattered 
thoughts." 

" I feel obliged by her delicacy ; but 
I wish to behold her again.'' 



GASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 83 

" Then I feel pleasure in gratifying 
your wish/' said the stranger, as she 
advanced from the gloom, ''and I trust 
you will have the goodness to forgive 
the alarm I unnitentionally caused.* 

Our heroine gazed on her approach- 
ing figure, with fear, awe, and yet 
with pleasure, and answered her kind 
inquiries with a trembling timidify, 
which she in vain endeavoured to sup- 
press. 

'' My dearest madam," said Alexena, 
" I sincerely thank you for your atten- 
tion. The chill air of those dreary 
apartments, aided by idle fears, of 
which I now feel ashamed, quite sub- 
dued my weak spirits ; but I have tres- 
passed too long on your kindness. IMay 
I in treat you will have the goodness to 
accompany us to our chamber, where 
there is a fire, which, I trust, you will 
find grateful, after being, for such a 
length of time, exposed to (he almost 
deadly coldness of the night breeze." 

The stranger was unwilling to refuse, 
yet hesitated ; but, at length assented. 



Si alexena; or tiiE 

on condition that her visit, tog-ether 
with her very existence, should be a 
profound secret. To this Alexena and 
her friend jjromised strict attention^ 
and instantly after, followed their un- 
known friend with all the haste their 
strength would admit of, towards their 
apartment. It was some time before 
they observed she led them by a direc- 
tion 'different from that by which they 
had reached the late scene of their 
terrors. Somewhat alarmed, they 
stojjped for a moment, and begged to 
know whether she was certain of the 
riuht direction. 

" Oh! most assuredly I am." she 
replied ; *' fear nothing-, and follow me 
in silence." 

The next moment brought them 
into a corridore, which terminated in a 
spiral staircase; this they descended, 
and their guide then produced a small 
key, which she applied to a lock inge- 
niously concealed in the wall, the bolt 
of which was no sooner withdrawn, 
than the party were admitted into 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 85 

Alexena's apartment, and to their in- 
credible surprise, found their mirror 
formed the door which they heretofore 
conceived was immovably fastened to 
the wainscot. This the stranger care- 
fully closed, and was then led to a 
chair by Louisa, while Alexena pressed 
her to partake of some refreshments 
which the attentive Marg-aret was al- 
ways careful they should be plentifully 
supplied with. Her appetite, however, 
was by no means better than that of 
her kind friends ; and supper being 
hastilv removed, she, in accents of the 
most touching sweetness, addressed 
Alexena, again apologizing for the 
fright her unexpected appearance had 
occasioned, saying, she sincerely trusted 
it w^ould not be the cause of any serious 
indisposition, and intreated our heroine 
to seek that repose, of which her pallid 
looks and weary eyes clearly indicated 
she stood much in need ; but the latter 
would not retire so precipitately, 
avowing, she felt perfectly well, and 
had not the least inclination to sleep. 



86 alexena: or the 

" Wellj then/' said tlie fair stranger, 
" may I suppose you are anxious to 
know who the person is that has alarm- 
ed 30U at such an hour in the desert- 
ed chambers of the Castle of Santa 
Marco? Believe me, I should feel 
miserable, if you were to form an 
opinion which might be inimical to our 
further intercourse, therefore, if not 
trespassing on your patience, I will 
inform you of the eventful incidents of 
my life, and trust, the relation will not 
depress me in your esteem, who I have ~ 
been taught to value so highly.'' Alex- 
ena looked anxiously at Louisa for an 
explanation of those words, which the 
stranger observing, said, " I liave been 
led to venerate the character of Alexena 
de Guzman; how, and where, I first 
heard of her, will appear in the course 
of that narrative which I am about to 
relate, and trust, she will have the good- 
ness to believe, that a dauijhter of the 
house of Santa Marco is in capable of 
uttering a fakhood." 

" Merciful Powers!" exclaimed 



y 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAIICO. 87 

Louisa^ " is it possible, that one of the 
descendants of this castle yet exists?" 

" Yes, in me you behold one, 
and the most unfortunate of all my 
family ; but as morning approaches, I 
shall keep you no longer in suspense." 

She then gave her attentive auditors 
the foilowinq; relation. 



CHAP. VIII. 

" An honest tale speeds beit, being plalny told."^ 

Richard HI. 



FEEL convinced you will be 
surprised, when I tell you, lam that Cla- 
rissa, whom'Margarct led you to imagine 
was the sister of Don Philip, and who 
perished by the stiletto of Belzo Car- 
racci. Alas! lam, indeed, that miserable 
being, and to the merciless cruelty of 
Acasto I am indebted, for all the nume- 
rous evils which have, at length, reduced 
me to the humiliating alternative of 
accepting a shelter in the subterranean 
dungeons of this house, of which. 



S8 alexena; or the 

since my brother's death, I ought to be 
the ackiiowleged mistress. Most un- 
fortunately, however, that brother who 
would have protected me, fell an early 
victim to his open goodness of heart — - 
to the treachery and vile machinatioiia 
of a wretch, who, by false professions, 
was, for a period, honored by the sacred 
name of friend , but who really deserved 
no better title than that of villain It 
is almost needless to intorm you, this 
monster was Don Philip, who, under 
the mask of friendship, concealed the 
most corrupt of hearts. The first time I 
had the misfortune to see him, was with 
my brother in Madrid, to whom he had 
been introduced by my late unfortunate 
husband, Don Selib Del Harco, who 
was, at that period, acknowleged the 
most elegant and accomplished cavalier 
in the city. To him Acasto brought the 
most flattering letters of recommenda- 
tion, which he had easily obtained 
from m.y Selib's uncle, then residing 
in I/isbon. — Fatal, fatal, introduction! 
^t led to the immediate ruin of both my; 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. S9 

brother and Imsband^ which oflen since 
has impressed on my mind the convic- 
tion,, that we cannot be too circumspect 
in our inquiries relative to the charac- 
ters we introduce to our friends^ or to 
their families. Those who form hasty 
and inconsiderate opinions of men^ in 
generab are frequently erroneous, and 
are apt to regret tlieir want of prudence 
when too late. Many there are in so- 
ciety, who, from the speciousness of 
their manners, hide their vices under 
the dark cloak of dissimulation, and 
by that means escape detection ; but if 
exposed to public view, would be ob- 
jects of universal contempt, if not of 
abhorrence ; and such a character was 
Acasto, who, being- a perfect adept in 
the art of deception, " seemed the rose, 
but was the serpent under it." My 
brother was not lone: intimate with Don 
Philip, until he imbibed a partiality for 
gaming — that most detestable of vices, 
to which his hours, in a short time, be- 
came totally devoted, while his other 
amusements were neglected, iu ordei' 



90 alexena; or the 

that he might pursue, with unrestrained 
indulgence, this worthless propensity ; 
and, surely, oT all human pasBionsJtis the 
most despicable and degrading. How- 
ever, Don Philip contrived to draw him 
on by insensible degrees, desig-nedly 
allowing him to win small sums, as a 
bait, by which he might lure him to de- 
struction, and strip him of his entire 
patrimony — Acasto succeeded, and Don 
Miguel becameabcggar. The estate on 
which this castle stands, was the last 
remnant of his broken fortunes, and 
with it he lost his life, to insure to its 
present abhorred possessor, peaceable 
enjoyment. Thus it ever happens, that 
one crime draws on another, until the 
cup of infamj is full, which, at lengths 
overflow's, drowning the guilty wretch 
in its poison. Many are the sighs — 
many are the bitter tears, that Acasto 
has wruns: from the aijonized mothers 
of those children, whose fathers were 
irretrievably ruined, and driven house- 
less on a pitiless world, by that monster's 
rapacious villany. By gambling, how 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 91 

many has lie reduced to wretchedness — 
to despair— to self destrnction ; how 
many has he deprived of every earthly 
comfort; how many have perished in a 
loathsome prison ; how many fallen by 
the hand of the executioner ; hov*^ many 
banished from their native land ; how 
many from everlasting happiness, by the 
crimes that this vice, and his demoniac 
spirit drove them to the commission of. 
Oh ! my friends, 1 fear they are innume- 
rable, but an All-just Power, for a time, 
allows such wickedness, in order to 
accomplish its own unerring and im- 
mutable decrees." 

" Don Philip prolonged his visit to 
Madrid, by several petty pretences; un- 
willing to depart, until he and his vile 
associates should possess the last pistole 
of his two unsuspecting friends. Don 
Selib, indeed, had little to lose ; there- 
fore, a short period was sufficient to 
effect his ruin ; but the immense posses- 
sions of my brother, required more time ; 
they were a bait too enticing for the 
subtle Portuguese to relinquish, without 
using every exertion to obtain them ; 



92 ALEXENA ; OR THE 



beside, their acquisition opened a path 
to the promised completion of schemes 
of a most diabolical nature, which liis 
incorrigible villany flattered him he 
^vould be able to perpetrate. Don 
Miguel was every thing he could wish ; 
confiding, open-hearted, generous, and 
being a man of the strictest honor, was 
unsuspicious, believing those in whom 
he placed confidence, equally so. How- 
ever, the moment rapidly approached, 
when he was to be painfully awaken- 
ed from those dreams of imagined in- 
tegrity, in which he had placed a too 
ruinous reliance. 

" Already his gloomy and care-worn 
brow, loss of appetite, long fits of 
musing, and sullen pettishness, which, 
from my earliest recollection, were un- 
usual with him, awakened my fears, and 
induced me to seek the cause of his 
uneasiness ; but he refused to acquaint 
me with the real fact, and Selib, who 
had also grown gloomy, sullen, and 
discontented, was equally careful to 
conceal the source of his vexation. 



OASTLE OF SANTA MAHCO. 93 

though his aukvvard attempts, instead 
of quieting my fears or suspicions, only 
served to excite them; and such was the 
aspect of our affairs the third month 
after the arrival of Don Philip. One 
evening, on which Don Miguel returned 
some hours earlier than usual, he sum- 
moned me to his private study, where, 
with all the impetuosity of frenzy, 
vowed he was irretrievably ruined. As 
soon asgrief, surprise, and consternalion 
would permit, I anxiously required a 
relation of the particulars, and too 
soon learned the fatal cause. Don 
Philip and his emissaries, who it was 
more than suspected were vile sharpers, 
- had stripped him of all his vast posses- 
sions, even this ancient castle, which 
had for ages borne our name. Imagine 
my grief and terror — for some moments 
I was incapable of either making a 
reply, or offering my advice, but when 
somewhat composed, I begged his ac- 
ceptance of my fortune, then in the 
hands of a most respectable merchant in 
^Madrid, entreating he v,'oii!d purchase 



94 alexena; or the 

this oiir ancient mansion. He gazed 
on me for a moment in silent admiral- 
lion, then clasped me to his breast, 
and while the tears of brotherly affec- 
tion fell on my bosom, he, in the most 
solemn manner, refused to accept of a 
single crown. Recollect, said he, you 
promised your hand to my friend Selib, 
and with it he is entitled to your for- 
tune, besides, I fear my entreaties have 
reduced him to much the same situation 
in which I am at present, and should, 
therefore, think myself highly criminal, 
if I wilfully added further injury ; but 
do not despair, my dear Clarissa, there 
is yet a gleam of hope, as it is con- 
fidently affirmed by men of high re- 
spectability in the city, that Acasto has 
played foul, and should I be so for- 
tunate as to convict him of this infa- 
mous charge, I shall not only regain 
my property, but be avenged by expos- 
ing the villain to public scorn and con- 
tempt. I felt somewhat relieved by 
this information, and when I had ob- 
tained a promise from my brother^ that 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 95 

he would not act, except with the utmost 
caution, and, if possible, avoid resorting 
to violent measures, I reluctantly con- 
sented to his calling' on Acasto for an 
explanation of his conduct, and for a 
refutation of the baseness with which 
he w as charged, if in his power to 
give it ; if not, to demand the restora- 
tion of his property, accompanied with 
a command to leave the capital next 
morning, on pain of being exposed to 
ignominy aiul disgrace. Shortly after, 
Don ?rliguel hurried into the street, and 
1 watched the moment of his return, 
with anxious inquietude ; at length he 
arrived, accompanied by Don Selib 
and our confessor, at which I was 
much surprised ; but imagine my asto- 
nishment, on his leading me into his 
study, where he told me, he expected to 
see me the wife of his friend in less 
than an hour. In the utmost alarm, lest 
his intellect should have been deranfjed, 
in consequence of his late mi?fortunes, 
1 entreated him to retire to his chamber ; 
he guessed my thoughts, and in the 



SG alexena; or the 

gentlest accents of kindness, urged his 
request. * Believe me, my dearest sister,' 
said he, as he tenderly embraced me; 
'it is to insure your happiness that I am 
thus urgent, and not to gratify any 
whimsical or capricious desire of my 
own, nor to comply with the ardent 
wishes of Don Selib^ who, I pledge my- 
self, is in total ignorance of my resolu- 
tion ; for I could not possibly inform 
him of his intended felicity, until I had 
first obtained your approbation." I 
thanked him for this instance of delicate - 
attention to my feelings, but begged to 
decline an immediate marriage, unless 
he would satisfy me, that the urgency 
of his reasons were unexceptionable. 
*' Clarissa, said he, impressively, observe 
me, 1 can have no motive, save your 
welfare ; my reasons I will explain at a 
future period, and pledge myself, they 
are such as are entitled to, and must 
meet, your approbation ; but, notwith- 
standing what I have said, should you 
persist in your determination of delay- 
ing the happiness of your lover, I swear 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 97 

mo^st solemnly never more to hold con- 
verse, or have communication, with you : 
no! not durin«f the remaining period 
of my existence ; you can't have more 
than a few minutes to deliberate, there- 
fore, however cruelly circumstanced, you 
must determine quickly. Though thus 
reduced to a deplorable dilemma, a 
minute's reflection convinced me it was 
better to yield with a good grace, as I 
had nothingtofearorbedissatisfied with, 
except this mysterious haste; therefore, 
relying on Selib's love, and Don Migu- 
el's brotherly aiTection, I placed my 
hand within his, at the same time say- 
ing it was at his disposal : 'tis impos- 
sible, said I, you can injure my peace, 
1 confide implicitly on your honour; 
my hand and heart are both Seiib's, 
from this moment do with me as you 
will. He gazed on me in ecstasy, 
folded me again and again to his bosom, 
and bathed my pale cheeks with his 
tears. In the name of heaven I de- 
manded, what is the cause of this agita- 

VOL. II. E 



98 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

tion — this violent emotion? Oh! tor- 
lure me not with suspense. " Ask me 
not, I beseech you, my darling-, my 
beloved sister, I hope very shortly to 
explain my motives to your satisfaction, 
but at present it is utterly impossible." 
He then hurried away for the purpose 
of informinij Selib of his happiness ; 
but before he retired, said, it was un- 
necessary I should make any alteration 
in my dress. In a few minutes I was 
Jed to the saloon, where Selib, the good 
father, and a few of the oldest domes- 
tics of the family were already assem- 
bled, and from the violent agitation of 
the former, I felt assured he was unac- 
quainted with this sudden arrangement, 
even or his entering the house. After 
waiting a few moments for my cousin 
Isabella, we stood up, and I became 
the wife of Don Selib. This altog-ether 
was so like the vision of a distempered 
fancy, that I was unwilling to believe 
myself awake, but the gratulations of 
my family soon dispelled the idea of 
an illusion; and immediately after 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 99 

supper, my brother again embraced 
me, with a tenderness that excited 
fears — vague suspicions of — I know 
not what ; and when he retired, I felt 
very uneasy, as Selib could not explain 
liis mysterious conduct. On entering 
the breakfast- room the following morn- 
ing, I inquired for Don Migue], and 
became exceedingly alarmed, whcti 
informed by one of the servants, that 
he had been absent during the night. 
Selib instantly set out in pursuit of 
him ; but had scarce left the house, 
ere my maid brought me a letter, 
which she found in my cabinet. The 
superscription was the handwriting of 
Don Miii'uel, and I instantly broke the 
seal; then, with a fluttering heart, 
read those words, which are indelibly 
imprinted on my memory : — 

" My dearest Clarissa — Before you 
peruse those few lines, your unfortu- 
uate brother may be in awful eternity, 
or languishing in the gloomy dungeons 
of a prison. I am ruined beyond hope, 
by the vile artifices of that most 



100 alexena; or the 

detestable of villains, Acasto. In my 
interview with him last night, he had 
the presumption, the daring effrontery, 
to make an infamous proposal for you, 
my sister ; but I shall not wound your 
delicacy by an explicit detail. Let it 
suffice, the wretch demanded your 
hand, not as his wife, but, oh, torture ! 

as : conceiving I should sacrifice 

your honour to my interest. The re- 
sult is easily imagined. I demanded 
instant satisfaction. We drew, fought, 
and Philip fell! Conceiving him badly 
wounded, I sent for surgical aid; but 
judge my surprise, on being informed 
he only received a slight scratch, hav- 
ing feigned inability to tight ; relying 
on my honour for his forfeited life. — 
When the surgeons arrived, he sent 
a messenscer for an al2:uazeil and other 
officers, }]efore whom he deposed, I 
wounded him unfairlv, with intent to 
murder, bavins^ ur^j^ent reasons for 
wishing tlie removal of a man, who was 
so intimately acquainted with my trca- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. lOl 

soaaljle practices, and vvilli a conspi- 
racy which 1 had formed against the 
person of liis majesty, and for the 
sidjversion of the constitution. With 
the story of this pretended conspiracy, 
1 am yet unacquainted ; but warrants 
have been issued for my appreliensioii, 
and as Acasto, his steward, Torquo, 
and several others, have also sworn to 
the truth of this horrible fabrication, I 
am advised to retire to Portn:j;al or 
Italy, for the present, or until such 
time as the king can be convinced of 
my innocence. In half an hour, I will 
be on the road to the Italian States, 
and shall write to yon again on my 
arrival at Toledo ; which place 1 hope 
to reach by sun -set to-morrow. — 
Advise Selib to retire to Santa Marco 
for the present ; for if once within its 
walls, you may remain ia perfect secu- 
rity, as he is acquainted with all the, 
private and secret outlets. You are 
now, I trust, satisfied with the reasons 
which induced me to insist on your 



102 ALEXEXA ; OR THE 

r 

bestowing- your baud on Selib, as I 
have secured vou from the matchless 
villany of Acasto^ by giving you the 
sacred protection of a husband, a maa 
of honour — one uho adores, and is 
worlhy of your love. He will defend 
you from the artifices of such wretches 
as Philip, and I sincerely hope you 
will long enjoy the felicity which, I 
make no doubt^, your worthy husband 
will use every exertion to bestow. 
You have, inclosed, a draft on your 
hanker, for the entire of your fortune. 
Confide it to Selib : he is worthy of 
the trust ; and may all the heavenly 
angels take you both under their holy- 
protection." 

" It is useless to say what my feel- 
inij:s were, on readin"; that fatal letter. 
From a state of insensibility, I awoke 
to intolerable sufferings. Don Selib was 
supporting me in his arms, using every 
exertion to restore my peace, while I 
passionately demanded tidings of my 
brother; but my husband's frenzied 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 103 

looks forbade inquiry; yet, to withhold 
information, he was convinced, would 
only inflict the tortures of suspense, 
and, when suihciently composed, he 
explained the danger of remaining 
manv hours louijer in Madrid. Terri- 
fied by new fears, I urged our imme- 
diate fligiit, and though undetermined 
hovT to act, w^e left my brother's house, 
and retired to a small cottage, in a 
lonely part of the suburbs, where we 
resolved to remain until we had certain 
informafion of Don Miguel's destina- 
tion. On the fourth day after his 
departure, his faithful servant, Hen- 
riquez, returned with the fatal news of 
his death. He had been way-laid — 
inhumanly murdered — and when dead, 
the assassins carried oft' his body ; 
from which moment, all trace of him 
had been lost. Sorrows came not 
singly ; for very shortly after, Selib 
was proclaimed a traitor, and an im- 
mense reward offered for his apprehen- 
sion. To remain longer in Madrid, 
was to insure destruction. We, there- 



]0I ALEXENA ; OR THE 

fore^ left it in the shades of nighty 
accompanied by Henriquez, and made 
all possible haste towards Lisbon, 
Avhere we intended to reside, until we 
could ascertain the final determination 
of his majesty, who had confiscated 
the remaining property of my brother, 
which was very trifling. Selib had con- 
verted my fortune into gold, which 
was fully equivalent to satisfy our 
moderate wishes; bnt the fickle god- 
dess seemed resolved to persecute us, 
as we were plundered by banditti, and 
reached Lisbon in extreme distress. 
There was an uncle of my husband's 
residing in that city, named Felix Del 
llarco, who possessed immense wealth, 
and from whom my Selib had large ex- 
pectations. By this relative we were 
kindly and hospitably received, as he 
was then unacquainted with our dread- 
ful change of fortune ; and in his 
house my infant son first saw the light, 
who, for a short time, dispelled the 
gloom that was fast gathering round 
us. Some demon, who had heard our 



CASTLE or SANTA MARCO. t05 

cVisg'race in Madrid, blasted our hopes- 
and character, by the propagation of 
the most infamous falselioods, which, 
in less than three months after the 
birth of my boy, caused a visible plte- 
ration in the manners of Don Felix 
and his lady. The lalter was a woman 
of narrow education, brought up in 
the most g-ross ignorance by her father, 
one of the merchants of the city, 
who, by rigid industry, and strict 
attention to business, had amassed a 
large fortune. Donna Del Harco, by 
mearniess and ingenuity, found the 
true situation of my Seiib's circum- 
stances, and ever after, availed herself 
of every opportunity of insulting and 
torturing my feelings with a repetition 
of them. Before stranjjers, her rude- 
ness and vulgarity were insufferable : 
at one moment affecting pity for our 
misfortunes ; the next, displaying her 
generosity, in granting us the sheiler 
of her roof: frequently reviling the 
memory of my brotlser, and, ironically, 
praising the honour of Selib, which- she 

E 5 



106 alexen'a; or the 

affirmed was his sole motive for makin«' 
a beggar's sister his wife, tt were 
tedious to enumerate the insults and 
des^radino; insinuations of this ill-bred, 
ignorant woman ; but for a lenfrth of 
time, my husband's unfortunate cir- 
cumstances kept me silent, until re- 
peated injuries rendered my wretched 
life intolerable. Loss of cheerfulness, of 
liealth, heretofore so excellent, seized 
my whole system, and presented strong 
indications of a rapid decline. Selib, 
now seriously alarmed, had too much 
penetration not to discern the real 
cause, and in a very few days after the 
discovery, removed me to a cottage, 
about a mile from Lisbon, where we 
lived most happily, until the clamours 
of our creditors presented a new spe- 
cies of misfortune, the most heart- 
rendins: of all others. We had received 
their property ; were unable to pay, 
and thouirh Selib would have cheer- 
fully submitted to the rigours of the 
hardest labour, or the solitary gloom 
of a prison, if either of those terms 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. JOT" 

would satisfy their demands; but, alas! 
they would not ; and in the latter he was 
speedily confined, without havino^ the 
power even to pay for the few trifling in- 
duJgencies that are granted to wretched 
captives ; leaving his miserable wife, 
and infant son^ perishing for want of 
the necessaries of life, as a mouldy- 
crust, and a little water, was the only 
food which the wretched Clarissa could 
procure for many days; but these pri- 
vations gave nie little pain, while my 
husband languished in the noisome, 
foul, and contagious air of a dungeon. 
It subdued my pride — my reluctance — ■ 
and for my Selib's sake, I applied to 
Don Felix, who generously paid our 
debts, and gave me a few pistoles, ac- 
companied with his earnest wish, that 
we would leave Portugal, and retire to 
some private village in Spain, where- 
we might live in solitude, until the 
king's anger should be appeased, or, 
at least, until such time as he could do 
somethin<J: effectual to serve us. Our' 
finances were such as rendered our 



108 alexexa; or the 

compliance with this advice absoliitely 
iiulispensable, and a very few days 
after Selib's liberation, we set out for a 
small villa ire in Andelusia. where we 
determined to reside ; but the malign 
shade of Don Acasto hovered round 
us, to whatever clime we wandered, 
and the long-wished-for time arrived, 
in which he hoped to find us friendless, 
helpless, and forsaken. Our deserted 
and pitiable situation, softened not his 
relentless bosom. We were an easy 
prey, he had long determined to make 
sure of; not one ray of compassion 
for our late sufferings, ever warmed 
his chill bosom; his domestics received 
their bloody mandate from the inhu- 
man ruflian, and Selib fell beneath 
their munlerous sabres. The scene of 
this horrible tragedy, was a lonely and 
sequestered vale, where Acasto's vile 
emissaries had a litter prepared, in 
which they conveyed me, with my 
infant, after a long and fatiguing 
journey, to the gloomy walls of the 
mansion in which I was born ; but. 



^ CASTLE OF SANTA MAneO. 109 

oil ! how changed ; it had been once 
tlie scene of happiness, but was 
then of every crime. The distracted 
state of my mind, precluded the pos- 
sibility of my being able to recognize 
the country through which I was con- 
veyed, and I had been manj hours in 
the castle, before I had the slightest 
conception of the name or situation 
of it. T\ly inquiri'i.s were answer- 
ed by a kind old woman, named Mar- 
garet, the same that now attends yon, 
^^ ho informed me, 1 was in the mansion 
of Beizo Carracci, the robber. This 
was the first moment I had heard of tliis 
extraordinary man, and my first sensa- 
tions were those of disgust, abhorrence, 
and terror; to him I conceived myself 
indebted for the heaviest calamity of 
my life; but I was not long snfiered to 
remain in ignorance, as the morning 
after my arrival Don Philip was sighing 
at my feet; the monster avowed him- 
self the murderer of my S«Ub, and 
then pleaded ungovernable passion, in 
extenuation of the horrible deed. A 



IIG alexena; or the 

prisoner v/itliin the narrow confines of 
a chamber, I was obliged to listen, or, at 
least, hear the repetition of his detest- 
able love ; but his prayers, tears, threats, 
entreaties, or imprecations, served only 
to add hideousjiess to tiie horrible 
ruffian ; every mental torture that it was 
possible to inflict,! was doomed to suffer; 
but, I trust heaven, not one thought 
even swerved from the rigid path of 
virtue. My suiTerings were intolerable, 
and the invention of this fiend seemed 
on the rack; so persevering were 
his endeavours to conjure up new 
terrors, for the purpose of afirighiing 
me into a compliance with his savaga. 
wishes. At length — oh! horrible re- 
collection ! — Acasto swore — dreadfully 
pledged himself, that my infant's life 
should pay the forfeit of my obstinacy, 
and gave me but one short day to de- 
cide on the dreadful alternative. 1 
passed the hours of it in prayers and 
tears, and when the light of the fol- 
lowing morning rendered objects visi- 
ble, I shoqk like an aspea at the sound 



fiASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. lit 

of every footstep that eclioed tbroiig]i 
the castle; but noon beheld my 
murderous gaoler in my chamber, 
armed with a dagger, and a counte- 
nance so horribly portentious, that I 
shrieked, on his entrance, with despair 
and terror. A few frantic strides 
brought him to my side, and in despite 
of my struggles, he forced my lovely 
infant from mv arms; the innocent 
babe smiled on his assassiii, and play- 
fully grasped his curls. A momentary 
sensation of penitence seemed to soften 
the wretch, but an instar.t served to 
darken the gem of compassion which 
had brightened his visage; all the 
gloomy malignity of a diabolical ima- 
gination, added increasing terrors to his 
brow, as he agairj solemnly swore, my 
boy should be the irnmediate victim of 
his vengeance, unless I that moment 
consented to be his forever. Monster, 
begone ! I cried, with frenzied gesture, 
and harm not my babe. Heaven will 
save him from your grasp; but should 
Providence permit the perpetration of 



J 12 alexena; or the 

such a crime, behold, I am armed!— the 
moment I see my cbild expire, the 
same shall witness this poignard sheath- 
ed in your bosom." '' A dagger 1" he 
fiercely exclaimed, '' Oh! cursed hour' 
say, woman, where didst thou procure 
that weapon?" On the floor of my 
chamber ; behold it, has it not been an 
instrument of destruction? has it not 
been an abettor of your vile purposes? 
It may have committed murder, directed 
by your hand, but heaven has placed it 
now in mine, and has infused courage 
in a woman's bosom, and given nerve 
to her aim, to rid the world of a 
savage. At least it will preserve my 
peace, and punidi with death the cow- 
ardly wretch who would inhumanly 
anniiiiiate helpless infancy. 

*' Acasto gazed a moment in silent 
wonder, and then placed my boy within 
my trembling arms ; take him, he said, 
look, behold his smiles— consent to be 
mine, and he shall smile so still ; if not, 
on€ short, one fleeting hour, shall see 
him yield his inlitnt breath, in all tho 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 113 

(orture of convulsive agorsy, and his 
lastpani^Sj his kist sighs, will reproach 
you witii the obduracy that so cruelly 
sacrificed him. But why, he continued, 
sliould I lose a moment ; swear this 
instant to he mine, or by all the terrors 
of unrelenting- veni^eance, the brat 
now dies. He drew his stiletto — 
I pressed my boy closer to my bosom 
— he grasped my arm — then raising 
his — in a hollovt^ tone, said — " swear." 
Oh! my God! I cried, do not forsake 
me in this moment of agony; ' of un- 
utterable distress! "Swear," vociferat- 
ed Acasto ; never, no, never ! will 1 bo 
voluntary criminal; villain begone. 
He cast a ghastly look of horrible ma- 
lice, deadly expressive, and again 
raised his poignard. '* One moment 
more," he said, '' gives thoe to never- 
ending repentance — gives thy child to 
the tomb — say, murderess, shall 1 strike? 
The shades of evening already darken 
this chamber with gloomy shadows, 
so there's no time to lose — speak— I 



114 ALEIENA; OR THE 

have tiified too long.'* " Pity me, ob, 
heaven!" I exclaimed. Oh, yes! said 
Acasto,, in a voice of thunder, as he 
directed a deadly blow at my littl« 
darling — it fell — the point of his 
stiletto pierced my arra, and as he 
drew it forth, my blood sprinkled his 
dress. Again his hand was raised to 
strike, but a gigantic figure rushed be- 
tween the da^^^er and mv infant. Hold, 
murderer! said this awful visitor, in a 
hollow tone. Don Philip heard him not, 
as hewasah'eady stretched seriseless on 
the floor. Follow me, said this dread- 
ful figure. I obeyed, but with difiicully 
could keep within view ; with such 
rapidity did he measure the great cor- 
ridor which led to the apartment, 
where medicine and sur^•ical iustru- 
ments were deposited ; on entering, lie 
examined my wound, and dressed it; 
his hands trembled violently, and while 
thus kindly occupied, I beheld with 
wonder his colossal figure; but his face 
I could not distimxuish throuoh his 
visor, which was overshadow'ed bv an 



CASTLE OF SANTA IIAIICO. 115 

immense dark piumej that waved over 
liis helmet ; his armour ^vas covered 
with a cloak of dark crimson^ in ^vhich 
he wrapped my infant son, and when 
lie had dressed my arm, said, the wound 
was somewhat severe, but not danger- 
ous. Praise heaven, your child has 
escaped unhurt ; and it shall now be 
my care to save him from future peril. 
He then rose to leave the chamber. 
Oh! whither would you take my boy^ 

I cried in despair; perhaps, you too . 

The eyes of the stranger shot the fire 
of displeasure, but pity instantly suc- 
ceeded. ''Unfortunate mother! I hava 
not a moment to lose; say your infant 
is dead, and that you have hid the 
body. Acasto will be here instantly; 
but ere 1 depart, I solemnly swear to 
protect, to save, your child. You shall 
see me again to-morrow. Ilark ! ap- 
proaching footsteps — farewell — fare- 
well." I snatched a parting kiss from 
my lovely innocent, and the same in- 
stant this stranj^e beinn' vanislied with 



116 alexena; oh the 

him through the pannelled wails of this 
very apartment." 

Alexena and Louisa, who liad sat 
listening- in horror, now crept closer to 
the unfortunate Clarissa, who con- 
tinued : — 

"■ Scarce had the sliding v/cod sluit 
him from mv sisrht. before Acasto en- 
tered the chamber ; his countenance 
was lividiy pale ; his voice was hollow ; 
and he trembled violently. '' Where 
is the body?" he faltered, " that 1 may 
remove it." — Accursed fiend ! I ex- 
claimed, while tears of thankfulness 
and jfjy, at Lis escape, accompanied by 
convulsive sobs, almost deprived me of 
utterance ; you sha'n't have the bodv, 
I will ernbahn it with my tears, and 
then lay it in the grave, from whence 
his blood shall call for vengeance. 

" The wretch, misconceiving the 
cause of my tears, told me, conceal- 
ment was useless, as putrefaction, in a 
very few days, must ensue, and lead 
to a discovery of the corpse. Those 



CASTLE OF SAKTA MARCO. 117 

(TXpressioiis were intended to pierce mj'- 
heart, and tliey bad the d<3sired effect. 
i screamed vvitii terror, alarmed, lest his 
words should be prophetic, and my 
repeated shrieks, at length, drove him 
from the chamber. As soon as he re- 
tired, I threw myself on my knees, and 
petitioned for heaven's protection, for 
my infant; while the idea Acasto en- 
tertained of his death, considerably- 
relieved my mind, and sug^^ested the 
plan tJiat I afterwards resolved to ex- 
ecute ; which was, to assure Don Pliilip 
I had hriyself buried the body in the 
ruins of one of the fallen towers, that 
I might have the melancholy pleasure 
of weeping over the tomb of my mur- 
dered innocent. From the terror wliich 
Acasto had been unable to conceal, I 
felt convinced he was superstitions, as it 
was evident he had mistakeii the kni:>ht 
for a spectre, and believed I was utterly 
ignorant of the appearance of this 
supposed phantom. Oar next interview 
coiifnmed this idea, as (he hypocrite 
solemnly protested it was not his inten- 



lis ALEX.ENA ; OR, TME 

<ion to kill my child. " Elated with the 
hopes, said he, of making you mine, 
I pointed tlie dagger^ in order to terrify 
you into compliance, and unfortunately 
stumbled at the moment, which caused 
your infant's death; being shocked 
at the fatal accident, the violence of 
my feelings overpowered me, and I 
sunk to the ground. He then earnestly- 
requested I would discover the unfor- 
tunate babe, that he might have the 
body deposited in the cemetery of the 
castle, but, on my absolute refusal, he 
promised never again to mention the 
^subject, and, in this instance, punctu- 
ally adhered to his word, as for some 
\Yeeks after this interview I was per- 
mitted to enjoy comparative tranquillity. 
The black knight regnlarly attended, 
with the pleasing information of my 
boy's welfare, for whom he had pro- 
cured an excellent nurse, on whose 
fidelity he could rely, and removed 
them both to a place of safety. I was 
also assured of his protection, and en- 
tertained sanguine hopes of escape^ 



OAStLE OF SAXTA MARCO. 119 

through his interference, if I could 
possibly avoid the advances of Don 
Philip for a very few months, as it wsis 
necessary my champion should interest 
the See of Rome in my behalf, and to 
the Pontiff he had resolved to g-o for 
the express purpose. Before he de- 
parted, I was informed of the particulars 
of the plaUj and of the real nanie of 
my incognito, at which I was exces- 
sively surprised ; but a few days affer 
his departure, Acasto renewed his in- 
famous suit, and numberless were the 
tortures which he indicted; amongst 
others, he almost starved me into com- 
pliance, but Providence, assisted by 
his supernatural terrors, often saved 
me, in moments of the darkest pros- 
pect ; the accidental falling of a 
picture, the sudden clashing of a door, 
or the mournful sound of the wind, has 
deterred him from a deed of infamy. 
But the moment arrived, in which I 
was to be sacrificed to his safety. A 
letter from some of his agents in Italy, 
reached the castle about two months 



120 ALEXEKA ; OR. THE 

after the departure of tlie black kniglit ; 
and I remember the evening v. ell. Don 
Philip was busily engaged with some 
papers, which he was examining with 
more than usual attention, while I sat 
in a recess of one of the windows, 
gazing in despair on the gloomy ram- 
parts, when Torquo, thai most pitiless 
of demons, entered, with the fatal 
packet, of which Acasto had read but 
a very few lines, ere his countenance 
became convulsed almost to blackness^ 
and it was a considerable time before 
he could command articulation. The 
first use he made of his voice, was to 
order me to prepare for a journey to 
Saragossa, where, he intimated, it was 
his intention to send me the following 
day; then desired Torquo to accom- 
pany him to his study : of their con- 
fereiice I could not form an idea, but 
regretted my sable warrior's absence, 
and that, be the intentions of 
Acasto ever so savage, 1 had no alter- 
native, but submission. I passed that 
night in a variety of vain conjectures, 



CAHL-E of SANTA MARCO. 121 

•respecting the cause of tliis sudden 
and unaccountable determination ; for 
where could he effect his purposes 
with greater secresy than in Santa 
Marco : and it never occurred in course 
of this mental inquiry, whether Acasto 
was, or was not, to be the companion 
of my journey. Indeed, I had not an 
idea that he would even allow me to 
cross the court-yard unattended by- 
himself; then judge my surprise on 
finding that Torcjuo was to be my sole 
attendant. I shudder, when I reflect 
on the impatience with which I awaited 
the approach of the following evening 
— of the hour on which the heartless 
Acasto doomed me to death. But I 
had not the most indistinct idea of his 
bloody purpose, and joyfully prepared, 
blessing the moment in which I 
was to quit the castle — a spot where 
I had passed the most miserable hours 
of my existence. On entering Don 
Philip's anti-chamber, he seemed 
greatly agitated, and when he bade me 
adieu, I was seized with a fatal presenti- 

VOt. II. p 



123f alexena; or tiie 

ment of approaching evil ; but my 
emotion was such as forbade reflection, 
and 1 hurried to the portal, where the 
inhuman Torquo ira|)atiently awaited " 
my approacii. Acasto followed to the 
draw-bridge_, and when quite nigh me, 
drew his cloak round his person, in 
order to conceal his features, which 
were so obscured by its shade, that I 
could neither distinj^uish, nor judge of 
their expression. His voice was hollow; 
but he spoke little, and as he placed a 
heavy purse in Torquo's hands, cau- 
tioned liim to be steady, and let me 
want for nothing. " You have," said 
he, '' received every necessary instruc- 
tion. Now, Clarissa, f^irewell : and 
recollect that what has heretofore oc- 
curred, or may hereafter happen, of 
an unpleasant nature, has been solelj 
occasioned by your unrelenting obsti- 
nacy ; but reproof, at this moment, 
would be as unavailing as cruel ; I 
therefore wish you safe, for your jour- 
ney is likely to be a long one." " Am 
J not ^'oing to Saragossa?" said f. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 1'23 

" Yes, certainly/' was his reply, and 
again wishing' me all happiness, until 
Ave should meet again, returned to the 
castle, while 1 mechanically followed 
Torquo across the draw-bridge, into a 
little wood, through which we hastened 
at a round pace, as he informed me we 
had many leagues to travel, before we 
could possibly reach the place at which 
he intended to put up for the night. 
The shades of evening were rapidly- 
approaching ; but their gloom was en- 
livened by the rising moon, which then 
began to glimmer, and cast her faint 
rays over the dark brows of the neigh- 
bouring rocks. It was almost twelve 
before Torquo thought of slackening 
his speed ; but to proceed wilh the 
same velocity, became impossil)le, as, 
from the inequality of the ground, our 
animals were unsteady, and being weak 
with fatigue, stumbled every moment. I 
entreated my attendant to alight, which 
at first he was unwilling to do ; but on 
my again representing the necessity of 
the measure, he complied, and led the 

f2 



tf4 alexena; oh the 

liorse throiiji-h the narrow defile la 
which we then were, into an extensive 
glen, apparently sunk in the bosom of 
the mountain. I gazed from the height 
on this yawning abyss, and with an 
emotion of extreme terror, demanded 
whether it was absolutely necessary we 
should pass through that savage wild. 
*' Yes/' replied Torquo, " but our 
journey, for the present, tcrmifiates at 
the opposite extremity, where you will 
find a place of rest, of which, I feel 
-assured, you stand much in need.'' 
My thoughts now became confused ; 
J feared — I could not tell what ; but 
rode into (he glen, close by his side, 
who, as a man, I naturally looked to 
for protection, and for the first moment 
of my life, I beheld him without 
being dismayed. He proceeded at a 
quicker pace than I wished, and in half 
.an hour, we reached the opposite ex- 
tremity of that wild, but only for the 
purpose of entering a still more terrific 
one. These horrible vales were con- 
jaected by a narrow pass, apparently cut 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 125' 

©lU of the solid rock, where the road 
became so rug-^ed, that it was impossi- 
ble to sit the horses with safety ; we, 
therefore, dismounted, and I walked 
forward a few paces, while Torqiio was 
apparently employed in fastening their 
bridles, so as to enable him to lead 
I'neni thronijh the olen. On obscrvinj:r 
what he was about, I slowly advanced 
Ihronali the narrow defile, and rained 
the open plain, where I beheld the 
rising" moon, in all her glorious splen- 
t\oVi\\ I stood to gaze on the bright 
arid welcome Imninary, and my 
thoughts naturally wandered to the 
heaven, in which it moved. Willi 
fervency, 1 besought Almighty pro- 
lection ; but short space was allowed 
for my prayers : a quick approacliing 
footstep atarmed me, and on turning 
to ascertain the cause, beheld Torque, 
without the horses. A horrid convic- 
tion of his murderous intent, flashed 
across my affrighted imagination, and 
it was with much difficulty I could 
summon eouragre to demand where our- 



126 alexena; or the 

animals were. He hegitated for a mo- 
ment, tlien said, " We no longer want 
them, lady ; our journey is nii*!! 
finished. A few puces farther, at the 
next turning" on the road, you will see 
tlie house prepared for your reception." 
'' I breathed as:ain, and hastened for- 
ward, that I might see it, as I could 
not help fearing my uncouth attendant, 
who I wished to be rid of; as with him 
my fears of death would vanish. The 
rock that excluded the view of that 
home to which I was conducted, lay 
within a few paces of us, and as I 
touched its brown sides in passing, I 
peevishly exclaimed, *' What ! is there 
to be no end to (his pile of crags ?'* 
*' Oh \ yes," replied Torquo, " a little 
farther, and you will have an extensive 
prospect of a most delightful country.-*" 
I quickened my pace; but guess my 
despair, on turning round its projecting 
base, when, instead of an hospitable 
hearth, I beheld a barren and desolate 
plain, of great extent. My eyes were 
strained in vain endeavours to catch 



fiASTLE OF SANTA MAIICO. 12T^ 

the form of a human dwelling-, in the 
hazy mists of distance; bat my scruti- 
nizing search was tVuilless, and in- 
accents of despair and poignant dis- 
tress, I turned to Torquo, demanding 
the home to which lie had promised 
to conduct me. He paused — seized me 
by the arm — then^ with a ghastly look 
of murderous exultation^ pointed to 
the earth, whicli had been freshly 
turned up, and presented to my af- 
fnglited senses — to my agonized soul — 
a grave, newly dug, at the foot of a 
rock. " This is the home — the couch — 
the mansion of repose^ — to which I have 
solemnly sworn toAcasto, to lead — and 
bury you and your griefs for ever." 
*' Oh, heaven!" I exclaimed, *' forsake 
me not, or I am, indeed, lost! Oh! my 
child, my darling child, intercede for 
your mother. Alas! are we to be thus^ 
thus cruelly separated ?" ''By no means," 
observed Torquo, " yor. will be with 
him presently; therefore, pray speedily, 
as there is no time to lose." I fell at 
the. feet of the assassin, and pleaded- 



ISS ALEXENA ; OR THE 

for life I so true it is^ tliat he our mise- 
ries what they may, we are unwilling: 
to part with it. I promised to change 
my name, to retire to whatever distant 
clime he might comuiand, and buid 
myself !)y a solemn oath, never to reveal 
the secrets of that night — my birth — 
my name — or my misfortunes. But his 
impatience to perpetrate his bloody 
deed, scarce allowed me time to make 
those promises. ''All stuif and madness, 
lady," grumbled Torquo^ "you must 
<}ie !" then dragged me to the mouth of 
that tomb, which gaped to receive its 
destined prey. I frantically belieid the 
narrow spot w hich was to receive me — 
and my fears. The moon-beams fell 
tiiintly on the cold clay, and instant 
death, with all its concomitant horrors, 
chilled my heart ; a sickly scream an- 
nounced my fast-fleeting strength; 
while the villain endeavoured to bind 
me, and stifle my cries, by placing his 
hand tight on my mouth. But what 
could he fear? what could render such 
caution necessary in such solitary wilds? 



CASTLE GF SANTA MARCO. 129' 

Yet he had fears, and not without rea- 
son, for the bands of Belzo Carracci 
wandered through those desarts, hunt- 
ing' in concert with beasts of prey ; tho* 
who among- them so savage as Torquo. 
He had forced me on njy knees — then 
pausing a moment — raised his glit- 
teriuG: stiletto — the liiiht of the moon 
added brightness to its terrors; and as 
it trembled in his grasp, annihilated 
hope ; the motion of my feet, in vain 
endeavours to rise, threw some of the 
loose earth, which had been hardened 
by the frosty air, into the grave, and 
it rattled in hollow sounds, similar to 
those formed by clay thrown on a coffin. 
I shuddered, and conceivino: it mv 
death-knell, once more turned my 
streaming eyes on my intended mur- 
derer, who seemed to hesitate ; con- 
ceiving this a favourable omen, I again 
pleaded for life, with the energy 
which fear, in such moments, always 
inspires. But at that terrible and trying 
instant, the sound of voices came sigh- 
ing on the breeze, accompanied by the- 

F 5 



m 



ALEXENA : OR TBE 



distant echo of horses' feet, which were 
easily distins^uished advancing'. Airain 
the inhuman Torquo raised his mur- 
derous arm : hope and fear induced me 
to scream, as assistance was evidently 
nigh; while my executioner, startled and 
alarmed at the piercing" wildness of my 
shrieks, with an execration, buried his 
poignard in my side — threw my motion- 
less body into the grave — and fled ; 
but to heap the earth on me was not in 
his power, as the horsemen were within 
ii few paces, and would have massacred 
him had he remained a moment longer. 
When I awakened out of insensibility, 
occasioned by my wound, imagine my 
surprise, on finding myself in bed, in a 
comfortable, though vaulted chamber, 
-attended by the black knight and a 
peasant girl. The visor of the former 
was down as usual, but I conceived his 
face was w^asted by long sickness, and 
his emaciated form confirmed my con- 
jectures. As soon as I had power to 
articulate, I demanded where I was? 
and under whose protection 1 [' You 



G-ASTLE OF SANTA iMAllCO. 131' 

are safe, and under mine, said this ex- 
traordinary being, but you must not 
speak, until such time as your perfect 
restoration permits; your wound lias a 
very favourable appearance, and a 
fi:ood sister from a neio^hbourin"- con- 
vent, who constantly attends you, will 
be here presently to dress it, and now 
that you are sensible of your situalion, 
I trust you will aid our exertions for 
your recovery, by taking- those medi- 
cines that are prescribed for you, and 
by strictly attending to Father Zelo's 
advice." He then, in accents of the 
fondest solicitude, wished me a speedy- 
recovery, enjoined silence, and with- 
drew." 

Here Clarissa was interrupted by the 
visible ajiitrJion of Alexena, which 
alarmed both her and Louisa. On in- 
quiring the cause, our heroine tre- 
mulously demanded, what sort of man 
Father Zelo was? Tl.is qur^stion sur- 
prised Clarissa, who entered into a 
description of his person, and which 
satisfied the former, that he was the - 



132 ALEXEKA ; OR THE 

identical priest who Ansclmo had pro- 
cured to m?dTy her and Lord Mortimer. 
But unwilling to interrupt Clarissa, she 
promised her an explanation ^.t some- 
ollier period, who then proceeded thus: 
'' The moment I found myself un- 
restrained bj any other than my female 
attendanJ, I begged to know how long" 
I had been confined in that apartment, 
and when I was brought to it ; to whicli. 
she replied, 1 had been there a month, 
and that the black knight had watched 
by me during that time with unceasing 
kindness and attention, but could not 
inform me where I was, as she had 
been led there blindfolded by Father 
Zeio, v.ho never suffered her to 
wander more than a very few paces 
from my apartment. It is useless ia 
enter into a detail of all those circum- 
stances which occurred during the 
period of my confinement. Let it suf- 
fice, I had the rapturous joy of again 
folding my infant to my bosom, and 
that I was treated with all imaginable 
care and tenderness, bv the kind fathej 



CASTLE OF SAXTA. MAHCO. 133" 

and the black knight, to whose un- 
remilting care 1 owe my life. In 
less than three months, I made an 
astonishing -i-ecovery ; for though tlie 
wound had not been dangerous, yet 
the fever brought on by the agitation 
of my spirits, reduced me to the hist 
extremity, and had it not been for the 
skill and unremitting attention with 
which I had been treated, it is a moral 
impossibility I could have survived. 
At length, when able to leave my 
chamber, I became anxious io retire 
into a conv^ent, until such time as I 
could acquaint Don Felix with my 
melancholy situation, who, I had no 
doubt, would provide for my child, 
and enable me to take the veil. On 
my next interview with the black 
knight, I explained my intentions, and 
requested his advice. He listened 
attentively, then, with a smile, said, 
'' Have you already forgiven Torque. 
From your ravings, when delirious, I 
am inclined to believe you are indebted 
t® that old ruffian for your wound and 



1-S4 a^exena; oa the 

late illness ; you may, Iherefore, rest as- 
sured, I will not lose the benefit of such 
an excellent witness; one, whose single 
testiniony is sufficient to brin*^ the 
assassin to that punishment, which it 
would bean insult to justice to let him- 
evade. Here you have nothing to fear, 
and am certain you will be astonished 
when informed, that you are, at this 
moment, in the subterranean dungeons 
of Santa Marco." I became almost 
motionless at this terrible information, 
which gave the black knight much 
uneasiness, and, in the kindest accents 
of pity, he assured me, I had nothing 
to fear. *' Acasto," said he, " has gone 
to Lisbon, and it is likely will never 
return ; I will, therefore, in the cojn-sc 
of to-morrow, conduct von throuo-h 
the secret passes of those caverns, with 
the secrets of w-hich, it is absolutely 
necessary you should be acquainted, 
and introduce you into the castle, wliere 
von are to reside, until such time as I 
can remove you to a convent, or some 
more agreeable residence." The fol- 



GASTLE OF SAXTA MARCO. 135 

lowing morning, he led me through 
the most terrible intricacies that, I 
believe, were ever formed, and witli 
the secrets of which I was before un- 
acquainted. Amongst others, he taught 
me the nature of the spring in the 
pannel of this apartment, whicli I am 
permitted to explain, and also to inform 
you of the name of my friend, in order 
that, by your knowledge of the first, 
you may secure an impenetrable retreat, 
if necessary, but to which you are not 
to resort on any trivial occasion — only 
in cases of dire necessity, should such 
occur; and with the second, that his 
name may inspire confidence, and 
banish ridiculous terror, should you see 
the hero himself ; yet it is necessary to 
observe, your life will pay the forfeit 
of your indiscretion, if you ever, with- 
out permission, reveal the name I am 
about to confide to your keeping ; but, 
to terminate your suspense, know that 
the black knight and Belzo Carracci 
are the same person. Yes; that for- 
midable robber;^ the terror of this 



13G- alexena; or tiis^ 

country, is that man — the best — and' 
"bravest of the brave." With his historv, 
or the former incidents of his life, 1 am 
unacqnninted ; but I have seen his 
horrible troop, and know him lo be 
their leader. Last nio^ht, thcv brouirht 
prisoners to their cavern, mIio, I un- 
derstand, are persons of distinction,. 
'VTith whom Carracci is acquainted ; yet, 
as he has, from some unaccountable 
motive, sworn to protect you, you have 
now little to fear from Acasto; for the- 
oalh of that bandit has never been 
violated. However, be watchful, as 
lie may be ab.sesit at the moment 
when his aid would be most wantins:. 
Recollect, I fell beneath Torquo's dag- 
ger, owing: to a similar circumstance: 
but I am inclined to believe Carracci 
is more watchful of your safety, as hc^ 
has informed m»e of every circumstance 
of yoiu' life, since your arrival from 
Enij;land, and expresses \\iQ. utmost 
interest in your welfare. Now, farewell ; 
as I sec tlie dawn bursts throuMi the 
eastern sky, and it is time to retire;. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 157 

tlioiigh 1 sliall, \vitli your pornsission, 
visit you as olten as is consistent ^vi{h 
safety and prudence ; yet, ere I go, 
let me caution you (o have special 
care how you wander through the de- 
serted chambers of this castle, lest you 
may be lost in their mazes ; and sliould 
you, at any time, encounter strange 
figures, carefully avoid them ; for wlieu 
Carracci conceives it necessary to in- 
troduce himself, he will do so in a 
proper manner, and however odd this 
advice may appear, you will, picrclanoe, 
find it valuable and worthy yo! r atten- 
tion." 

Clarissa now rose to retire, but 
Alexena would not permit her, until 
she partook of some refreshment, after 
the fatio:ues of the ni^ht ; then thanked 
her, in the most graceful manner, for 
her advice, kindness, and the gratiii- 
cation she had conferred, in the recital 
of her eventful story. 

Before she retired, Louisa ventured 
to inquire how she became acquainted 
with Margaret's mentioning^ her name 
to them. 



13S alexena; or the 

" I was behind that pannel," said 
Clarissa, pointing to it, " vvliere curi- 
osity led me to seek the captives of 
Acaslo, who Carracci had represented 
in such glowing terms, that, believe me 
VThen I say, you excited no small 
dejrree of interest. It was there I 
overheard Margaret repeat the tale. 
which Don Philip has impressed on 
the minds of his domestics." 

Alexena now mentioned the form 
she had seen, and which had been the 
real cause of her weakness ; at which 
Clarissa seemed surprised, and after a 
thoughtful pause, said, *' It must be 
Carracci Iiimself, whose curiosity has 
also prompted him to have a peep at 
your lady sJ lip ; yet I am inclined to 
believe he did not wish to be seen, 
though it is probable, he wished to see 
you, lest such knowledge might become 
absolutely necessary, when it would 
not be in his power to attain it." 

Clarissa then pressed the spring of 
the pannel, which was concealed in 
the carved wood, and in the secret of: 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 159 

Mliicli she initiated Alexena. AVlien 
touclied, it flew open, and discovered a 
-long narrow passage, contrived in the 
wall, at the farther end of which a 
lamp was burning. Observing the 
surprise of her new friends, she in- 
formed them, it was placed there by 
Carracci, who, doubtless, waited to con- 
duct her in safety to those apartments 
appropriated to her use. Our heroine 
smiled at tlie mention of so much atten- 
tion, which did not pass unobserved 
by Clarissa, who, v.ith smile answering 
smile, said, " It is necessary to the 
safety of Carracci and his troop, that he 
should be thus particular, lest I should 
stray and fall into some unforeseen 
danger which might prove fatal. — 
Believe me, Del Harco is not oblite- 
rated from my memory, and you 
cannot forget who my friend is. I 
owe him, it is true, a vast debt of 
gratitude ; Init nothing more/* 

Alexena became alarmed, lest she 
had unintentionaliv hurt the feelings 

ml ^.' 



110 alf.xena; ok uiE 

of her friend, and timidly eatrcaled 
forg;ivcnc5S. "Ob, my dearest love!" 
said Clariirsa, '' was I so captious, I 
should be unwortliy your favour. I 
merely made those observations, lest, 
by your enteilaining; such ideas, I 
might lose that place in your esteem, 
v»Lich I value so hig-hly;" then afFec- 
tionatelv saluted both her and Louisa, 
and \Tas about to enter the passage, 
when a gigantic figure appeared at 
the farther extremity, beckoning her 
to hasten, \vhose dark plume and 
glittering helmet announced Carracci. 

*' Is it hvn," said Alexena, in a low 
fiiint voice. "Yes," replied Clarissa, im 
a still lower tone, as she darted through 
the aperture, which shut with amazing 
rapidity after her. 

Louisa gazed at the spot where she 
had stood, lost in amaze and wonder^ 
until reminded by Alexena, that she 
was unable to sit longer. The former 
then apologized for her inconsiderate 
fhonghtlessness^ and thev hastened to 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 141 

their beds, wbere^ in ii few moments, 
their cares were buried in profound 
and tranquil ileep. 



-^~<-*^^i 



CHAP. IX. 

Whenwe in our viciou?ness grow hard," 
ti'.e wise gods seal our eyes; 



In our own filtli drop our clear judgments; rn;;ke vjs 
Adore our errors ; laugh at's, wliile we strut 
To our confusion." 

Ant. '< Cleo. 

At was noon ere our heroine or Louisa 
awoke, and then, from the darkness of 
the morning, occasioned by heavy rain, 
they had no conceplion it Was so late. 
The slintters of the windows remained 
closed, and they, therefore, lay con- 
versing on the extraordinary events of 
the last night, which seemed a fantasy 
of the brain ; but was, nevertheless, a 
certainty not to be doubted. 

" It is too true," said Louisa, " that 
Ave arc in one of the chambers of Santa 
Marco ; the actual prisoners of the 
Tilest of human beings ; yet a gleam 



M9 ALEX.ENA ; OR THE 

of light bursts tlirough the darkness, 

and encou raises hope, for are we 

not protected by heaven and Carracci?'* 
" Yes, 1 trnst, we are," Alexena re- 
plied, " and though I fear that man^ I 
feel I must respect him ; his power is 
great, and we have proof, that in one 
instance, at least, he has not abused it ; 
we are assured of his best wishes, and 
are we not desired to rely on his ex- 
ertions when a favourable moment 
offers? Clarissa says we, are, and may 
Providence grant it speedily; but at 
all events, while allowed to remain to- 
gether, I shall fear nothing from 
Acasto; for the instant he decides on 
any thing personally offensive, 1 fear 
we will be separated, and then to what 
trials may we not be doomed. For who 
can save us from the power of such 
wretches as Don Philip, his confessor, 
and steward ? — none, except that Being 
who gave us life ; therefore, let him be 
alwavs in our thouuhts ; let us call on 
him, and he will not forsake us in the 
hour of distress; no sickness or casualty 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 143 

can impede his will, and we should 
Recollect his late merciful interference 
in favour of Clarissa; his omnipotence 
directed the stiletto — mocked the ar^sas- 
sin's aim — defeated his bloody purpose 
— saved the intended victim from an un- 
timely grave — and, likely, will restore 
her to joys which will more than compen- 
sate for all her late grievous trials. There- 
fore, let us bear our misfortunes with 
fortitude, v.^ith patience, with Christian 
resignation, bowing humbly to the 
Divine Will, and we may calculate with 
certainty, on being- rewarded, if not in 
this world, surely in the next. Yes, let 
us imitate Clarissa, and, if necessary, 
like her, struggle for the preservation 
of our innoconce, to the last moment of 
expiring nature. We may be rendered 
miserable by the villany of others, but 
it rests with ourselves to be guiUy or 
not. Let nothiri": ever temnt us to do 
that by which we shall forfeit our own 
esteem, and we will insure the good 
opinion of the world. The wicked 
prevail for a given period^ but it is only 



244 alcxena; or the 

to accomplish the wise purposes of tli« 
IMostUii^h, \vho «>enera!Iy doon,s theia 
to be tlicir own executioners; punish- 
ment eventually awaits tiieir misdeeds, 
and (he !oni;er they delay, the more ac- 
cumulated the force with which it falls 
• — the more terrible the destructioii 
by which they are crushed." 

At this moment Margaret entered 
ihe'iv chamber, and represented the 
lateiicss of the hour. " Don Philip has 
breakfasted/' said she, " and i^one out 
on the ramparts, accompanied by his 
chaplain ; therefore. Donna Alexena, if 
you please, you can have the morning's 
repast in your anti-chamber, or in the 
parlour, before he returns, should his 
presence be disagTceable. My lord, 
however, is in good humour this morn- 
ing, nay, I do not remember when I 
have seen him so much so ; he would 
not allow you to be disturbed to day, as 
he wishes you to appear particularly 
charming this afternoon.'' 

" For what reason ?" said Alexena, 
whose colour at the moment vied 
with the lily. 



CAITLE OF SANTA MARCO. lij 

" I understand/' replied Margaret, 
*' there are to be strangers here, incon- 
sequence of some curious discovery 
Don Philip has made," 

"Of what nature?" demanded Louisa. 
' *' I know not/' rejoined Margaret, 
•' but suppose it is something that 
will lead to mischief, from father Mon- 
tano's looks, which have been unusually 
expressive of malice since morning." 

Alexena wished to change the sub- 
ject, as it was extremely painful, from 
apprehensions which tormented her, 
respecting Carracci and Clarissa, the 
latter of whom she feared had been 
traced to their apartment. However, 
firmly resolved not to give Margaret 
cause for suspicion, she carelessly de- 
manded, were there any musical instru- 
ments in the castle?" 

''Oh, yes! Doima, tliere are; and 
drawing materials in the library, besides 
a vast number of books of all laniruaires ; 
please, allow me, when you have finished 
dressing, and I will conduct you to it." 
' Alexena thanked her, but observed, 

VOL. II. G 



146 ALEXEXA ; on THE 

she conceived it necessary first to obtain 
Don Acasto's permission. 

" Shall I go ask him?" said Margaret, 
anxiously. 

*' No, by no means, I shall mention 
it after dinner, and to-morrow will visit 
it, if I am not denied that pleasure." 

^' Well, my dear lady, just as you 
please; but I would feel so happy in 
having it in my power to contribute to 
your amusement or comfort, that was 
lie to look ever so terrible, I would ask 
him for your sake." 

Margaret now retired to serve break- 
fast, and the moment the door closed 
after her, Louisa observed, she would 
give much to know the subject of con- 
versation between Acasto and the 
monk. '' I fear we are connected with 
it, and that such knowledge would ex- 
cite a painful degree of interest; for 
what could detain lliem on the ramparts 
so very long, except devif?ing mischief 
against us poor creatures/' 

" 1 sincerely trust you are mistaken,'* 
replied our heroine, with a smile, '' but 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 14:7 

^should they be employed as you sup- 
pose, 'tis likely they may (all the vic- 
tims of their own villany in the 
interim ; however, it is for us to watch 
with vigilance their every word, look, 
and action, that, if possible, we may be 
prepared to counteract or avoid them; 
and would it not be prudent to examine 
all the adjoining apartments, that in 
case of necessity, we may be com- 
petent to ascertain the situation of 
each, even in darkness ?" 

" I agree with you/' said Louisa, 
'' and let our second scrutiny commence 
at the top of the great staircase, that 
being tlie central point from which the 
galleries and corridors lead to the dif- 
ferent suits of apartments," 

They shortly after left their chamber, 
and on reaching a great arched win- 
dow, which commanded a view of the 
draw-bridge; they were surprised to 
find it lowered, and a number of men, 
advancing from the adjacent wood, 
"vrho, Acasto was waiting to conduct 
into the court-yard. 

q2 



lis ALEXENA; OR TIFE 

" Who can these be?" inquired 
Alexena, *'Am I to suppose they are 
people who Acasto has employed to 
guard the castle, in consequence of 
Torquo's information ? yet, if he be- 
lieves Carracci is in the vicinity, why are 
they not armed? but it is. unnecessary, 
as there are weapons in the armoury 
here sufficient for twice the number.'* 

The strangers were now fast assem- 
bling in the hall below, which rendered 
it unsafe for our heroine to remain 
longer, and as she was about to retire, 
beheld Acasto and his monkish sha- 
dow approach from the portcullis, the 
draw-bridije havinq; resumed its wonted 
station. 'In a few moments after they 
reached their apartment, Montano at- 
tended in their anti-chamber, and in 
the most unhandsome manner, demand- 
ed admission, Louisa, alarmed and 
enraged at his insolence, attended to 
-prevent farther violence, as he knocked 
with such roughness at the door, that 
it threatened to go to pieces, without 
any apology for his rudeness; he said 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 149 

*' it was Don Acasto's pleasure that 
Donna Alcxena should attend him in- 
stantly in the saloon, where he wished 
to inform her of the extent of those 
apartments chosen for her pleasure or 
amusement, and to prohibit all others." 

Louisa observed, " she could not say 
wliether Donna Alexena would attend 
Acasto exactly then ; but, she conti- 
nued, "'tis likely, to-morrow or next 
day, lie may be honoured with half-an- 
hour's attention; yet, even for the cer- 
tainty of this, I cannot promise." \ 

Montano was almost convulsed with 
rage, and with a look of ineffable scorn, 
vociferated, " Begone, insolent girl ! and 
tell your proud mistress, that Don 
Philip commands her presence, and 
should you ever presume to use such 
impertinence hereafter, know I have the 
power to punish — to effectually curb — 
your imperious^ audacious insolence." 

" Wretched minion !" retorted the 
passionate Louisa, " I despise your 
threats — your vengeance; and ere you 
go, allow me to prophesy that disgrace 



J50 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

awaits, at no very distant period, to 
compensate your exertions. And now,, 
do you begone, and tell j our vile em- 
ploy; r, that jni/ mistiness will not attend 
his sunnnons. Away! I say, \esti/our 
master may be induced to punish your 
insolent intrusion, and outrageous con- 
duct, within those chambers " 

She then bounded into the inner 
apartment, and bolted the door, before 
the monk could recover presence of 
mind sufiicient to impede her intention, 
and findiiiG: his endeavours to force 
the door iuefiectual, retired, muttering 
dreadful imprecations, which were dis- 
tinguishable as he passed along the 
gallery. 

Alexena was terrified for the result of 
her friend's rashness, and dreading the 
resentment of Don Philip, sat almost 
an hour, completely motionless through 
fear, and when her powers of reflection 
were restored, she teased herself with 
conjectures, how she should appease 
Acasto's wrath, without degrading her 
friend, or being contemptible in her 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. ]5i" 

own estimation. Her innocent heart 
pointed out the jewels which Don Philip 
had sent; — " if I wear them," she men- 
tally said, " our tyrant may take it as- 
condescension ; if so^ it will appease 
his wrath, though 1 certainly shall 
never use them again." Without fur- 
ther consideration she began her toilet, 
and dressed with more than usual care. 
Her agitation heightened her complex- 
ion, and whe!i the dinner bell sum- 
moned her, she looked exquisitely 
lovely, but descended to the drawing- 
room with a palpitating lieart. Not sp 
Louisa, she had determined to repre- 
sent the intrusion of Montano into their 
apartments, as an unpardonable insult, 
and call on Acasto to reprimand him 
for it. 

With these different ideas they en- 
tered the saloon, where they found 
Acasto lolling on a sopha, who took 
no notice of tliem, and though Alex- 
ena felt the insult, she remained silent ; 
but not so Louisa, who, beiuii.- enraired 
on our heroine's account, said, '' I will 



152 ai.exena; oil the 

order dinner in our apartments, as Don 
Acasto is absent; yet is it not strange 
that the ruffian monk affirmed he waited 
here; liowever, we are fortimate in 
being rid of him, for who would desire 
the company of a man who is ignorant 
of the respect due to our sex." " Sig- 
niora Louisa forgets she is my slave/* 
said Acasto, grinding i;o!>ically, as he 
raised himself on his elbow " but as I 
have no further occasion for her service, 
I will show my gratitude for the past, 
by granting her freedom; therefore, 
let her prepare, for before this hour to- 
rn ovrow, she shall be on the road to 
Madrid." 

" Yes, on the same road you sent a 
lady under the care of Torquo, but 
beware lest Belzo Carracci intercept 
your attendants." Louisa paused, she 
found she had said too much, as Don 
Philip's countenance changed from red 
to pale, from pale to livid blackness; 
in a moment he sprung from the 
lounger, and seizing her by the arm, 
said, " so, so, Signiora, you have been 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAHCO. 153 

listening — an honourable lady-like 
amusement; I suppose this was the 
cause of your drowsiness this morning ; 
has Donna Alexena been also as 
elegantly employed? — ah! I am right 
in my conjectures — very well — mighty 
well ; however, I shall take special care 
yourcuriosity shall, in future, have little 
chance to be gratified. Believe me, the 
scale on which you are to move, will be 
Yery confined; eh! what think you of 
one of the subterranean cells?" He 
now shook her violently, and with an 
horrid oath affirmed, had he proof she 
vi'as guilty to the extent of his suspici- 
ons, he would consign her to a death of 
instant torments. Alexena now inter- 
fered, and assured Acasto, that Louisa's 
words were merely the ebullitions of a 
hasty temper, and that she was sorry an. 
innocent tale of Margaret's should be 
the oriijin of so much uneasiness. 

" The old woman" she continued, 
*' mentioned a sad circumstance of 
your sister's having been carried ofl'by 
a captain of banditti, who had inhii-' 

« 5 



J54r alexena; or the 

manly wounded her, and Louisa felt 
Iiurt that you should threaten to expose 
Iier to the same danger for so trifling an 
offence as a few inconsiderate words/* 

Here Alexena blushed deeply, she 
had never conversed with Acasto before 
— never spoke to him, except in mono- 
syllables, and she was then obliged to 
prevaricate to save her cousin's life. 
Acasto in a moment forgot his anger, 
and, mentally, cursed his folly for using 
such language before the woman he 
adored ; arid in order to remove the un- 
pleasant impression from her mind, 
promised to prevent a repetition of 
Montano's visits, though he really had 
no such intention. 

That barbarian was awaiting their 
entrance in savaije "loominess, nursing 
a large portion of gall and passion, 
which he intended to torture those un- 
fortunate females with during the even- 
ing, as he was miserable when any liv- 
ing beingenjoyed tranquillity, even for 
a moment, where he had the means to 
prevent it, and they, therefore, shrunk 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAKCO. 155 

from his brutal scrutiny, but not until 
their pallid looks discovered all he 
"wished to know, as their agitation 
plainly told their interview with Acasto 
was of a most unpleasant nature. 

The desert was scarce served, ere 
Montano significantly asked Alexena 
had she been in the library or music 
room; she was unwilling to enter into 
conversation with her old enemy, as it 
Avas particularly disagreeable, but he 
adroitly placed her unwillingness to 
another account, and with a sneer said, 
" was I the friend of Donna Alexena, I 
■would commend more suitable amuse- 
ments, than those of meanly prying 
into the secrets of a family, or endea- 
vourins: to seduce a doatin"r old woman 
to assist in the brainless project of 
escape." Louisa started at those asser- 
tions, and Alexena seemed thunder- 
struck, while their wary persecutor 
continued, ''yes, yes! your evident 
confusion confirms your guilt; say was 
it not mean, detestably mean, to offer 
a bribe to a servant : denial is vain, for 



15d alexexa; or the 

in consequence of a sort of confession 
which I had from the talkative idiot, I 
find you were anxious to obtain an ac- 
curate knowledge of all the private 
apartments of the castle^ in order, 
should opportunity offer, to admit that 
EnHisli adventurer Mortimer, who is 
now loitering in this neighbourhood; 
but should our domestics be so fortu- 
nate as to capture him, he shall be 
han.Qred from the draw-brid^re, as an 
example to all such impostors." 

The latter part of this information 
was'Iost on the person for whom it was 
intended, as she had fainted from the 
j-liock which sudden joy had inflicted ; 
joy that her lover — her lord — her af- 
fianced husband, was in the vicinity of 
the castle; oh! it was an excess of 
liappiness that her agitated mind and 
delicate nerves were unequal to; and 
liad the effect of reducing her to a state 
of insensibility before the last savage 
expressions of the monk could possibly 
inflict the pain which he intended. 

Acasto darted an angry look at his 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 157 

chaplain, as he hastened to support our 
fainting' heroinCj and on her recovery 
summoned Marijaret to assist Louisa 
in bearing her to her chamber ; but she 
was unwilling to retire, until she should 
ascertain the truth of Montano's late 
assertion. Having drank a glass of 
water, she declared herself much better, 
and expressed a wish to remain a few 
moments; ''I cannot," she observed, 
*' leave this room, until I assure Don 
Acasto that I am not guilty ; I respect 
myself too much to allow any induce- 
ment to tempt me to corrupt the fidelity 
of a servant, was that servant corrupt- 
ible, which I sincerely trust is not 
Margaret's case ; however, had I made 
such an attempt, I should not reproach 
myself, when I reflect that I am con- 
fined here contrary to religion, to the 
laws of my country, and to my own 
will; but as to that good woman, 
when she offered to conduct me to the 
library, 1 declined the pleasure, until I 
should first obtain Don Philip's permis- 
sion ; and here is Margaret present^ le% 



158 albxena; or the 

her speak, should my veraf ity be ques- 
tioned." 

Moiitano instantly exclaimed, " ve- 
racity! — speak, old dotard! — tell the 
truth quickly." 

" I have little to say," replied Mar- 
garet, as she devoutly crossed herself; 
" what Donna Alexena has related, is 
no more than the truth, and as to mak- 
ins: confessions, God forbid I should 
make any to you, had I any to make." 

This irritated the monk not a little, 
who fiercely demanded, had she not 
informed him, that Lady Alexena was 
acquainted with Lord Mortimer's ar- 
rival in the neighbourhood, and the 
means by which Don Acasto had dis- 
covered that event? namely, by finding 
his lordship's baggage in the inn at 
the foot of the neighbouring hill ; again 
Margaret made the holy sign, which so 
enra.^ed Montano, that had not Acasto 
been present, he would have flung 
his glass at her head ; and in a voice 
of thunder, ordered her from the room ; 
— " begone, you old hypocrite! and 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 159; 

no more of your miinimery ; had I the 
power, I should incapacitate you from 
babbling-, by cutting the tongue from 
your head." 

Acasto was now also enraged, but from 
a different motive. His chaplain's indis- 
cretion was the cause : for had he not 
informed Alexena of her lover's arrival, 
thereby holding out strong hopes of 
escape ; he also felt assured Margaret 
had not made the discovery, though 
he knew she had heard that some friend 
of our heroine's had reached the inn 
on the moimtain ; but on reflecting 
that Lord Mortimer had fallen into the 
hands of Belzo Carracci, and his ban- 
ditti, his anger subsided, as he made 
no doubt, that his rival was, in a very 
few minutes after, a lifeless corpse ; and 
wishing to crush Alexena's hopes at 
once, he observed, that Margaret's 
imprudent communication gave him 
little uneasiness, as a fortunate circum- 
stance saved him the disagreeable task 
of punishing the intruder. A few 
day? since^ he was captured by Belzo 



130 ALEX.ENA; OR THE 

Canacci, that merciless robber, and, 
doubtlesS;, has long since paid the for- 
feit of his life, as atonement for the 
blind temerity which induced him to 
wander into those solitary wilds, with- 
out sufficient force to protect him 
against the outranges of that blood- 
thirsty bandit, who universally sacri- 
fices his luckless captives to the safety 
of his abandoned crew. 

Alexena listened in raptures to this 
detail, which Acasto hoped would have 
had a contrary effect, and the emotions 
produced by excessive joy, were so 
violent, that Don Philip would have 
been quite blind, had he not observed 
them. Indeed, from the commence- 
ment of the conversation, he had nar- 
rowly marked the expression of her 
countenance ; and to his infinite sur- 
prise, discerned more pleasure than 
pain in it. His observations were suc- 
ceeded by sensations of delight, and 
he became infatuated by the idea, that 
Alexena was rejoiced at the destructioji 
of lier late lover. •' Lord Mortimer; 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. ISf 

lias had some strange tie on her gra- 
titude," he mentally exclaimed/' which 
his death has happily removed, and 
leaves her uncontrouled mistress of 
her wishes. May it not be, that she 
already looks on my passion with a 
favourable eye? It must be so. Oh I 
woman ! woman ! most undefmable of 
creatures, that can be thus won by 
cruelty !" His imagination presented 
visions of the most delightful descrip- 
tion, which he fondly encouraged ; and 
Avhen he rose to attend Alexena to the 
door, her gaiety, and the harmony of 
her features, were 



" Confirmatloni itrong 
As proofs of holy writ," 

that she returned his passion, and 
would shortly make him the happiest 
of the happy. 

When the footsteps of Alexena were 
no longer distinguishable, Acasto re- 
turned to the table, and fdling up a 
massy cup for himself, and another for 



162 ALEXENA ; on THE 

his chaplain, he drank to the prospect 
of his speedy marriage, and was hear- 
tily pledged by his worth]/ chaplain. 
Glass succeeded glass — Don Philip 
then had an inexhaustible theme. 
They soon became inebriated, and 
were shortly carried to their rooms^ 
in brutal insensibility. 

CHAP. X. 

"It g'lTes me wonder great as my content. 
To see you here before me. O my soul's joy ! 
*♦•*«****«»*« 

• — _ If I were now to die, 

'Twere to be most happy ; for I fear 
My soul hath her content so absolute, 
That not another comfort like to thi* 
Succeeds in unknown fate.'' 

Otbello* 

vIN Alexena's return to her apart- 
ment, slie embraced Louisa, and then 
sunk, sobbing, on her bosom. " Oh ! 
my dear friend," she murmured, " those 
are tears of joy, which 1 must indulge; 
they are strangers, and are twice 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. IGS 

welcome from the cause. They flow 
from the observations I have made on 
Acasto's manner, who reallv imagines 
Mortimer is dead, which gives me 
doable assurance of his safety. Is it- 
can it — be possible he is with Car- 
racci ?" 

" I sincerely hope he is/' said Louisa, 
" but what proof have we that he has 
been in those mountains? May not all 
this be a fabrication, to try what effect 
such information would have on your 
feelings.'* Alexena admitted the jus- 
tice of this observation, which, in the 
plenitude of her joy, she had over- 
looked, and now became distressed, at 
the idea of having entertained, what, 
on consideration, appeared little more 
credible than an idle dream 

As it was almost dark, Louisa rose 
to procure lighted candles, and found 
on the dressing-table, a billet, which she 
was about to destroy, when the light of 
the fire discovered the address, which 
proved it was intended for Alexena, and 
on examination, found it sealed. Much 



1(54 alexena; or TiiE> 

astonished, she hastily lit a lamp, with 
a flaming brand, and then presented 
^- the note to Alexena, who hastily read 

these words : — 

" Lady Alexena — I have much plea- 
sure in being able to say, that Lord 
Rlortimer is safe under my protection, 
and anxiously entreats an interview 
Avith you this night in the castle chapel. 
Should you grant this request, which 
I trust you will ; secure the door of your 
apartment, and when the clock strikes 
twelve, fearlessly enter the passage by 
the sliding pannel ; a friend will await 
your approach, and conduct you in 

safety. 

B. C." 

It is scarce possible to describe the 
sensations produced by the perusal of 
this note. Alexena pressed it to her 
lips in ecstasy, forgetting by whom it 
was written, though the signature de- 
clared it the writing of Belzo Carracci ; 
but that very circumstance enhanced 
its value, as it removed all doubt, and 



CASTLE or SANTA MAUCO. 16S 

on advising togetlier, Louisa was of 
opinion, that onr heroine shoiihl ven-. 
ture to the chapel. " I make no doubt," 
she said, " but it is Clarissa tliat is dele- 
gated to conduct us; therefore, what 
have we to fear? For my part, I should 
not shriiik, if I beheld the dread Car- 
racci himself." Alexena started at the 
name, as she never heard it without 
emotions, which were to herself un- 
dennabie, and notwithstanding all she 
had heard of his o^oodness, the tales of 
Margaret, and dark hints of Acasto, 
left a strong impression of fear, which 
was encreased by his mysterious know- 
ledge of all the secret passages in the 
castle. However, she resolved to risk 
every thing, and see her matchless 
lover. 

'' There is not another so true on 
earth," she mentally said. " What has 
be not already suffered for my sake? 
Has he not encountered the greatest 
hardships, the most cruel privations ; 
followed me from clime to clime, from 
kingdom to kingdom ; over stormy 



IQQ ALEXEXA ; OR THE 

seas ; through desarts, into dungeons; 
ventured life, fame, fortune, coufttry, 
friends, every thing — rescuing me from 
oppression's grasp, and more than 
once from the jaws of death ? and has 
he not now confided his life to the 
keeping of a robber, terrible from his 
crimes, and for what I — Urged by the 
enchanting hope of saving me from a 
degrading slavery, worse, a thousand 
times vvoi-sethan death. Oh, ^Mortimer! 
yon love me with unbounded confi- 
dence ; take my heart in return, it is 
all I have to give ; but should heaven 
smile, and one day unite us, every 
moment of my life shall be devoted to 
your happiness." Alexena now blushed 
deeply at the idea that her unexpressed 
thoughts conveyed. She found she 
loved his lordship with her whole soul, 
and would willingly resign her life to 
ensure him felicity. Was there any 
thing indelicate in meeting him in the 
castle chapel? Certainly not! as both 
Gbrissa and Louisa were to be wit- 
nesses ; and when every thing was ar» 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 167 

ranged, with a palpitating- heart, sh© 
waited the sullen signal from the clock, 
anxiously counting the minutes of 
dilatory time, and calculating the num- 
ber that must necessarily intervene ere 
she again beheld her Mortimer. 

Margaret shortly after entered with 
chocolate, and apologized for the un^ 
easiness her idle talk had occasioned, 
and mentioned that Montano endea- 
voured to induce her to accuse Louisa 
of an attempt to subvert her fidelity, 
by a bribe; "but I firmly refused," 
continued Margaret, and he then 
threatened to have me confined in the 
dungeons ; however, he is quiet for the 
remainder of the night, as both he and 
Don Philip have been carried to bed 
in a state of drunken insensibility, 
though it is not yet eleven o'clock." 

This was welcome news, as it pre- 
-Vented any uneasiness arising from fear 
of intru:^ion or discovery by those 
"Wretches ; and as the hour glided on, 
Louisa became wearied bv Mar<iaret's 
loquacity, and dismissed her under 



16S alexena; or the 

pretence of hciiig troubled with a hcad- 
aclie. When she had passed the anti- 
chamber^ Alexena assisted in securing 
their door, which they did effectuaJly. 
Louisa then trimmed their lamp, and, 
at length/ the great clock, in slow and 
solemn sounds, tolled twelve. Our 
heroine was greatly agitated ; she list- 
fined attentively — counted the length- 
ened strokes — asked if there was a 
possibility of miscalculating the time — 
cast a scrutinizing glance round the 
dark outline of the chamber — was by 
Louisa's side the next instant, who 
pressed the spring with a firm hand ; 
the yielding pannel retired, and the 
same moment the passage received 
our fair adventurers, who glided along, 
in trembling haste, to the first turning, 
where the kind Clarissa waited. After 
saluting, she requested to know had 
they closed the pannel, and was sur- 
prised on being answered in the nega- 
tive ; she therefore hastened to secure 
it, and then shewed the action of the 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 169 

spring, with the means by which it was 
impelled back or forward. On touch- 
ing the movement in the wall, which 
was in its nakire extremely simple, the 
panncl flew into its place with amazing 
rapidity, and the ladies now instructed 
in the use of this valuable secret, were 
led by Clarissa through the passage, 
down a flight of narrow steps, into 
another passage much narrower than 
the former, and which seemed con- 
structed in the wall ; this led to the 
armoury, and into it they were also 
admitted by a moving pannel, where 
Alexena became terrified on seeimjr the 
rusty old suits of mail, long since ne- 
glected, but which her imagination 
animated with the spiritsof their former 
owners, and she trembled so violently, 
that Louisa could scarce support her. 
They hastened through this apartment, 
and entered a very spacious chamber, 
decorated with the likenesses of all the 
Santa Marco family; and as the ladies 
passed rapidly through the centre of 

VOL. II. H 



110 ALEXENA; OR -THE 

the room, the eves of each fi>>ure 
seemed to inquire the cause of theii- 
intrusion, or where thev were rambliiifr 
at such a chili and solitary hour. Hav- 
ing reached the library, they tripped 
along with light and cautious steps, 
as Clarissa informed them, they were 
then directly over Acasto's apartment ; 
from the library they entered the 
music room, out of which they quickly 
passed into a gallery, and it terminated 
in a corridor that led to the great 
stairs; these they hastily descended, 
and arrived undiscovered, and in 
safety, in the hall. 

Clarissa now shaded tlie lamp, as 
they were close to the servant's apart- 
inents, and it also became necessary to 
observe strict silence. From the hall 
they entered a small low chamber ; this 
communicated with the stone passage, 
that led to the tower, in which Alex- 
ena had overheard the conversation 
between Don Philip and Torquo. 
^lere Clarissa paused, and drew forth 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 171 

a key, by whose assistance they were 
admitted into anew range of extensive 
chambers, formerly occupied by the 
troops who defended the castle ; beyond 
these there was a passage of consider- 
able length, which terminated in a 
narrow flight of stone steps, that led 
to a vaulted passage, and at its extre- 
mity there were two ponderous folding- 
doors, which seemed to impede farther 
progress ; but on Clarissa's knocking 
gently, they were instantly opened, and 
they entered the chapel. The lamp she 
carried, cast a faint glimmering light 
round the long dark aisles, and dis- 
covered the receding figure of a man, 
whose nodding plumes swept the low 
jutting cornices, as he retreated under 

the gallery. 

Alexena said, ''That must be Car- 

racci, but where is Lord Mortimer?" 

"He will be with you presently,*' 

replied ClarissBj " if you conceive you 

have fortitude sufficient to support 

•an interview.^* 

h2 



17^ ALEXENA; ORfHt! 

''■ Oh ! yes, yes." exclaimed our hero- 
ine, " 1 am all impatience." 

Louisa smiled. Clarissa nodded sig- 
tiificantly, which covered Alexena's 
face with blushes ; she had involuntarily 
betrayed a secret, by the violence of 
her feelings, but of which she had no 
cause to be ashamed. They had then 
approached the altar, where Clarissa 
said, Beizo had orderetl her to remain 
until Lord Mortimer's arrival. '' Let 
us stand close to the holy sanctuary," 
she whispered, " and pray for Heaven's 
protection, as we cannot employ our 
time better, until the moment of your 
lord's approach." 

In a few minutes the organ sent 
forth one sad and melancholy note, 
the leno'thened sound of which almost 
froze the blood in the veins of Alcxena 
and her cousin, who then turned their 
eyes in horror on Clarissa, expecting 
every moment she would assume some 
frightfid shape, as at that instant, they 
believed her a spirit, who was permitted 
to lead them there^ in order to disclose 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. l?J 

some terrible and blocdy crime, Avhich 
Acasto had committed; and conjectured 
the figure which they conceived to be 
thatof Carracci, was no other than (hat 
of her murdered husband Selib. A 
moment's reflection, however, dispelled 
those ridiculous ideas, and thev smiled, 
and wondered how they could be so 
weak, as to allow them to intrude, 
Bnt the solitary hour — the place in 
which they stood — the solemn note of 
the organ — the peltin-^ of the rude 
storm wilhout — and the gloomy appear- 
ance of the chapel within, whicli the 
partial rays of a ^:ingle lamp served 
only to render more hideous — llie 
slight glimpse they had of the warlike 
figure of Carracci, flitting through the 
shades of the distant arches, then 
almost lost in misty obscurity, together 
with the chill damp air of that long- 
ne;Li'lectod spot — all these united, we 
should think, ought to be a sufficient 
excuse for the momentary terror which 
assailed the bosoms of those two agi- 
tated und unprotected females ; who. 



174r ALEXENA; OR THE 

from tlie nature of their situation, had 
every thing- to dread, from the cruelty 
or malice of a man, to whose power 
they were subject, and from whom 
there was no immediate prospect of 
escaping. 

Alexena, when somewhat composed, 
asked the meaning of the organ's dis- 
jnal sounds. 

" It is a signal that Lord Mortimer 
approaches," said Chirissa. 

Again, another and a more length- 
ened note was wafted along the lofty 
aisles, and the next instant the organ 
presented a sheet of livid fire ; each 
barrel seiit forth a blaze, while the re- 
peated sounds of the bass, roared like 
the thunder of destructive cannon. 
Our heroine caught the arm of Louisa, 
while Clarissa, pointing to the gallery, 
said, — *' He comes !'*^ 

They looked, and saw the pillars 
which supported the instrument, rend 
asunder, and Lord Mortimer, attended 
by Carracci, emerge from their bosom. 
The latter motioned to Clavissa^ to leatl 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 17o' 

Louisa to a dislance; his lordship ob- 
served them — flew rapidly along the 
gallery — descended the stairs, almost 
without touchiuir them— and in an 
instant was at the feet of his Alexena ; 
she sighed deeply — saw him not — but 
sunk into his expanded arms, over- 
powered by emotion. Mortimer clasped 
her to his heart ; the warm kiss of love 
restored her^ and their tears of mutual 
joy were mingled. Then might his 
lordship truly say. 



She is mine own ! 



And I as rich in having such a jewel, 

Ap twenty seas, if all their sand were pearl, 

The water nectar, and the rock's pure gold. 

As she gave him a short recital of 
all she had suffered since their parting 
in Bayonne; and in return, with wonder, 
learned, that she had been accompanied 
by him to the very castle gates. 

The wonderous Carracci was not 
forgotten ; he received from both, their 
most warm acknowledgments ; and 
the first bright tints of dawn had dis- 



176 ALEXEXA : 017 THE 

pelled tlip darkness ero the lovers 
thought of separating-. But to remain 
lon«>Tr in the chapel would be hii^hly 
im})nRlei)t; and after Belzo had 
given his word they should shortly meet 
airain, they unwillino^ly parted. Lord 
Mortimer following- his predaceous 
guide; while Akxena, supported by 
Clarissa and her cousin, slo\^ly re- 
traced her meandering way to her so- 
litary chamber. 



CHAP. xr. 



Can such things be. 



And overcome us like a summer's cloud, 
■Without our special wonder." 

Shakspearj. 

Vf E must now beg leave to lead our 
readers back to the crimson chamber^ 
where we left Lord JMortimer, the first 
night of his captivity. 

When Monfrane retired from that 
apartment, his lordship rose and ex- 
amined every crevice of it, and having 
secured the entrance with several arti- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 177 

<>!es of heavy furniture, sought his bed, 
where busy thought drove sleep from 
his weary eyes, Carracci was connected 
with every idea, and he vainly endea- 
voured to develope the cause of that 
robber's kindness ; kindness unsought, 
wnlopked for, and unexpected. All 
was yet a mystery — he was treated as a 
state prisoner; though Belzo promised 
his assistance, and had exacted an oatli 
from his troop, that they would destroy 
Acasto, and rescue Alexena, there was 
something unde(inab!y strange in this ; 
yet the elegant address, suavity of 
manner, noble figure, and animated 
countenance, of the freebooter, secured 
Ids lordship's good opinion ; indeed, so 
mucli so, that he was ashamed of the 
caution he had used, in securing the 
aperture to liis room, (for it could not 
be called a door,) particularly, when 
Monfrane endeavoured to enter the next 
morning. lie then apologized for his 
want of confidence, at which the latter 
smiling said, " Had any injury been 
iatendcd, his lordship's barriers would 

« 5 



1 

178 alexena; or tjzz- 

3iave been useless, as there were i^xn: 
other private entrances ; two in the 
walls, one in the floor, and one in the 
ceiling; through which the entire of 
the banditti might have entered, with- 
out disturbing his repose." 

Albert was then summoned, and felt 
happy on seeing his lord in safety^ 
and began to entertain a better opiniort 
of his late ferocious acquaintanceso 
When his lordship was dressed, Mon- 
frane informed him^ he had orders to 
shew him to the breakfast-room, where 
Carracci waited, and in a few moments, 
he was conducted through those pas- 
sages, which had excited so much 
wonder the night before, into the hall 
next the banqueting chamber of the 
troop, where they found four iron 
chairs, and Rourke already fastened 
in one of them. Lord Mortimer and 
Albert sat on two of the others, at 
Monfrane's request, and in a moment 
after, the vaulted roof of the hall rung 
with the signal whistle. Instantly, the 
chairs sunk through the fioor^ and 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 179 

rested on a large marble table, in a 
chamber undenieatli, \\hich was hand- 
somely furnished, and where Carracci 
and the good priest, whom his lord- 
ship recognized as his friend Zelo^ 
waited to receive him. The former 
hastened to assist Lord Morlimer, while 
Monfrane rendered the same service to 
his lordship's domestics, which was 
extremely necessary, as the moment 
their weioht was removed from the 
chairs, they flew with amazing swift- 
ness into their former positions, and 
closed the cavil y in the ceiling that 
their descent had formed. There were 
six marble steps from the table to the 
floor, inlaid with curious devices, which 
his lordship afterwards examined with 
much satisfaction, and the morning' 
passed in agreeable conversation. The 
chamber they were in, was many feet 
below the surface of the earth, and the 
light of day never had visited it; but 
flaming torches, and an excellent fire, 
dispelled its natural gloom, and substi- 
tuted in its stead their light, heat, and 



ISO ALEXENA ; OR THE 

comfort. Carracci entertained liis lord- 
.ship by giving- him a description of those 
amazing subterranean vaults. "You 
are," said he, " in the dungeons of the 
castle of Santa ?vfarco, though half a 
mile from the building itself. This 
may seem ineredihlc, from the length 
of way you have been couvejed here ; 
but Dofhing is more certain, and I shall 
this day, if you wish, carry you to the 
very central chambers of it, and will, 
probably, be able to gratify you with a 
Qflimpse of your fair mistress, if you 
think you have fortitude to follow me 
through the most horrible caverns that 
ever yet were formed by nature, as- 
.sisted by man's ingenuity ; but should 
you be so Iticonsiderate as to discover 
yourself to ladyAlexena, your life shall 
pay for your temerity, and her misery 
ivill be endless." 

'' Dculit not my discretion,' replied 
his lordship, " lead on, and 1 will fear- 
lessly follow, even was death to assume 
a thousand frightful foruis to scare me 
from my purpose. I will proijiise to 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. }b:l 

he guided by your advice, and faitii- 
fully, nay sacredly, observe the most 
trivial of your injunctions^ if not in- 
consistent with my honour ; and allow 
me to say, nothing could give me 
greater pleasure, than wandering with 
you through the astonishing meander- 
ings of this subterranean world, and I 
shall feel doubly gratified, if you allow 
my servants to attend us " 

*' Oh ! certainly, my lord," said 
Belzo, " if you think they are as fear- 
less as yourself. 

" I never had reason to doubt their 
courage — father Zelo himself has had 
proof of it, and will, 1 should think, 
vouch for their firm and steady con- 
duct." 

" That I will, with all my heart/' 
observed Zelo, '* though I sha'n't be 
of the party to those solitary abodes, 
for I feel no curiosity to revisit them ; 
I prefer a book and a good fire to 
wandering through the gloomy pas- 
sages of the almost endless caverns of 
the castle." 



132 alexena; on mis 

Monfrane was now summoned to 
prepare proper torches for their in- 
tended scrutiny, together with two 
small lampS;, whieh he produced in a 
very few minutes. Carracci then girt 
on his massy sword, and placed two 
case of pistols in his belt. His lord- 
ship, Monfrane, and the servants^ were 
also armed, and after each had sworn 
to keep whatever he should see, a pro- 
found secret, they began their inspec- 
tion of those long-neglected abodes of 
gloom and darkness. The chimney- 
piece in the breakfast-roorn was made 
of black shining metal, to each side of 
which were fastened two large brass 
rings ; through these, Carracci and 
Monfrane conveyed a rope, and then^ 
assisted by the party present, who 
had to use their utmost force, they 
succeeded in drawing out the chim- 
ney-piece, grate, &c. into the floor^ 
disclosing, to the innxpressible sur- 
prise of his lordship, a door beyond 
the chimney, which stood half open, 
inviting them to enter a narrow rocky 



GASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. I§, 



s» 



cliamber, which terminated in a flio-ht 
of ahnost perpendicular steps. This 
his lordship entered — Carracci made a 
signal, by touching a small beil^ and 
in a very few moments, several of the 
troop attended, who pushed the grate 
into its former position, enclosing 
Belzo, Lord Mortimer, and his attend- 
ants, in the narrow cell, the stairs of 
which they ascended with difficulty,, 
and reachod a small platform, before 
a passage, secured by a strong iron 
grating, where the former paused, and 
drew from beneath his cloak a horn, 
with which he made the caverns re- 
sound — and echo answered from the 
farthest extremity. Figures were now 
observable moving through the gloom ; 
in a few seconds, the massive gothic 
door slowly receded, and they entered 
a vanity cave, cut out of the solid 
rock, through which they rapidly 
glided. This passage terminated 
in an oval chamber in which 
were a vast number of vessels, as 



i64; ALEXENA; OR THE 

Jarge as hog'sheads, with small lad- 
ilers placed against (he sides of them. 
'' Stop/ said Carracci, " and let each 
of you jump into one of those cisterns, 
Ihe bottoms of which will sink with 
your weight, and you will then be gra- 
dually lowered by slings, into a cham- 
ber underneath, and from thence we 
will proceed to the castle." In a mo- 
ment they ascended the ladders, and 
then leaped with all their force through 
the hollow sides of the vessels, which 
instantly sunk, not into a chamber, 
but into a cavern of immense extent, 
where they distinctly heard the hoarse 
roaring of a torrent ; and as the reflec- 
tion of the dark red gleam of the torches 
played on the black and rocky sides of 
this vanity oave, superstitious dread 
presented a thousand vague forms 
flitting through the distant gloom, which 
caused undefinable sensations in the 
agitated group, who moved forward., 
in order to ascend a long, rocky flight 
.pf rugged and irregular steps, that led 
io a still more irregular mass of crags 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 185 

— rough, difficult, and uneven, in the 
extreme. Over these they scrambled, 
with much pain and kibour, being 
sometimes obliged to creep on allt' ours; 
during which time they frequently were 
in danger of burning themselves with 
the torches, or extinouishins: them, 
and the latter would have ensured des- 
truction. These horrible vaults, how- 
ever, gradually widened, and the thun- 
der of a cataract, added terrors .to the 
savage scene. In a few minutes, our 
adventurers were able to walk upright, 
and rushed forward with unrestrainable 
impatience — often at the risk of their 
lives, notwithstanding the repeated 
cautions of Carracci ; but here their 
further passage was impeded by a black 
rock, immensely high, and perpendicu- 
larly steep ; it supported the cavern's 
roof, and apparently presented an im~ 
passable boundary. There the party 
paused, and Lord Mortimer turned to 
Belzo, with a look so expressive of in- 
quiry, that the former understood its 
meaning, without its being accompanied 



IS6 al^xena; on the 

by words, and instautly stooped io 
remove a scanty portion of earth from 
the surface of the spot on which he 
stood, and quickly discovered to his 
lordship's astonished eyes, a prodigious 
iron rin^^, fastened in a stone flag. 
This, with Rourke's assistance, he 
raised, and disclosed a flight of stairs, 
the lovvcr steps of which were enve- 
loped in impenetrable darkness, and- 
prevented the possibility of ascertaining 
their extent, or where they terminated. 
Carracci gazed on the yawning abyss^ 
and at that moment, the torch which 
he bore, cast a strong light on his coun- 
tenance, wliich was evidently agitated, 
by sensations that he wished to conceal. 
Lord Mortimer, though disconcerted, . 
made no observation ; but Albert could 
not suppress his fears, and, without 
liesitation, boldly forbade his master 
to venture into that horrible den. — 
*' Why should he not?" inquired Car- 
racci, in a voice that made the latter 
tremble. " Have I not pledged my 
honour for his safety? — Away with- 



GASTLE OP SANTA MAncO. 1ST 

cowardly fears, if any here entertain 
them ; follow me^ for hesitation is 
death/' he said, and plunged into the 
stony bosom of the gulph. Lord Mor- 
timer and Rourke fearlessly followed ; 
but Albertj always cautious, suspected 
treachery, and watched each move- 
ment of his guide, with the vigilance 
of an Argus. One minute was suffi- 
cient to descend those stairs, which 
brought them into a lofty hall ; this 
Ihey crossed, but were obliged to stop 
at a large heavy door, which, with con- 
siderable difficulty, they partly opened^ 
and then, the noise of the water be- 
came tremendous, exciting the great- 
est anxiety to learn from whence it 
came. At lengfh, when this impedi- 
ment was removed, a scene romanti- 
cally terrible, arrested their attention. 
At a few paces farther, there was a flight 
of six steps, cut in the solid rock, which 
were washed by water that fell from 
frightful precipices, elevated, at least, 
one hundred feet above the hall. The 
roof of this part of the cavern was of. 



188 alexena; oe the 

a variety of colours, formed by ihe 
reflection of the light on the petrefac- 
tions and spar, caused by the dripping 
of the water. The foaming torrent 
fell into a kind of natural basin, before 
the door of the hall, and from thence 
rushed, with irresistible impetuosity, 
until it was precipitated over anotiier 
riJge of rocks, which lay a trifling dis- 
tance below tlie steps, and tumbled, 
with the noise of the loudest thunder, 
into the rocky gulpli, that groaned 
as it received its weiirht. There were 
two tripods suspended from the roof, 
which, to Lord Mortimer's great sur- 
prise, v»ere lit, and faintly served to 
ilhmie this rude — this dread scenery, 
Carracci gazed on its rugged deformity; 
but to him its terrors were familiar. He 
smiled on itsfrowningcrags, and pointed 
to the opposite side, which presented a 
smooth upright rock, without any pro- 
jection, on which the roof of this won- 
drous production of nature rested. 

" We must cross this rivulet," said 
Belzo, sportively ; '' and here is a boat 
. ready for the purpose." 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. I89 

'" Where?" demanded his lordship. 
" In this creek/' continued Carracci, 
as he pointed out. the little vessel, 
wliich lay lower down, between the 
rocks. Lord Mortimer observed it, and 
shrunk back terrified, as it was not 
much lar<^er than himself. The rob- 
ber's eyes now flashed displeasure, as, 
in a rough sullen voice, he said, " Do 
you doubt my honour? — Say, what 
have you to tear? Do you not ob- 
serve a stronn: iron oTalifisr across the 
torrent, which prevents the possibi- 
lity of our little bark tumbling over. 
She will be carried by the current to 
its edge, and we will push her along, 
with the assistance of the barrier, into 
a small cavity, not now discernible in 
the gloomy distance, and from thence 
there are steps formed in the rock, 
wliicli will lead you in safety from this 
place — the cause of your present fears.'* 
He then unfastened the boat-chain, but 
held it until Lord Mortimer and his 
attendants were seated, then springing 
on board, the vessel rushed, with the 



IBO alekena; or the 

liirhlniiiir's swiftness, towards the irou 
railing ; and as Hiey approached, Car- 
racci used a pole to prevent her striking 
violentiy agaiiist it; yet the shock, not- 
withstanding his utmost exertionj shook 
the grate with such force, as threatened 
instant destruction ; but it was merely 
momentary, and while the boat lay along 
side, her passengers stood up to observe 
the torrent as it fell with hideous din, at 
least seventy feet beneath them, into the 
stony gulph. From that rocky bed, it 
rolled under the draw-bridge, from 
thence into an earthy cave, which con- 
veyed it to the sea, and was lighted as 
it passed, by several lamps, fastened to 
the chains of the bridge, whose feeble 
rays served to show its many horrors. 

" Have we to cross that frightful 
bridge?" demanded Lord Mortim.er. 

" Yes," replied Carracci, '' the rock 
on which we are about to land, forms 
a kind of cave, and through it we will 
pass, and issue at its termination, on 
that structure which will asraiu enable 
US to cross these waters.'' 



CASTLE or SANTA MARCO. 191 

They then landed, and his lordship 
was surprised to see the boat return to 
its former station, without any visible 
assistance. On requiring- an explana- 
tion, Belzo informed him, there was a 
small chain fastened to her keel, one 
end of which was conveyed through a 
cavity in the rock, and secured in the 
hall opposite, where one of the troop 
tlien attended to draw her back to the 
little creek, that had been formed for 
her safety. 

Carracci now led them up a narrow 
flight of irregular steps, and passed 
through a small natural door-way into 
a cave of a conical form, slanting to<- 
wards its extremity, which they descend- 
ed with considerable difficulty from 
its steepness, and from the rock being 
excessively slippery. However, they 
reached the draw-bridge, which liad 
been lowered, and hastily passed over 
its half-decayed planks, to a projecting 
platform, scarce broad enough to ad- 
Bjit of six persons standing together. 



J99 ALEXENA ; on THE 

and from it there was no visible pas- 
saf^e, by which they could advance. 
Here his lordship stood j^azing in mute 
astonishment, admiring the cataract, 
whose spray, however, rendered his 
situation far from agreeable ; and he 
was about to request his guide to move 
forward, when Rourke laid his hand on 
his arm, at the same time pointing to the 
grim faces of several horrible bandits, 
whose almost bursting eyes glared mur- 
der, as they lay grinning and peeping 
through several holes in the cavern's 
dripping roof Carracci observed them, 
and ordered ladders to be instantly- 
lowered, which he had some pains to 
persuade his lordship to ascend ; but. 
the robbers assisted them above, and 
in a few moments, they were all drawn 
througli those nan'ow openings in 
safety. The scene now changed ; a 
gentle acclivity led them to a passage, 
formed by man's ingenuity, which they 
were informed, lay under the glen, 
where the rock stood Ihat supported 
tlie vast castle of Santa Maico. In it. 



KBASTLE or SANTA MARCO. 193 

at reirular distances, there were iron 
gates, fastened to its flinty sides, for 
the locks of which Carracci had a 
master key ; so they proceeded with- 
out interruption into the dunoeons. 
whose gloomy cells lay in every direc- 
tion. Frc.Ti thence they wound among 
an infinite variety of vanity caverns, 
until they reached the cemetery, where 
the bones of the Santa Marco family 
were deposited. Their coffins were 
arranged on large oak benches, which, 
like those they supported, were moul- 
dering into dust, and impressed on the 
minds of our wandering group, the in- 
evitable end of all human greatness. 
There lay the warrior, the statesman, 
the steady friend, and merry companion, 
whose — *' flashes of merriment were 
wont to set the table in a roar." — There 
forms, once beautiful ; but, alas ! 
their sweets had melted in the grave, 
leaving no trace, save a few marrowless 
bones, and a scanty portion of ofl^en- 
sive dust. Their virtues, however, were 
rescued from oblivion, and were inde- 
voL. n. I 



IS4 ALEXENA ; Oil THE 

libly engraven on the hearts of their 
mourning countrymen. Cenotaphs in 
the chapel, briefly recited the splendid 
achievements of those iJlustrious heroes 
'who fell in distant climes; but those 
mementos had long since ceased to be 
objects of public inspection — ceased to 
inspire the neighbouring youth with the 
wish to emulate their virtuous example. 
And the reason was obvious — Acasto 
was then lord over all. 

While they continued in the cem.eter)', 
Carracci was apparently much agitated^ 
and more than once wiped away the 
unbidden tear. His lordship was sur- 
prised, but held such feelings sacred, 
and made no observation until Belzo 
pointed to a cofHn, which, from its 
freshness, could not have been long^ 
tenanted. 

'' There/* said he, '* lies the dearest 
friend of my infancy; it was he that 
first led me through these subterraneans 
— pointed out the path to virtue, to 
happiness; but, alas! how have I 
•trayed; yet let me not disturb Jii* 1 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAHCO, I^J* 

shade, by the repetition of ray heed- 
lessness and ingratitude.'* 

Here a hollow groan seemed to rend 
the coffin, accompanied by an exclama- 
tion of — Heaven have mercy !— 

Lord Mortimer fervently ejaculated 
an amen ! while Carracci looked wildly 
round for an explanation of those 
words, but none there could give it. 
He now paused for some moments, then 
said, let us proceed, and instantly 
rushed forward to the foot of a stately 
monument, which touched the vanity 
ceiling ; Avhen at its base, he drew his 
sabre, and with its point seemed to trace 
the half obliterated inscription, for thft 
apparent purpose of developing its 
obscure meaning ; but the ensuing 
moment proved he sought for a spring 
concealed among its letters, which wai 
no sooner pressed than it burst open, 
with a tremendous noise, disclosing a 
spiral staircase of black marble ; tbii 
they ascended, and at the top found 
themselves inclosed in a hollow column ; 
here again Carracci touched a spring, 

I 2 






1% alexena; or xjic 

which instantly admitted them into a 
spacious chamber^ and the same mo- 
ment the pillar closed with a horrible 
crash; Belzo then cautioned his lord- 
ship and attendants to be silent^ as they 
were in the immediate vicinity of the 
castle chapel, at the same time pointing 
to the further end of the chamber, 
where there was a curtain, which 
reached from the ceiling to the floor, 
and this was no sooner drawn up fhan 
his lordship discovered the organ. 
Carracci then applied his torch to a 
small portion of cumbustible matter, 
which caused that extraordinary light 
that afterwards terrified Alexena so 
much. He then raised a small panneL 
touched, the keys, and the following 
moment was admitted through one of ^ 
its pillars into the gallery of the 
chapel, which he never entered without 
first using this precaution, being con- 
vinced were any of Acasto's people in j 
it, those extraordinary soimds and ap- 
pearances would be deemed superna- 
tural, and deter them from repeating 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 197 

Iheir visit. With all this Clarissa was 
acquainted ; and of course felt no un- 
easiness the night she led our trembling 
heroine to its mouldering- altar ; but was 
forbidden to elucidate the mystery for 
the present, lest some unforeseen fata- 
lity might oe the consequence. 

After his lordship had examined 
every thing worth notice which it con- 
tained, his kind guide conducted him 
into the adjoining chambers; explained 
their several uses; their private outlets 
and entrances ; and for what purposes 
they were originally contrived : from 
thence they proceeded to the armoury, 
banqueting rooms, and library; then 
crossed the hall ; ascended the great 
stairs, and entered a corridor, which 
brought them by a circuitous route, 
into the secret passage, behind the slid- 
ing pannel of Alexena's apartment, a 
part of which Carracci slowly and cau- 
tiously opened, and disclosed to tlie 
enraptured Mortimer the fair object of 
his alTections, reading to her cousin 
I^ouisa ; unconscious of the vicinitr 



J99 alexena; on the 

of such a dear and welcome intruder. 
While his lordship stood gazing, Alex- 
ena laid down the book, and after re- 
minding her companion of the lateness 
of the hour, prepared to dress for 
dinner. " My dear Louisa," she con- 
tinued, '' with what pleasure I should 
make my toilet, vras my Mortimer to be 
one of the party at table; but heaven 
forbid he should ever become an in- 
mate of this house; what would I not 
give to be convinced of his safety; 
though that is a pleasure I can scarce 
ever hope to enjoy ; for, ala.*! how is 
intelligence to be conveyed to or from 
ihis horrible castle; oh! my cousin, it 
is an absolute impossibility." 

^' Well," replied Louisa, with a 
playful smile, " I should never despair, 
particularly, were my lover as true as 
you represent your's to be; poor fellow, 
if he but knew what sighs, what tears, 
what prayers, he has cost you sinceyour 
arrival here, his heart would ache ; nay, 
lie would give worlds to enjoy Abdallah's 
ring for one short hour, that he might 



rAiTLE OP SANTA MARCO. I9ff 

gKJe on the sightless air, ami whisk 
through the key-hole to his sweet love. 
In faith, I fear he would assume soni« 
insect shape, and sip Ihe dewy honey 
of that panting lip; and if so, I kupw 
not where h*^ could find a more deli- 
cious banquet." 

** Fie ! fie ! Louisa, you really mak« 
nie blush/' 

'' Really ! — ah ! my fair cousin, if I 
mistake not, you would willingly hide 
those biuslies in Mortimer's fond bosom ; 
heaven preserve him, and restore you 
to each other." 

*•' My heart says amen to that," ob- 
served our heroine, " and may the 
Almiglity render him happy, should we 
never meet." 

** Amen," reiterated Louisa, " but 
I doubt the possibility of such an 
event; let me see if I could com- 
mand a wish, I really think, 1 would 
trust his lordsliip into the hands of that 
frightful cut-throat Carracci, for I am 
MO strongly prejudiced in the robber's 
favour, that 1 make no doubt, was he 



200 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

acquainted with the eventful story of 
your loves, he would hang Acasto, 
throw the monk out of the window, 
blow up the castle, and restore you ta 
each other." 

Again Louisa beguiled Alexena of a 
smile, who now playfully said, " I 
should not be surprised, if you wore 
next to wish yourself the wife of that 
predaceous captain. What a pretty- 
picture those taper fingers of your's 
would make, sporting in the dark curls 
that shade his brow, or when elegantly 
employed in buckling on his armour, 
ere he went forth to relieve the dis- 
tresscd of their last ducat ; yet, was I 
reduced to the dreadful necessity of 
accepting either he or Acasto, as a 
liusband, I should not hesitate to fix 
on Carracci. He might be reclaimed, 
hut as to the other — oh ! that were im- 
possible." 

*' Doubtless, Don Philip would be 
extremely obliged for this kind opi- 
nion," observed Louisa, '* and you, I 
suppose, say he is as welcome to, as he 



CTAStLE dP SANTA MARCO. 2<)l 

fs deservinj^ of, it; hut. hark! tlie hell 
gives the signal that Mar<^aret will he 
here presently, so let us hasten, lest 
<hat savage monk may eat us instead 
of his dinner. I wish Carracci were 
here, that he might march down with 
us to whet Montano's appetite, with 
>vhom he is already a great favourite ; 
at least it is but fair to suppose so, as 
the latter is most anxious to make the 
bandit a present of a brace of bullets ; 
lie tliinks two leaden eyes would be of 
infinite advantage — would, in fact, be 
an acquisition to the robber, much de- 
sired by both Acasto and himself For 
the truth is, Carracci sees too far with 
those bright crystaline orbs, which he is 
at present in possession of, and the 
former kindly ^Yishes to add about an 
ounce of that heavy metal to prevent 
the possibility of his discerning quite 
so much. 

The party in the passage had anxious- 
ly listened to this conversation; but Car- 
racci, through his impatience to catch 
every syllable, defeated his purpose l:»j 

lb 



!P02 ALEXENA; OR THE 

tlrawin^ bis liand from the spring, 
\vhich caused the pannel to slap too 
with considerable force, and nearly de- 
prived Alexena and her friend of mo- 
tion; they both screamed, and their 
late merriment was exchanged for the 
agony of terror; but, fortunately, they 
knew not from what part of their chan^- 
ber the noise issued, and after a few 
moments reflection, were inclined to 
believe it was one of the doors of the 
adjoining apartment, which had been 
s-hut by the violence of the wind. 

Lord Mortimer remained until Mar- 
fraret summoned them to the saloon, 
then followed Carracci to his retreat, 
and it was nigh eight o'clock before 
they recrossed the cataract, the sight 
of which was sufficient almost to para- 
lyze the stoutest heart, and when they 
aiiain found themselves in the room, 
where they had left Father Zelo, they 
were much in need of nourishment and 
rest, and when his lordship had partaken 
of the former, he joyfully followed Mon- 
frane to his chamber. 



CASTLE OF SANTA J^AHCO. 205' 

From that day forward. Lord Morti- 
5tner had permission to visit the castle, 
and joyfidly availed himself of it. In 
many of his solitary rambles, he recog- 
nized Acasto and his old enemy, and 
fervently prayed for the hour in which 
they should be delivered into the hands 
of justice. Belzo had already >Yritteri 
to his lordship's friends, and had sent 
trusty guides to convey them, in dif- 
ferent dis":uises to the castle, which 
hourly became the scene of riot and' 
confusion. Acasto had collected a 
number of desperate men to guard his 
mansion, and to seize all travellers 
who should pass in the vicinity of it, 
whom he detained until such time as 
he was able to ascertain their name, 
business, and whether they were ene- 
mies or not. In consequence of this- 
outrageous attack on the liberty of 
strangers, many had lost their lives, 
and more had been wounded; none,, 
however, were stripped of their pro- 
perty, except those few who were s*> 



S04: ALEXEV A ; OH THV 

unfortunate as to oxcito Acasto^s par* 
ticiilar suspicion or dislike. 

One evenin;^, on which his lordship 
returned from the castle, quite discon- 
solate, in consequence of not seein"^ 
Alexena, he was met and questioned 
by Carracci, who, in consideration of 
his disappointment, promised him an 
interview with her the followin!]: niiiht, 
on condition that he should have the 
ijnal arrangement of the time and place, 
llis lordsliip could scarce credit the 
evidence of his senses, at this most un- 
expected indu]«^ence, and ag-ain and 
a2;ain thanked Belzo for his many and 
repeated exertions in endeavourini^; to 
Biake him happy. " Say no more,'*^ 
said Carracci, *' or I shall feel ashamed. 
Compose your thouj^hts, and resolve to 
act with steadiness and resolution, 
while I shall, in the mean time, pre- 
pare your mistress, who will need your 
support, together with her own forti- 
tude, to bear, t!ie pain of separation, 
which must necessarily follow." He 
fbcn retired, and hit his lordship ta 



PASTLB OF SANT^A M\1lCO. 505: 

eliitle the lazy aioinents that wore to 
intervene, before the blissful hour in 
which he s!iould again fold his Alexcna 
to his bosom 

Carracci, in the letters he had written 
to Lord Mortimer's friends, stated the 
particular manner in which l^e was 
situated, and impressed the convictioji, 
that nothinii' less tlian the utmost can- 
tioiiand vigilance, would enable him to 
emancipate his lordship and the lovely 
Alexena; whom Clarissa had undertaken 
to conduct to the castle chapel the fol- 
lowing night, to meet her lover — to 
renew their vows of everlastina: con- 
stancy — to mourn over the unforeseen 
events which placed our heroine in the 
power of Montano and his infernal 
master — and to rejoice and praise hea- 
Yen for its kindness, in bestowing such 
a friend as Belzo Carracci. 



^6 ALEXEXA ; OR THE 



CHAP. XL 



If tht midnight bell 



Did, with hit iron tongue and brazen moutli, 
Spund one unto the drowsy race of night j 
If this same were a. church-yard where we itand. 
And thou possessed with a thousand wrongs ; 

Or if that thou couldst see me without eyes. 
Hear me without thine ears, and make reply 
Withont a tongue, using conceit alone, 
Without eyes, ears, and harmful sound of words;. 
Then, in despite of brooded watchful day, 
I would into thy bosom pour my thoughts: 
But, ah! I will not." 

KiKcJoBN. 

?T HEN Clarissa had seen her friends- 
to their apartment, she hastened away, 
and, as Acasto was unwell after the 
last night's debauch, it was almost 
noon before Margaret entered to an- 
nounce breakfast. On descending, our 
heroine found three strangers, whose 
appearance was far from prepossessing, 
but to whom Acasto did not think pro- 
per to introduce her. The conversa- 
tion was chiefly about the ramparts^. 
parts of which were rather in a ruinous 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 207 

state, and of intended alterations, pre- 
paratory to Don Philip's marriage, 
which he asserted was an event he 
looked forward to the speedy consum- 
mation of, 

" I cannot conceive," observed Mon- 
tano, addressing Acasto, " why you 
have been so long inattentive to your 
happiness, as I will confidently affirm 
the fault is not ladyAlexena's; indeed, 
she even values your wishes so liighly, 
that, I am certain, she would feel as 
little reluctance in bein"' led to the 
altar, hy you, this day, as in a month 
hence/' 

*' Oh ! I believe you," said Acasto, 
with a sneer ; " but I cannot exactly 
say I understand the meaning of the 
compliment you so good-naturedly in- 
tended for us both.'* 

*' Nor I, neither !" exclaimed Louisa, 
but please understand this, Alexena 
de Guzman will willingly perish, rather 
than wed that wretch who would insult^ 
or suffer her to be insulted, at his own 
table." 
/ 



563 AT.EXENA ; OR THB 

Alexcna blushed deeply ; her feelings 
were dreadfully shoeked at the insult 
offered in the presence of strangers, 
and held down her head to hide the 
starting tears, without makin*>" any 
reply, while Pvlontano, that brutal^ 
shameless selfish, loathed beast ; that 
slave of savages ; felt — I know not 
what. Could it be, that a woman'^s 
tears, a lovely, innocent, beautiful wo- 
man, whom he had injured, abused, in- 
sulted, maltreated, and would have 
murdered, for an assassin's fee — could 
it be, that those tears of her's, shed in 
the presence of others — dra'.vn from 
iier agitated bosom by his unfeeiing^^ 
expressions — awakened sleeping re- 
j-norse? or was it, that he now felt, for 
the first time, that a triumph over help- 
lessness, served only to render him des- 
picable in the eyes of those strangers ? 
be it what it may, he blushed ; but his 
^as liot ihe blush of conscious inno- 
xzence. It was not that divine emblem 
of purity ; it was the burning fire of" 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 209 

a guilty conscience, that blazed for a 
uiotnerit on his visage, theti faded into 
the yellow sickliness of deadly rage — 
rage begotten by the idea, that he even 
fell in the estimation of his villanons 
associates, by encrcasing the distress 
of that sex which he was created to 
sooth, to cherish, and to protect. The 
observation of Don Philip encrcased 
his confusion ; so much so, that he wag 
unable to reply to Louisa's pointed sar- 
casm, and the former, tliough evidently 
enraged, also remained silent. In fact, 
the feelings of all present were now 
painfully embarrassed ; but the monk, 
■who had rapidly regained his mental 
powers, with a languid laugh, in the 
imitation of which fiends v/ould fail, 
said, he begged pardon for his un- 
timely jest, and should he be so fortu- 
nate as to obtain forgiveness, he would, 
in future, carefully avoid matrimonial 
subjects. Alexena now rose to with- 
draw, but before she retired, overheard 
Acasto say, in low, dark, and broken 
sentences — " Montauo, follow iwo. to 



210 ALEXEUA; OR THE 

the secret chamber of the south tower, 
as soon as our friends depart, and I 

shall there communicate end of 

this triflinsr this niirht 

Alexena's chamber Do you 

observe , see Hugo ...... I am 

resolved on it." — Here his voice was 
lost in a murmuring whisper; but our 
affriMited heroine had heard enou^;h 
to make her wretched^ and with diffi- 
culty, tottered from the room, sup- 
ported by Louisa. When in the 
Eolitade of her apartment, she commu- 
lacated her fears, and the cause of 
i!iem ; but it was not in the power of 
her friend to point out the means of 
cither escape or safety, as Torquo was 
acquainted with the private passage, 
and all the adjacent chambers. To 
inform Carracci of their distress was 
i^-npossible, except heaven should send 
him to their apartment; and they were- 
yet consulting-, when Margaret entered, 
whose countenance was the picture of 
woe. 



CASTLE OF SANTA WARCO. 211 

*■' What is the matter, good Marga- 
ret?" said Louisa. — '' You are, I fear, 
unwell." 

•' Oh ! matter enough. Donna. There 
have been several prisoners brought 
here by my lord's savage people; 
anions: whom, there is a beautiful 
young girl, who, unfortunately for her- 
self, was dressed in man's apparel, and 
in a scuffle that took place between her 
lover and the monk, the latter, not 
knowing her sex, shot her." 

'* Gracious heaven! is it possible?'" 
shrieked Alexen.a. 

''Alas! it is too (rue," replied Mar- 
garet ; " Montaiio endeavoured to drag 
her to one of the towers, where pri- 
soners are confined, supposing she was 
a young lad, from whose terrors he 
might extract information ; but of what 
nature, I am ignorant. While they 
were yet struggling, a noble cavalier 
rushed to her assistance, and pushe#^ 
the monk backward, who tripped, and 
fell over some loose stones. This was 



212 ALEXENA; OttTUE 

-the fatal moment ; forMontano, in his 
rage, fired at him, and killed (he lady/* 

'' Unfortunate young creature !" said 
Louisa ; " is she dead ? — gone beyond 
all hope ? — Does not there yet exist a 
chance she may recover ?" 

" None >Yhatever, Donna ; she is 
already as cold as marble, and her 
remains arc lying on a table in the hall, 
exposed to the rude and unfeeling gaze 
of the brutal soldiery.*' 

*' Margaret ! Margaret V fauUered 
Alexena, *' you have rendered me very 
wretched ; but \\hile I yet have the 
power, let us hasten to the hall, and 
bear the body to this chamber, where 
it shall remain until it receives the last 
sad rites." 

'' From whom ?'* mournfully de- 
manded IMargaref, " is it from her 
murderer?" 

" No!" replied our heroine^ " I shall 
myself read the service, and this night 
her remains mav be inferred in the i 

cem.etery of the chapel. Come, I say^ 
iet us hasten to the hall, and save tbc 



:) 



GA.STLE OF SANTA MARCO. ^13 

body of the hapless stranger from far- 
ther insult." 

" My dear Donna, you talk wildly ; 
bless your heart, the cavalier is stand- 
ing close by, guarding her body \^i(il 
his bloody spear, and holding her clay- 
cold hand. His eyes are burning with 
rage and revenge, so none dare touch 
the body, nor approach within his 
spear's length. Heaven knows where 
this sad business may end ; for the 
monk is now in deep consultation with 
Don Philip, in the secret chamber of 
the south tower, plotting some direful 
mischief." 

*' It is immaterial to me,'* replied 
Alexena ; I am resolved to see this 
slrano'cr, and offer my services ; there- 
fore, if you decline attending me, I 
shall <»o alone." 

Margaret, finding her determined^ 
assented, and led the way, while our 
heroine slowly followed, leaning on 
Louisa. On descending the stairs, they 
SAW the mourning cavalier, leaning 



214: ALSIEM ; OR THE 

over tlie remains of the unfortunate 
victim of Montaiio's blind rage ; but 
as his back was towards them, it was 
impossible they could distinguish his 
features. A solemn stilhiess reigned 
around, uninterrupted, except by the 
sound of the distant laughter of the 
soldiery, who were regaling them- 
selves after the fatigues of the day. 
When Alexena reached the hall, she 
tyas ahuost paralyzed, on beholding two 
or three dead bodies, horribly lacerated ; 
and would have hastened back to her 
chamber, had she not been too near 
the stranger to retire; who, on hearing 
her footsteps, and those of her compa- 
nions, quickly turned. — Louisa scream- 
ed — " oh! my brother!" — Alexena — 
'* my cousin Bolerno!" — and the fol- 
lowing instant they were both folded to 
his bosom. 

After the first transports had sub- 
sided, he pointed to the corpse, and 
burst into tears ; " alas !" said he, 
behold this lifeless form ; in vain en- 
deavours to rescue her from Don 



. CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 2 ii 

Philip's marautlers, I became his 
captive. She was crossing the moun- 
tain, attended by two stout guides, 
whose bodies you see here, when a 
number of those villains rushed from a 
thicket, and surrounded her, on whicli 
they fou*>^ht, and fell fighting bravely 
in her defence. 

During the contest, she several times 
called on some person named Carracci, 
and it was the wildness of her cries drew 
me to the spot, where I was almost 
jnstantly captured. 1 believe Montane 
has not recognized me, though we 
struggled for some moments, previoui 
to his firing that shot, which has de- 
prived this lovely girl of life. But as 
to where she was going, and for what 
reason she assumed this disguise, I 
know not, and it is likely it will remain 
a secret for ever, (at least in this world, 
as her attendants being both killed, 
prevents the possibility of a discovery.'^ 
Alexena then recpiested he would bear 
the body to their chamber, which he 



216 alexena: or the 

agreed to do, and they followed witk 
tearful eyes; on reaching' the great 
landing place, he proceeded straight 
forward, instead of turning to the left, 
and after wandering through several 
galleries, entered an apartment, the 
door of which stood half open, there 
Louisa discovered they had mistaken 
their way, and in endeavours to regain 
it, became more bewildered. Margaret 
had left them in the hall, and might not 
aeain seek tliem for several hours: this 
added to their perplexity, and Bolerno 
was so much fatigued, that he was un- 
able to bear the body further, therefore 
laid it on a couch, in the chamber in 
\vhich they then were. In this dileroma 
we must leave them, and return to 
Montano, who immediatrlv after Alex- 
en a left the breakfast room, went out 
on the ramparts, to await the arrival of 
a party, who had been sent to recon- 
noitre in the neighbourhood of St. 
Sebastian. In less than half an hour 
he saw them approach, and on their 
entering the court-yard, observed the 



CASTLE OF SANTA MATICO. 2 17 

extreme terror of the supposed youth, 
who lie instantly resolved to detain, as 
an attendant on his own person, be his 
rank or quality what it might. On 
questioning- the stranger, he perceived 
her confusion encrease, which gave 
birth to the ridiculous idea of her being 
a spy of Lord Mortimer's ; no sooner, 
therefore, did he conceive this, than he 
determined to carry his captive into 
one of the prisons of the keep, and 
strictly examine her as to that important 
point ; but her fears caused her death, 
as the moment she expressed her un- 
willingness to accompany him, he 
seized her by the collar, which led to a 
discovery of her sex. At this eventful 
minute, Bolerno shook the monk, up- 
braiding him with his brutality; then 
threw him on those stones, mentioned 
by Margaret, which led to the fatal 
catastrophe. When Montano saw the 
stranger fall, he retired, muttering ex- 
ecrations against his want of steadiness; 
but without making any further at- 
tempt against Bolerno, who would have 

VOL. II. K. 



218 ALEXENA; OR TH« 

killed him on the spot, had he not 
been prevented by the guards. But 
the moment he disappeared, Henri bore 
the body to the hall, and on the soldiers 
and domestics gathering round, he 
snatched a spear from one of them, 
with which he swore to annihilate the 
first who should presume to utter an 
indecent jest, or offer the slightest in- 
tiult to the body. The weapon being 
stained with the blood of her murdered 
attendants, increased the terrors of old 
Margaret, who had been a witness of 
this scene. 

Montano, in the mean time, sought 
Acasto, who then waited in the tower, 
debating with himself, whether he 
should or should not confide the secrets 
of his bosom to his chaplain's keeping; 
he knew him to be an agent willing to 
commit any crime, no matter how hor- 
rible ; but if he once employed Mon- 
tano, he would then be in his power; 
which was an alternative he wished to 
avoid. Here, however, his meditations 



CASTLB OF SANTA MARCO. 219 

were interrupted, by the entrance of the 
subject of them. 

" Montano/' said Don Philip, '' 1 
wish to have your advice, how I shall 
overcome the obstinacy of Lady Alex- 
ena: 'tis evident she dislikes me, and 
without some powerful incitement, to 
be produced either by the effects of ter- 
ror, or fear of dishonour, she will never 
consent to be my wife; and although I 
might now actually avail myself of her 
helpless situation, and compel her to re- 
ceive my hand, yet such a measure could 
not insure my happiness; and was 1 to 
appear in the world again, how would 
it be possible to conceal our present 
proceedings. That Englishman would 
demand vengeance at the foot of the 
throne; and 1 have too many enemies 
to risk such a trial. Her brother is in 
my power, and was it possible to in- 
duce her to accept my hand, he could 
be easily removed. — You understand 
me ?—" 

The monk nodded significantly, and 
Acasto thus proceeded : — " But you are 

k2 



f20 alexena; or the 

aware, that unless Donna Alexena pub- 
licly avowed she became my wife with- 
out compunction,, I could not enjoy a 
single ducat of her fortune, nor a crosvn 
of the immense revenue which Don 
Diego, Velasco's uncle, left him at his 
death. Now it is also evident, that 
Louisa has increased her dislike; I 
therefore wish to have her removed, 
and on consideration, think it were 
more merciful to give her to the grave 
at once, than let her linger in the 
gloomy torments of a noisome dun- 
geon; the longer she continues about 
the person of Alexena, the more dif- 
ficult it will be to remove the prejudices 
which she hourly instils into the inno- 
cent bosom of my fair captive. No\y 
what say you to this very night?'* 

. Acasto paused — but the monk spoke 
not — the former tried to summon 
courage to ask the reason, but his 
words were lost in tlicir struggle for 
utterance, and died away in unprofit- 
able sounds. Again he paused, and 
rthe silence was awful! — how to extei- 



tA'STLE OF SANTA MARCO. 221" 

tnlnate a human being, without leaving 
a trace of the horrid deed, was the 
subject of the thoughts of one, while 
the other calculated on what he should 
demand for the successful perpetration 
of the crime. At len^ith, Montano 
said, *' there has been too much blood 
shed here already; 1 like not the office 
which I understand you wish to assign 
me; but " 

" But/w'hat?" impatiently demanded 
Acasto. 

** I think my servant Hugo, with 
Torque's assistance, would be able to 
accomplish it.'* 

"Ah !" exclaimed .Vcasto, who pauped , 
then turned his piercing eye on tlie 
monk, and tried to read on his furrowed 
Urow the thcughis of his heart; but 
Montano guessed his intentions, and 
sm.oGlhed it even to the most calm 
placidity — aye — even at the moment 
when he had resolved to commit a 
delestablv^, foul, and horrible murder. 

'* Yes," said Philip, mentally, as he 
wondered at the monk's deep penelra- 



g2^ alexena; or tub 

tioii, '' lie wishes to avoid becoming a 
principal, tliat I may be subject to his 
power; (hat be may be able to sacrifice 
me in a moment to his ambition or his 
interest; bnt ill defeat his projects^ by 
pretending- i have given over the idea 
for the present ; and yet, Louisa^ this 
night shall be the last of your ex- 
istence. "^ Acasto now addressed Mon- 
tano, and said, "" I have turned this 
matter in my mind, and shall for a 
certain reason defer the arrangement 
for a few days longer; you can, in 
the mean time, think of it, and let me 
Ivnow the result; but not until you are 
rid of those consciencious scruples.** 
Here Acasto could not suppress an 
ironical sneer, which was not lost on 
bis worthy confessor, and the former 
then continued : " What is to be done 
■with the body of that youth that fell by 
your hand this morning?" 

" I am vexed at that unlucky inci- 
dent," replied the monk, " and shall see 
him decently interred." 



CA3T1.E OP SA>fTA MARCO. 223 

" He should be much obliged to you,'* 
observed Acasto ; " but I desire you 
may curb that fiery temper, as it ill 
becomes a prop of our Holy Church." 

Again Montano was disconcerted, 
and with an ill-feigned laugh, endea- 
voured to cliange the subject. Don 
Philip, however, enjoyed his embarrass- 
ment sometime longer; then dismissed 
him, in order to dress. 

When he had retired, the former 
summoned Torquo, who he commanded 
to dismiss the prisoners that had been 
captured that morning, and after dinnei' 
to assist the moijk in burying the re- 
mains of the lad then Ivinq; in the hall. 
Torquo observed, that Donna Alexena 
had removed the body to her own 
apartment ; at least, so Margaret had 
informed him, and that the stranger 
had assisted in bearing it there. Acasto 
was excessively enraged at this circum- 
stance, and desired Torquo to bring 
the cavalier before him instantly; but 
became infuriated, when he understood 
that Fernandez, captain of the guard. 



224 ALEXENA: OR THE 



had discliarged liiin a very few minules 
bcfore_, agreeable to his own order, 
which he (orgot had been issued pre- 
vious to his interview ^Aith the monk. 
Torquo represented the impossibility of 
retaking him ; and after a few moments 
lis became reconciled, by reflecting, 
that it was more than unlikely Alex- 
ena would inform an entire stranger of 
her situation, particularly a prisoner^ 
Avithout assistants, or hope of enlarge- 
ment. Acasto^ therefore, dismissed every 
disagreeable thought on the subject, and 
descended to the drawing-room with a 
placid brow, where he had not been many 
minutes, before Montano entered, who 
was not even then reconciled to him- 
self, for refusing to obey Acasto; but 
knew not how to recommence the con- 
versation ; and Don Philip was much 
in the same situation. He wished 
Louisa dead, but had informed his 
confessor, he had given over the idea; 
should he now renew the subject, it 
^vould betray an anxiety, which it were 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 225 

ioipossihle to conceal from the wily 
monk. They had been together several 
minutes before either spoke; their 
thoughts were merciless, stern, and 
bloody, and they feared to give them 
utterance. The cold perspiration of 
dire anxiety stood trembling on Acaslo's 
forehead ; his heart laboured with the 
secret of a black and savage deed ; he 
was bewildered by frightful thoughts; 
and the dark page of his foul intent, 
would have been lost in obscure con- 
fusion ; — rendered illegible, had not 
the murderous blazing of Montano's 
eye re-kindled and illumed it ; one 
moment was sufficient — thev under- 
stood each other — ]Montano stretched 
forth his hand — it was grasped by 
Acasto, who squeezed it — - 

" This night!"— said the latter. 

*vThis very night!" — reiterated tlie 
monk. 

"No idle, womanL-li, fears!" conti- 
nued Don Philip. 

•' None! the thought is unwoithv of 
my former services." 

K 5 



226 alexena; or the 

« Forgive me ! and I am bound to 

you for ever," said Acasto. The monk 

caught his hand — gazed expressively 

on his face; it was enough — that bond 

of their villany was sealed, which was 

to witness against them at that great 

and dreaded day, when we shall all be 

called to a strict account. Just then 

the castle clock struck seven, and Don 

Philip started at the sound; ''In a few 

short hours, Louisa," he said, *' shall 

sleep in death, and nought then can 

disturb you further; yet it may be, thy 

pure spirit will wander through those 

gloomy chambers in search of your 

friend ; perhaps, stalk across my path, 

and point to your gory wounds; what 

then ?— you will be a harmless shade, and 

cannot hurt me; but living, you thwart 

my plans, vex and mock my purposes— 

so die you must! the twelfth hour this 

night, shall ring thy death-knell; once 

done, it were well; — down pity, down 

• — but hiish! here she comes, innocent 

as the unconscious Iamb when led to 

slaughter; and there stands her unfeel* 



«ASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 227 

ing" butcher. Montano, I do hate thee 
now, thou art an ugly devil, yet I am 
blacker still; I can save — I will not, 
must not, cannot— cursed folly ! — where 
are my thoughts wandering? — but here's 
my love ; the cause, source, and spring 
of all my actions; I must speak fair, 
and swear, if there be need, I knew not 
of this morning's bloody work. Ah! 
here's Louisa, I wish she were again 
in her chamber; but no matter, her 
suspicions are lulled, she fears nought; 
then why should I tremble so ?" 

Here Acasto's reflections were inter- 
rupted by the presence of the ladies; 
and he had scarce apologized for the 
lateness of the hour, before Larco 
entered, to announce dinner. The 
same party that had breakfasted, met in 
the dining parlour, and they sat down 
in gloomy silence. Acastowas thought- 
ful; the Monk malicious; Fernandez 
sullen; and the strangers discontented. 
Shortly after the desert, Don Philip 
complained of a violent head-ache. 



SfS jllexena; on the 

and rose to withdraw; whicii was a wel- 
come signal to our heroine, as she was 
then suffered to return to her chamber. 
Montano continued at table with the 
remainder of the company, who drank 
pretty freely ; pouring libations to the 
rosy god until a late hour; but the 
moment they separated, the monk 
prepared to execute his direful mission ; 
and with a pistol in one hand^ and a 
torch in the other, he cautiously pro-^ 
ceeded towards Alexena's apartment, 
where his victim sat unconscious of the 
approach of her intended murderer. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 229 



CHAP. XI I. 



-Come, thick night, 



And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell ! 
That my keen knife see not the wound it makes; 
Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark. 
To cry, hold ! hold ! 

Macbith.'* 

tT UILE our lieroiiie and her friends 
fatigued themselves^ in vain endeavours 
to regain her chamber, Bolerno ac- 
counted for his appearance in the 
Pyrenuees. He had been in Spain some 
months, when business of considerable 
importance called him to Bayonne, 
where he was obliged to go ; and for 
the present give over his fruitless search 
after Louisa ; who he found, had been 
carried off by Don Velasco, Alexena's 
brother; and that neither had been 
heard of since the night of their de- 
parture from Madrid. On his return 
from France, he was captured by 
Acasto's people^ and to his inex- 



230 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

pressible surprise, found his sister in 
the castle of Santa Marco. 

Louisa had frequently been urged by 
Alexena, to relate the particulars of the 
misfortune which placed her in Don 
Philip's power, but that affectionate 
girl could not be prevailed on to inflict 
the pain which her sad recital must 
have necessarily given; however, to 
conceal the facts longer w^ere impos- 
sible ; she, therefore, told her brother, 
that Don Velasco had been a consider- 
able time her favoured suitor ; that she 
had listened to his professions, and con- 
sented to be his wife, without enter- 
tainins: an idea of a clandestine mar- 
riage. Velasco applied to her friends^ 
and was peremptorily refused, in con- 
sequence of which, he forcibly carried 
her ofFj assisted by a number of young 
cavaliers of the city, who accompanied 
them to the vicinity of the castle, wher« 
they were surprised by a number of 
Acasto's marauders, and made pri- 
soners. On the morning after their 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 231 

arrival, Velasco was escorted within 
a league of Fontarabia, and left to 
find his way back to Madrid, while 
Louisa was doomed to suffer number- 
less persecutions of the nature of those 
to which our heroine was then exposed, 
and from the first day of her imprison- 
ment, had not heard of her lover, ex- 
cept the vague account which Marga- 
ret had gathered from unconnected 
sentences dropped by the soldiery. 

Louisa had proceeded thus far, when 
the noise occasioned by the shutting of 
an adjacent door, attracted their atten- 
tion ; and in a few minutes after, Mon- 
tano came forth from Acasto's chamber, 
and hastened along a distant gallery, 
through which they cautiously followed 
him, until they regained the corridor 
that led to their own apartment, and 
where they had not been a moment 
before Margaret entered, accompanied 
by Fernandez. *' Signior," said the 
latter, addressing Bolerno, " I have 
received Don Philip's orders for your 



§32 alexena; or the 

liberation ; you will, therefore, please 
make all possible haste to the draw- 
bridge, lest he should countermand 
them, which, 1 fear much, he will do, if 
he finds you have been conversing with 
those ladies." 

*' For mercy's sake," said Louisa, 
" fly instantly, as in a very few minutes 
you may be too late, and you can ren- 
der us no service while you are here." 

" No ! nor any where else/' observed 
Fernandez." 

Bolerno nodded, significantly, to his 
sister, who felt the value of the cau- 
tion, and made no further observa- 
tion. He then led her to a distant 
window, where he most solemnly con- 
jured her to be unremitting in her at- 
tention to Alexena, whose liberation 
he confidently looked forward to, and 
was about to explain the reason, when 
Fernandez became so impatient, that 
(hey were obhged to separate; the pain 
of which we shall pass over in silence. 

When they were somewhat com- 
posed, JMargaret, who had remained, 
reminded them it was time to dress; and 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 2S5 

tliey had scarce finished their toilet, 
ere tiie bell summoned them to the 
drawing-room, where they found Acasto 
absorbed in those reflections, from which 
their presence had awakened him. 

On their return to their chamber, 
after dinner, they were surprised to 
find the fnrtiiture had been changed. 
Light and handsome chairs were sub- 
stituted for the old and heavy moth- 
eaten ones, and the entire seemed 
uew-modeiied. There were several en- 
tertaining books, of various authors, 
scattered on the tables, with drawing 
implements, and a few very fine land- 
scapes, which increased their wonder, 
and rendered them somewhat anxious 
to know to whom they were indebted 
for such valuable gifts. After they had 
inspected those new-found treasures, 
Louisa ben:i?ed to read one of the books 
to Alexena, who felt much obliged, 
and the subject being an agreeable 
one, they perused it with considerable 
satisfaction. Having read to each other 
alternately, they were not fatigued, and 



234; ALEXENA; OH THE 

after supper, continued to pursue the 
story with increasiuf^ interest ; so n^inch 
so, that the castle clock tolled twelve, 
before they were aware of the lateness 
of the hour. There was yet a few 
pages to finish, and Louisa gently 
wrested the book from our heroine, 
that she might ascertain in what man- 
ner it concluded, when her attention 
was attracted by a kip.d of rustling 
Boise, which seemed within the apart- 
ment. After listening some time, wilh- 
out hearing a repetition of it, they 
carefully examined every corner, par- 
ticularly nigh the door, and sat down 
again ; but Louisa had scarce touched 
her chair, which was opposite the pan- 
nel, ere she, to her inexpressible terror, 
beheld a human eye blazing through 
it, burning, and beaming on her with 
excessive brightness. She became as 
motionless as the woodpecker, when 
infatuated by the eye of a rattlesnake ; 
and Alexena, who observed her wild 
and palid look, without being able to 
ascertain the cause, cast a scrutinizing- 



CABTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 2S5 

glance round the chamber, and also 
became horror-struck, on beholding, 
not the eye, but the arm, of a man, 
hangiiig from one of the pillars next 
tlie door; tise hand of which was 
placed on that of an emblematic figure 
of safety, that stood in an adjoining 
recess. 

'•^ Gracious heaven!" said Alexena, 
in a whisper, " what can yonder arm 
mean ?" Louisa heard her not, as she 
was attentively watching- the pannel, 
from which tlie eye was, in a few mo- 
ments, withdrawn, and — oh, horror ! — 
the muzzle of a pistol introduced in its 
stead. She saw it, but was transfixed ; 
her lips moved, but they produced no 
sound. Alexena did not observe her, 
being attracted by the arm, whose 
hand grasped that of the bust,, which 
it had no sooner done, than the diair 
that supported Louisa fell to pieces^ 
and she dropped at full length on the 
floor. The same instant, a bullet 
struck the distant wall, and the cham- 
ber was filled by the smoke of the 



S36 alexena; or thk 

murderous weapon, which heaven ren- 
dered harmless, though it terrified our 
}]eroine to that degree that slie shrieked 
many moments without intermission, 
and several had elapsed before she had 
power to raise her insensible friend^ but 
even then^ not having- strength to sup-^ 
port her, she fell from her feeble hold 
on the floor. Alexena was now incal- 
culably wretched, and her distress was 
augmented by hearing footsteps in the- 
passage ; but they were those of tlio 
inonk, who waited to ascertain whe- 
ther his aim had proved fatal, and 
en seeing Louisa continue insensible, 
retreated to his chamber, to rejoice 
over the sum he conceived he had 
secured bv her death. 

When all again was silent, Alexena 
raised her cousin, who, with much dif- 
ficulty, she placed on her bed, and w'as 
compensated for all her terrors^ by see-' 
ing her gradually revive. As soon as 
Louisa could articulate, she explained 
the cause of her fainting, yet had not 
beard the report of the pistol ; but 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 237 

'the cla'r having fallen so critically, 
-attracted their attention, Avhich they 
had scarce touched, before it rcsunned 
its former shape, and on examination, 
proved to be constructed on springs, 
which communicated Mith the bust, 
being- conveyed from it under the floor. 

*' It is now evident," said Louisa, 
" that we are protected by some person 
within the castle, who has resolved to 
save us from the murderous tyranny 
of Acasto, and this accounts for the 
chano-e of furniture. I suspect Fer- 
nandcz is that fric^nd ; if so, he could 
favour our escane, and I am resolved 
to use every inducement that is likely 
to have influence with him." 

Alexena assented to the necessity of 
the measure, without entertaining the 
sliijhtest idea of its success : but she 
wished to encourage the hopes of her 
cousin, as they were likely to prove an 
antidote against despair, and apparently 
entered into all her wild schemes for 
liberty, without making one observa- 
tion against the impracticability of ex- 
ecuting them, 



25S ALEXENA ; OR THE 

After two o'clock, they lay down on 
their beds, without undressing, having 
first earnestly entreated Almighty pro- 
tection, and rose next morning, pale, 
agitated, and unrefreshed. On de- 
scending to the breakfast parlour, Don 
Philip started from his seat, almost 
petriiied by amazement, on seeing 
Louisa, v/ho Montano informed him 
he had shot quite dead ; but on ob- 
serving the significant looks which 
the ladies could not avoid exchang- 
ing, he, with consummate art, placed 
his evident perturbation to the uneasi- 
ness, he said, he could not avoid 
feeling at the apparent indisposition of 
both ; but his surprise was trifling, 
when compared with the monk's, who 
had now entered the room, lie doubted 
the evidence of his senses, and for 
several minutes, actually believed he 
beheld a spectre. His blood thickened 
with terror ; his eyes were distended ; 
his breathing convulsive ; his frame 
paralyzed ; his knees smote each other; 
and the cold dew of fear trembled on 
his brow, until he heard Louisa speak ; 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. SS9 

but then, her voice had the effect of a 
talisman — he cursed his folly^ and was 
''' himself again." 

" Her escape is unaccountable, I 
must have wounded her, and that 
severely/' he mentally said, " if so, 'tis 
out of the power of medicine to save 
her, and she has only escaped instant- 
death to die in torments. The ball was 
poisoned by a most deadly drug, and 
her paleness says, it has ah-eady began 
its work of destruction ; but, Alexena 
is equally pale ; therefore, I must have 
failed; no matter, when I try again, I 
shall use my faithful dagger, and there is 
no avoiding that. Well, Louisa, you 
shall have a week's respite, and now for 
some plausible tale to drown suspicion, 
that I knew aught of this foul attempt; 
but, is it not time enough to make de- 
fence, when a man's accused ? certain- 
ly ; however, I will be ready with a few 
suppositions, if called on ; for, as to 
my having any knowledge of the trans- 
action, oh ! that's quite impossible." 
Thus did Montano ironically review 



SiG ALEXENA ; OR THE 

the recent attempt, and felt no remorse 
at Ills infamous cruelty; on the contrary, 
he looked forward to the repetition of 
it with nsalicious joy, and, with his 
deadly thoughts, already immolated his 
innocent victim, though he had re- 
solved not to execute his savage pur- 
pose, until her suspicions were lulled, 
and she again rested in fancied security; 
but Don Philip thought quite differ- 
ently ; he suspected the monk had no 
intention to murder 'Louisa, and that 
some powerful inducement had urged 
him to spare^her ; he, therefore, deter- 
mined to perpetrate the horrid deed that 
night himself, as it was likely she 
would sleep sound, after her recent 
fatigue'; and^ having thus resolved, he 
shortly after retired to his study, and 
ordered Torquo to attend him ; but 
^here he had net been many minutes, 
until he sent permission to Alexena, 
to walk in the court-yard, or on the 
ramparts, if she thought proper ; and 
that Signiora Louisa might accompany 
her. Our heroine was much surprised 



CaSTLE of SAXTA MARCO. 24i 



aJt this induli^ence ; but both gladly 
availed themselves of it, and in the 
course of their rambles, ascended a 
watch tower, which commanded a fine 
view of the sea, surrounding- coast, and 
the castle ; there they continued almost 
two hours, during which time, they 
made many observations on the im- 
possibility of escaping from their pri- 
son, without the consent or connivance 
of some of Don Philip's people. From 
the tower, they proceeded to examine 
> every thing worthy attention, and be- 
fore the shades of evening fell, were 
weak with fatisrue. On returninn: 
to their chamber, Margaret signified, 
*' it was her lord's pleasure, they should 
dress with particular taste that day, as 
he momentarily expected the arrival of 
several guests. He desires," she con- 
tinued, '* that you will appear in your 
richest robes ; and Donna Alexena, 
you are to wear all the fine jewels he 
sent you ; don't neglect to obey him, 
for if you do, he will insult you before 
VOL. n. li 



2i^ ALffXENA ; aR THE 

those strangers, and, perhaps, turn yon 
from the table." 

" I am very unwilling to comply vfith 
those commands/' observed Alexena, 
*' but, it is Tain to contend, as our 
tyrant is resolved to exact compensa- 
tion for the walk Miih which he in- 
dulged us this morning " 

** Yes," said Louisa, " and sent us 
out, merely, that the air might revive 
us after last night's alarm." 

The idea of that dreadful circum- 
stance, almost reduced them to despair, 
as they had no means to prevent a re- 
petition of such nocturnal visitors, and 
it was evident, that the life of Louisa 
had been aimed at, for some particular 
reason,of which neither could form any 
fair conjecture; however, being obliged 
to reconcile themselves to the necessity 
of appearing at dinner, they began to 
dress, and in compliance with Acasto's 
commands, Alexena chose a white 
sattin robe, fancifully trimmed round 
the bosom, with a train of purple velvet, 
beautifiilly embroidered ; her waist was 



•CASTLE OF SA5TTA MARCO. 24^ 

encircled with a zone of brilliants, 
while a tiara of diamonds confined her 
black hair, to which her polished brows 
-added lustre. 

*' I had not an idea," said Louisa^ 
*' that those jewels were so very pretty ; 
but, it is evident, their beauty is bor- 
rowed from the fii^ure they were in- 
tended to adorn." Our heroirie blushed, 
but did not reply ; and after the second 
bell, both descended to the saloon, 
where they found only Don Philip and 
his confessor. On their entrance, the 
former arose, and led Alexena to the 
tl in in 2:- room : his countenance was 
dressed in smiles, and he seldom or evef 
was so attentive ; but his attentions 
were too pointed, to be otherwise than 
distressing ; they inflicted torments on 
her whom they were meant to please; 
and when he found her inattentive to 
his protestations, his agitation betrayed 
the pain her evident disgust excited. 
While the visage of Montano was 
undefinable ; triumph, revenge, joy^ 
anger, and discontent, followed each 

L 2 



,344^ ,ALEXEN,A ; ©n TKE 

other in sucli rapid succession, tliat, li 
was -utterly impossible to say, by which 
he was actuated ; and^ in those mo- 
ments, Louisa was tortured by his 
dark insinuations, into a belief, almost 
amounting' to certainty, that it was he 
^vho had fired the shot the preceding 
niijht. Alcxena's charms outrivalled 
the queen of beauty's ; they were irre- 
sistible, and it is impossible description 
cculd do them adequate justice. Don 
Philip beheld them with the eye of a 
miser, who is fearful of losiui^ hiis 
treasure ; and he resolved to remove 
JLouisa, who was evidently inimical to 
Jiis wishes ; and as one, whose advice 
she observed with scrupulous ex- 
actness. 

About an hour after the ladies had 
retired, Margaret * attended in their 
chamber with coffee, and after she had 
setit on tlie table, said, *' a number of 
stranirers have just arrived, but whether 
they are prisoners cr not, I cannot say ; 
much confusion reigns below ; and I 
was obliged to get Torquo to cany t». 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARtO. SIS' 

huadle of dry fag-gofstoyoiiranti-cbam- 
hev, as these nights are so cold and' 
chill, unless you had a good fire^ vo^i 
must be very uncomfortable." 

''I entreat/' said Alexena, '* you 
will go for the wood, and dismiss Tor- 
qno ; he will he angry at being detain- 
ed, and I shall he in agony while he 
retnains so ni2:h/' ' 

" Oh ! Doj'.naj there is no fear of him, 
lie is i.i excellent humour, or he would 
not have carried the wood, particu- 
hirly when you recollect his shoulder 
is very badly hurt, from falling down 
stairs last night ; I assure you, he can- 
not move his right hand, notwitli- 
standing he contrived to hobble her« 
with the faggots, because I told him, 
you would be obliged to sit without a 
fire if he did not." 

" Well, I feel much obliged/" ob- 
served our heroine, "^^ but, good Marga- 
ret, do dismiss him, and should we 
want any thing, we will go to your 
apartment for it." At this moment, the 
Siounds of distant and tumultuous 



246 alexena; on the 

laughter roiled through the deserted 
corridores, and atmost shook the castle. 
Alexena \vas now considerably alarm- 
ed, and before Mai'garet retired, sought 
an explanation. 

** Be not alarmed, dear Dcnna, those 
are the centinels that have just been 
relieved, who their companions are 
welcoming : I saw the day when such 
boisterous mirth would not be suffered 
"wilhln those walls, but times are 
strangely altered. Don Philip seems, 
to have no power over his unridy 
houshold, or is insensible to their ex- 
cesses, and we are likely to have fine 
doings below this night, as he has given 
them a few flaggons of wine to enter- 
tain the strangers, who, from what I 
have seen, are little better than those 
who brought them here.*' 

" And who did bring them 1" inquir- 
ed Louisa. 

" My lord's soldiers, Signiora, who 
are the most abandoned set of wretch- 
es on earth. When I went to seek 
Torquo, to carry the fire wood, I was 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARSO. 247 

obliged to go into the hall where they 
now are, and there the savages were 
tonnenting a cavalier, wjio I never 
saw equalled in beauty. One begged 
to know was he hungry ; a second^ was 
he dry; a third, was he in love; a 
fourth, was he sleepy ; and so he wjrs 
teized by them all. To fh^ir questions, 
lie replied by contemptuous looks, and, 
it is well if they don't murder him be- 
'fore Don Philip is intbrmed he is in the 
castle." 

" For heaven's sake, fly, and tell 
Don Aeasto, he is in danger," saiil 
Alexcna, " lose not a moment, lest you 
may be too late." 

" I dare not. Donna, as my lord is 
now caroasini>: with the friends he 
expected to dinner ; but, I will try and 
prevail on Torquo, to save him from 
their fury, should he really be in dan- 
ger." Margaret now retired, and Louisa 
then secured the door of their 
chamber, and drew a heavy table 
across the pannel, in order to create 
alarm, should any person attempt t© 



fiS AT.EXENA ; OR THE 

enter l^y tliat passag'e ; but, Alexena 
observed, *' tliey had reason to believe, 
Acasto and the monk were too 
much eiig'a.q;cd, b}^ the arrival of the 
strangers, to tliinkof tliena ; and advised 
thej should instantly retire to rest; 
the former wilHnj^ly complied, and after 
they had soliciied Heaven's protection, 
undressed, and went to bed, having 
first trimmed their lamps, and set thein 
on the hearth. 

When Don Philip gave his captives 
permission to walk on the ramparts, it 
was for the purpose of adding^ to the 
tatignes of the preceding- night, that 
they miglit sleep sound ; for he was 
aware, the^ had not before seen the 
courts of the castle, except in then- 
passage from the draw-bridge, and 
knew they would examine every tower 
and projection about them with pecu- 
liar interest. '* That, '' said he, " will 
divert their attention, and assist my 
pan-poses ;" and he judged correctly, 
for they had been but a very few 



CASTLK OF SAN'TA MARCO. 249 

minutes in bed, ere extreme weakness 
sealed all their faculties in deep sleep. 

In the course of that day, Acasto 
mentioned his intention to Torquo^ who 
was unable to comply with his wish, 
from the pain of his arm, which was 
powerless ; but willingly consented to 
accompany him, and assist in disposing- 
of the body, after he had deprived it of 
life. Having' arranged every thing re- 
lative to the bloody business, Acasto 
met Torquo, a little after twelve 
o'clock, at the foot of a private stair- 
ease, that led to the pannel, with the 
secret of which that old villain was ac- 
quainted, and who had conducted 
Montauo to it the preceding night. 

A few moments previous to their en- 
tering the chamber, our heroine was . 
awakened, by a loud,, shrill, and wild 
^vhistle, which was succeeded by a low 
moaning uoise ; in an agony of terror, 
she called Louisa, but to rous(3 her 
was almost impossible, and after re- 
peating the attempt twice, she desisted. 

hile she lav trernblini;- in terror, tlie 
I, 5 



250 alexena; on THE ^ 

pannel was cautiously removed, and the 
foUowing instant, the lamp's feeble 
rays discovered the lengthened shadow 
of a man on the floor, who advanced 
towards her bed, but, when within a 
few paces, remained a moment motion- 
less, as if listening ; shortly after, he 
turned towards the aperture, moved the 
table, and beckoned to an assistant, 
who approached ; she then heard 
Acasto say, " they sleep sound, do you 
retire and close the pannel, while I 
close in everlasting sleep, the eyes of 
Signiora Louisa ; should you hear 
shrieks, and apprehend alarm, you can 
return in time to prevent confusion. If 
Lady Alexena consents, there is little 
more to be done, if not — to the cell next 
Velasco's." 

*' Sure you told me all this before," 
said a voice, which Alexena recognized 
as that of Torquo, " strike home ! — let 
the blow be sure ! — make as little noise 
as possible ; and before 1 go, ascertain 
which of the beds she is in." A cis to 



CASTLE GF SANTA MARC». 251 

complied, and first examined Alexena's, 
who shut her eyes, and breathed hard, 
as if in sound sleep. He hastily dropped 
the curtain, and with quickness raised 
his lanthorn over the other, where his 
"victim lay, tranquil and unconscious of 
approaching' death. A glance was 
sufficient for Acasto, who then softly 
retreated, and in the same lowwhisper, 
communicated his discovery. " Louisa 
is next us/' he said. '' That is fortu- 
iiate," replied the other. — '' Feel for 
her heart, and I wish you a steady 
hand. It grows late, and there is much 
to be done, so no musing — despatch 
her quickly." Torquo now retired ; 
but was recalled for the last time, and 
after some further indistinct whisper- 
ing", our affi'ighted heroine heard the 
fatal pannel resume its position, and 
saw Acasto draw nigh, grasp his sti- 
letto, and lift tlie hanging drapery. , 
She now endeavoured to scream ; but 
extreme terror deprived her of utter- 
ance ; her tongue was as motionless as 
hei' body ; and she lay watching th« 



252 ALiiXENA ; Oft THE 

relentless villain, who had then passed 
his hand along the bed-clothes, and 
felt for Louisa's heart ; but it l)eat so 
gently, that aln?.ost a nninute elapsed 
ere he discovered it. There remained 
little else to be done ; her life was not 
worth a moment's purchase. Acasto 
pressed his knee to the bed side, to 
give force and elasticity to the medi- 
tated blow, gmd raised his arm to 

strike. Nature could no more 

Alexena groaned — the assassin started, 
and impatiently turned to ascertain the 
cause, and that instant his throat was 
grasped by a hand as cold and as pow- 
erful as the bony one of death. His 
Fight was blasted by a spectre inde- 
scribably horrid ; its height was gigan- 
tic; it figure, lank and bony, covered, 
vvilh long black hair; its face, decayed 
and putrid ; its eyes glared like glow 
worms ; its temples were bound with a 
*bloody handkerchief, which seemed to , 
sparkle in livid flames ; maggots crept 
forth from the foam which surrounded 
its mouth, and sported in its eye-brows; 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 253 

its breath was hot and pestilential; the 
hands and feet, armed with Ioni»; nails ; 
the waist surrounded by the raw hide 
of an animal, and the remainder of 
the body naked ; one hand was armed 
with a short red-liot iron ; with the 
other, it clasped the almost strangled 
assassin ; then, with a yell which shook 
the castle, it stamped his pale fore- 
head with the fiery metal, and dashed 
him, shriekins:, on the floor. The 
monstrous phantom then shook his 
• dagger over him, in a threatening pos- 
ture, gave a second yell, more terrible 
than the first, boilnded against the ad- 
jacent wall, whose solid stone-work 
vent asunder, and received him wiiliiri 
its bosom. 

Louisa started from her sleep, on the 
first appearance of the spectre ; but 
instantly fainted, and its second cry 
recalled her to life. Alexena remained 
torpid with horror; she had witnessed 
the entire of the recent scene ; and 
v/hen the apparition vanished, her fears 
were renewed by the expected entrance 



§54 alexena; on the 



ofTorquo; but his shrieks were also 
distinguishable, and Acasto had yet to 
suffer another horrible rencounter; for 
the moment he awakened from the 
trance to which his fears had reduced 
him^ he saw the pannel move, and 
staggered towards it, for the purpose 
of availing himself of his servant's arms, 
as he was unable to walk, without the 
greatest difficulty ; then judge his ac- 
cumulated horror, on beholding the 
gjiastly form of a female — a dagger 
sticking in her side, from which the 
blood seemed to flow afresh ; in the 
])assage behind her, Torquo extended 
at full length, his torch blazing beside 
him; and, in the distance, the collossal 
form of a black knight, grinning hor- 
ribly, with his sabre raised in a threat- 
ening posture. Acasto saw, groaned, 
and again fell senseless. The female ap- 
proached the beds ; a door flew open 
close to thatof Alexena, tln^ough wirich 
she passed, and then shut with exces- 
sive violence. Again it opened, and 
Torquo appeared, pale, agitated, and 



©ASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 255 

^almost convulsed with terror. He lifted 
Ihe body of his master from the floor, 
who slowly began to revive, but the 
former not having strength, was obliged 
to drasr him from the chamber. Aijain 
the pannel closed, and many minutes 
elapsed before our suffering heroine or 
Louisa found the power of articulation. 
The latter, however, left her bed, and 
crept into Alexena's, where she had 
not been a moment, until they were 
asrain alarmed by a rustlinij noise at 
the door, which a large, rough, and 
shaggy dog forced open, and shortly- 
after, jumped upon the bed, to their 
^reat terror. Fear, however, was suc- 
ceeded by joy, when they heard a low, 
plaintive voice call — " Lion ! — Lion 1" 
but Lion would not stir, and in despite 
of Alexena's struggles, he licked her 
face and hands. She, fortunately, re- 
cognized the faitliful animal, and chid 
him gently, until Clarissa entered, and 
pulled him from the bed ; then our 
heroine became angry with herself for 
her recent terrors, on finding that Don 



536 ALEXENA; OR THE 

r\Iiguers sister was the idcMitical ap- 
j)arition that had passed through the 
chamber a few niiiiuies before, and who 
Iiad terrified Acaslo so much. She was 
attended bj a pretty peasant girl, with 
a tray of refreshments and cordials, 
\vhich Carracci had ordered, who was 
greatly alarmed, lest her appearance as 
a spectre, might have been attended 
by falal consequences ; but on Alex- 
ena's mentioning the hairy savage, 
Clarissa became terrified, and said she 
could not account for it otherwise, tlian 
by supposing Providence had sent some 
dreadful messenger to deter Acasio 
from his bloody purpose. " But i think," 
she continued, '' that you may calcu- 
late on one certainty, which is, that 
Don Philip will never repeat his horri- 
ble visit, and you have reason to be 
thankful to heaven for its peculiar 
kiucIViess, in sending Carracci to your 
assistance, wlio, by some extraordina- 
ry means, became acquainted with 
his intentions, and adopted that stia- 
tigem, which alarmed both so much. 



CASTXE OF SANTA MARCO. 257 

Lord Mortimer is with Beizo at pre- 
sent, in the subterranean chambers, 
deliberatina: on what will be most likely 
to ensure your future safety. His ser- 
vant, Rourke, is there also; and as I am 
a great favourite with Lion, he has 
been induced to follow me here, where 
I intend to remain durino; the niarht." 

Clarissa now secured the pannel 
w^ith a small iron, which she had 
procured for the purpose, and fhey 
then conversed until the return of day; 
but when Lion became restless, Alcx- 
ena was greatly alarmed, lest liis 
whining should be overheard, and lead 
to a discovery, the result of which 
would be inevitable destruction. Cla- 
rissa was, therefore, obliged to retire 
much sooner than she would otherwise 
have done ; but left onr heroine and 
Louisa, if not perfectly composed, at 
least confident that Carracci was zea- 
lously watchful, and, if necessary^ 
would sacrifice his life to insure theio 
safety. 



2j8 ALEXEIf a : Oil THE 



CHAP. XIII. 



Ere the bat hath flown 



His clolster'd flight ; ere to black Hecate's summoa!, 
The shard-borne beetle, 'with his drowsy luian, 
Hath ru'.ig night's yawning peal, there shall be done 
A deed of dreadful note." 

Shaksfeare. 

At v.as past two o'clock in the lifter- 
noon before Margaret made her ap- 
pearance with breakfast ; but apolo- 
gized for her delay, by saying she could 
not steal a moment from Don Philip's 
chamber, who was so extremely ill, that 
a phj'sician had been sent for. '' He 
lias been in a state of delirium the 
entire of the morning," said Margaret^ 
" and Father Montano says it is a fever, 
brought on by a severe cold. Torquo 
is much in the same situation; Fernan- 
dez is absent on particular business, 
and confusion seems the order of the 
day. The soldiers are drunk, and are 
squabbling with the servants; Williams 
has pounded two or three of the most 
ungovernable into a jelly, and if my 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 259 

lord is not better in the evening, I fear 
there will be murder committed. Larco 
is the only domestic in the castle that 
can be depended on, or is any thing- 
like a Christian ; but he is always 
mopini^ about those solitary rooms 
like a i;!iCst, and I am certain, if Don 
Philip Jinds him in the vicinity of this 
chamber, he will make one of him in 
good earnest.'* 

'* What can he po!?sibly be about V' 
demanded Alexena, evidently alarmed. 

'' 1 know not. Donna ; but you may 
rely on it he is not mischievous, and as 
to you, I am certain he would serve 
you with all his heart, if opportunity 
offered. I met him just now, and he 
desired me to caution you, to keep your 
chamber all this day, or at least until 
such time as Fernandez returns. In- 
deed, I almost forgot, that Montano is 
to call on you with a message from Don 
Philip, to the same effect, as he is 
aware, the soldiers have acted verv , 
badly those some days past." 



SCO alexeva; or TiiU 

*'Then, why not punish them?" in- 
quired Louisa^ " or turn them from his 
service." 

• "'/The latter he has resolved on," re- 
plied !^!nrgarct/' when Fernandez can'^ 
procure others." 

Here they were iiilerrnpted, by a"- 
loud knocking at the anti chamher, and 
Margaret hastened to ascertain the 
cause. When she was gone, Alexena-' 
said, " this is the monk, who comes for^ 
the purpose of learning how far >yg 
are acquainted with the occurrences of 
last night ; therefore, conceal every 
circumstance v^hich may induce him 
to conceive we know aught of it ; aad 
Acasto will be convinced we are pro- 
tected by supernatural agents, wliich 
should he once firmiy believe, nations 
would not induce him to repeat bis late 
alrocious attempt, lest it n)ight prove 
fatal. You can evade his questions, and 
confuse him, by soliciting an explana- 
tion of the reasons which has led him 
to imagine we were disturbed last 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAllCO. §64 

night ; that is, in case I am right in my 
conjectures, and that he has actually 
come for such a purpose." Alexena 
was perfectly correct; the monk had 
been sent expressly to hear their ac- 
count of the recent transaction, and (0 
learn whether they knew the extent of 
Acasto's intentions. On his entry, he 
endeavoured to read their thoughts, by 
a deep scrutinizing look — but they 
were prepared, and he vyas defeated. 
Their minds being perfectly collected, 
were proof against his most wily strokes 
of cunning ; and though his efforts 
to obtain his desired information were 
admirably ingenious ; yet, the vacant 
stare of Louisa, or the wondering gaze 
of Alexena, deceived this father of de- 
ceit ; and, in the course of their con- 
versation, the former archly inquired^ 
*' had he been wandering the preceding 
night? I suppose you have," she 
sneeringly said, *' and while on your 
ramble, determined to bestow your 
fatherly bcncdiclion on us — your daugh- 
ters ; but found the lazy colts un\\illin«,' 



263 ALEXEXA ; OTl tKE 

to admit your reverence ; nor could 
your most earnest prayers, prevail on 
the iron-hearted rogues, to allow you 
to steal even one glance." 

Thousrh Montano knew Louisa 
mocked him, he yet felt pleased, that 
Acasto had not been discovered ; but 
threatened to confine her in a dungeon 
for her ininertinence, and then hastened 
to Don Philip's chamber. As he tra- 
versed the south gallery, he had time to 
reflect on the late extraordinary occur- 
rences, and became almost convinced, 
that Acasto had seen a spectre, or was 
deranged. ''If the latter," he said, 
" Torquo must be mad also ; if the 
former, it accounts at once for the 
ladies not knowing any thing of the 
matter; but the marks on his forehead 
vrere never placed there by a shadow ; 
there is treachery in the castle, and I 
will find it out." Influenced by this idea, 
he hurried to his friend's apartment^ 
where he relieved his mind, by as- 
suring him, that his visit to Alexena's 
chamber, was entirely unknown ; and 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAECO. 233 

that both her and Louisa were totally 
unconscious of any of the dreadful cir- 
cumstances attending' it. 

The moment Acasto had regained 
his chamber, he sent Torquo for the 
monk, to whom he related with minute 
exactness, each particular circumstance, 
and dwelt, with horror, on the descrip- 
tion of the dreadful spectre he had seen ; 
but the pain of his head was for<^otten, 
until his steward besran to ^urse the 
hour in which he had accompanied him. 
*' My bones," said the old ruffian, •' are 
reduced to an olio ; the marrow, blood, 
and splinters, all jumbled together; and 
my shoulders are reduced to jelly ; but 
I would rather be pounded in a mortar, 
than have another interview with the 
lady Clarissa." 

*' Who ? who ?" demanded Acasto, 
in the utmost agitation. 

" Donna del Harco, I affirm ; and 
exactly as I left her, under the rock 

of -r 

" Hush, hush !" said Montano ; 
while every joint trembled. *' Do you 



2u4: ALEXENA ; OR TK^ 

not hear a moaning noise in the adjoiir- 
in*^ corridor?" 

"' No/' — replied Acasto, who then 
grew deadly pale ; " I trusty it is only 
the wind." 

*' Let us pray/' observed the monk." 
" No mockery, I beseech you/' 
fiiultered Don Philip, " lest we call 
down the immediate ven£:eance of 
heaven ; Toftpio retire, and order 
i^Iargaret to rise, and send refreshments, 
as my confessor will remain with 
me the remainder of the night." Torquo 
reluctantly obeyed, and with difficulty 
hobbled from the chamber; while 
Montano joyfully acceded to Acasto's 
wish, as he vYas extremely unwilling to 
encounter the solitude of his own 
apartment. Thus were these aban- 
doned men haunted by the terrors of a 
guilty conscience ; their own shadows, 
or the noise of their footsteps, threw 
them into agony. And so may it ever 
be with the merciless wretch, who 
would wilfully, and remorselessly de- 
stroy the peace of mind^ or daringly 



CAStLE OF SANTA MAnXJO. 2C3» 

rfvise his hand against the life of his 
fellow-being. 

Acasto felt considej'able pleasure on 
beholdinnr the first tints of returning* 
day, as they, in a great degree, dispelled 
the vapours with which fear and dark- 
ness had oppressed him ; and on re- 
flection, was not displeased that Louisa 
yet lived ; but her he could not think 
of without horror, and determined 
never to permit the renewal of the 
attempt against her life. Having thus 
made a kind of compromise with his 
conscience, he ordered the physician 
to be paid handsomely on his arrival, 
and dismissed, as he resolved neither 
to admit, or be »seen by him. 

Fernandez returned early the follow- 
ing morning, and restored order in the 
castle; but Don Philip was unable to 
leave his apartment, or was unwilling 
to do so, until the wound on his tem- 
ples should be quite well. During the 
period of his confinement, which was 
some weeks, he had many long con- 

YOL. II. M 



'266 alexena; or the 

* . ' ' 

ferences with the monk, and several 

couriers, who were constantly em- 
ployed in conveying- intelligence to and 
from INIadrid ; many strangers had 
been brought prisoi^ers to the ca'-tle, 
' but with Acasto's heallh, returned the 
persecution of our heroine, who the 
former, for some cogent reason, re- 
solved to sacrifice, if she persisted in 
refusins: to become his wife. Louisa, 
at this time, observed numbers of work- 
men constantly employed in putting 
the fortifications in the best possible 
repair, with all other preparations that 
are necessary, where a garrison intends 
to make a desperate resistance; and 
informed Alexena that she had little 
doubt of the government having re- 
solved to punish Acasto for his many 
and repeated outrages, but whom he 
determined to resist. The idea of 
being exposed to all the horrors of a 
regulair siege, inflicted no slight pain 
on the susceptible mind of Alexena, 
while the number that must necessarily 
fall in the conflict, with the consc- 



OASTLE or 9A!fTA MARCO. 



oaT 



quences of (lie probable rcsaltj rendered 
her miserable, and she watched the 
progress of the works with anxious 
terror, devoting- ahnost an hour of 
every evening to the inspcciion of what 
had been done during the day. When 
every thing had been completed, and 
the workmen discharged, she ventured 
to the rvimparts, attended by Louisa, 
and fouii.l new guns mounted, with 
other considerable alterations, which 
rendered tlie castle formidable as a 
fortress : and on reiiainin^ the corridor 
leading to her chamber, the latter de- 
tained her some time, in order to point 
out the peculiar beauty of the land- 
scape, from a noble gothic window, 
which commanded a fine view, and 
overlooked the deep ravine below. — ► 
The sun had gilt, witli golden beams, 
the tovveri'.ig projections of the neigh- 
bouring rocks, and the sm^ll western 
turrets that sat perched on the gloomy 
ramparts, nodding to the deep, which 
lashed, with foamy wrath, their solid 

m2 



268 ALEXENA; OA fUE 

foundations, while the tops of the clifi^ 
reflected the red glare on the tall pine, 
as they rose from the glens^ ])resenirng" 
to the imagination a blazing forest ; 
but adding a deeper shade to the dis- 
tant vallies, from which the growl of 
the wolf, or shrill cry of the chamois, 
were distinguishable. As the dark 
drapery of evening fell fast round the 
scene, the wind moaned through the 
groaning woods, and swept the dizzy 
erases and rustlina: foilaije, v^iih risinij 
impetuosity. The clouds rolled rapid- 
ly along, the lightning glared in (he 
distance, while the siij-hins: breeze stole 
throuiihthe Ion*? deserted oalleiies and 
neglected corridors, mournfully an- 
nouncing an approaching- storm. Alcx- 
ena eiijoyed the scene ; it was suited 
to the tone of her mind ; yet she beheld 
its accumulating terrors with awe, as 
the consequences promised to be fatal, 
particularly in those tremendous moun- 
l.ains, where the weary pilgrim, or lone 
'traveller, are so often bewildered ; 
where they frequency fall headlong- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 



SG^^ 



from some rude cliff, or Avalk^ micon- 
s^ciously, into the lair of the savage 
beastSj rendered furious by hunger, and 
who prey on their agonized forms. 

There was a paUi which led to a 
distant monastery, and wound througli 
the craggy heights : this road attract^ 
ed the altentiosi of our heroine and ' 
Louisa, who watched the gathering 
tempest, and anxiously bent their eyes 
on the f»inty pa'shway, in order to as- 
certain whether any luckless wanderer 
traversed its barren windings, unpro- 
tected from the [)ililess pelting of the 
storm. The rain fell in torrents, and 
pattered, with amazing fury, against 
the stony heads of the proud buttresses 
of Santa Marco. The blue and livid 
liglitning blazed in fiery splendour, 
now partially revealing the dark out- 
line of the mountai;is, next instant 
illuminatins: forests, from which their 
arrowy flames plunged, hissing, into 
the deep morass, or rushed along 
Ihe £:round, scorchinij:, with blii^htinir 
iury^ each tender plant, and prying. 



S70 ^lexena; or the 

with bnmijig gliuices, info the gloomj 
cavities of the projecting clifFs. The 
storm's intpetuosity became irresistible., 
and ^hook the strongest tov.crs. Lar-je 
branches of the adjacent trees were 
rent from tl)e parent sfeip^ and swept 
thrGn<;h the air; cataracts diished, with 
foaming madness, over the hoary and 
Sveather-l^eaten heads of ancient rocks, 
•while every succeeding blast carried 
away a poilion of their late verdant 
covering; the sea birds screamed wiih 
terror; the wolf gnashed his teeth in 
idle rage, and slunk to his den ; the 
fox forgot his cunning in his fears,, and 
gladly sheltered in his earth. All ves- 
tages of nature were lost, while chaos 
and confusion governed the frantic 
elements. Alexena shrunk from the 
contemplation of the scene, deeply im- 
pressed with the idea of that Almighty 
power, which could hush the roaring 
wind into peace, and was mentally 
invoking his protection, when a tre- 
mendous flash illumined the rocky 
path, and discovered a number of 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 2Tl 

liorsemeu riding furiously down ils 
projecting sides, and apparently ap- 
proachinj;' the castle. A;>ain they were 
distinguishable, by the lightning'^ 
vivid glare, and again lost in darkness.. 
Loud whistles and shoiUa were inter- 
minii'led with the blast, and were dis- 
tinctly borne by the storin, to the ears 
of our alirighled heroine, who recog- 
nized them, not as signals of distress, 
but rather of rude and boisterous mer- 
riaient. She turned to Louisa, to hetx 
an explanation ; but was answered by 
a voice behind them, wlio said, '^' those 
are the troops of Oelzo Carracci, re- 
luming from plunder," They both 
screamed ; but on observing Margaret, 
were ashamed of tiieir weakness, and 
apologized. 

" Dear ladies," said that affectionate 
creature, " it is I who should beg par- 
don for my unlucky intrusion ; may 
1 hope it is only the storm that has 
awakened such painful fears, and en^ 
o'eased your timid it v." 



272 alexena; or the 

''Indeed yon may," replied Loui«^a; 
"but now allow me to inquire «hy 
you affirm tliat Ihose horseu^jCM are 
Carracc'i'cs band." 

" Because my long- residence heve 
lias made me familiar with the si^i'nal 
whistle you have just heard ; and it is 
i^enorally used, cither to collect the 
troop, or to express their joy on the 
success of some enterprise, such as the 
destruction of a village, murdering' 
some great nobleman, or carrying- off 
a lovely damsel. But, hark ! — oh, holy- 
virgin ! — the castle is attacked by 
them. — Behold their savage counte- 
nances, when partially revealed by the 
fire of their guns. We need not expect 
mercy, if they succeed ; — fly. Donna 
Alexena, fly to your chamber, as you 
may be she , if you remain here." 

Volley now succeeded volley, in quick 
succession ; torches blazed on every 
part of the ramparts, and the cries of 
the soldiery were drowned in the noise 
of the cannon. Curses and shouts 
iilled each interval, while a most horrid 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARVO. £73 

scene of coijfuslon reigned in the liall 
and courts of the castle. 

Alexena hurried to the gallery which 
overlooked the hall, and she had scarce 
arrived, ere she saw Montano rush into 
it, wilh a glittering faulchion in one 
hand, and a torch in the other ; his 
voice rolled like thunder throuirh the 
arcades, as he vociferated — " We are 
attacked by the king's troops — massacre 
all prisoners — and if the enemy scale 
the walls, off with Alexena's head — 
•she is the cause of this misfortune, but 
never shall triumph in victory. Awaj, 
slaves: and hurl destruction on the foe!" 
The monk now ruslied into the thickest 
of the fight ; the castle shook with the 
tremendous tire, while each succeeding 
moment, the wounded soldiers were" 
carried into the hall, iiroanino: with 
anguish. Cries of "victory" now, and 
" treachery" the next instant, were 
clearly distinguishable: and our heroine, 
with Louisa, remained trembling in 
Ike gallery, awaiting the event, No<^ 

M 5 



S74 ALEXENA ; OR T?IE, 

many minutes^ however, had elapseJ, 
before Acasto ordered the f]rin:>: lo 
cease, and (he torches to be extin- 
guished. '' We are fighting the pinn- 
derino; hands of Carracci," he exclaim- 
ed, " and our lights serve to point us 
out. AVhcre is the traitor who first 
gave this false alarm, that I may sacri- 
fice him V One of Acasto's savage 
domestics, named Juan, said it was a 
cavalier, who had been captured the 
preceding- day, and offered to bring the 
culprit before hira. Instantly, shouts 
of revenge, and demands for vengeance, 
were made by the infuriated scldier}^ 
and Juan hastened to conduct his pri- 
soner into Don Philip's presence, while 
Alexena became anxious to see the 
stranger, and if any violence was offered^ 
she resolved to save him, or, at least, 
endeavour to do so. There was, at 
this moment, a deep silence, every eye 
bei? g turned towards the passage that 
led to the dungeons ; but the next, the 
rising murmur of countless voices, an- 
iiounccd his approach. Montano stood 



CA6TLE OF SANTA MARCO. 275 

'with Yulture eyes^ ready to feast on 
hlood ; and the moment the noble cava- 
lier entered, he frantically shrieked — 
"It is Mortimer, by heaven ! down 
"^vith him — hew him to pieces !" Our 
heroine heard, saw, screamed, and 
wildly flew towards the hall. The 
monk now fired at his foe, who stooped, 
and the ball having passed him, he 
snatched np a wooden rail, »vith which 
he defended himself from numberless 
blows that were aimed at his breast. 
Larco and Fernandez were foremost ; 
but an attentive observer would have 
perceived their intentions were not 
hostile, as their swords received the 
repeated strokes which were intended 
for the devoted victim of the monk's 
malice. 

Durin<^ the conflict, Alexena vainly 
endeavoured to reach the hall; however, 
a door at the extremity of the gallery 
preventing the possibility of he- pas- 
sing that way, she desisted in despair; 
but on turning, was snrprised to see the 
ebject of her solicitude enter at the 



^7G ALEXENA ; OR THE 

opposite end, and turn into a corridor 
which led to the centre of the castle ; 
as his pursuers were quite nigh, she 
hastened to mislead them, and met Mou- 
tano breathing revenge; at once he con- 
ceived she had concealed her lover, 
and pursued the direction from which 
he had observed her approach. By this 
fortunate circumstance, the stranger 
gained ground ; but in a few moments, 
he was hunted by an host of assassins' 
led by Acasto, and the cry of *' here ! 
here !" almost deprived our heroine of 
life, who now frantically called on heaven 
and Carracci, as she rushed forward to 
the scene of carnage. The unfortu- 
nate stranger was overtaken in the 
passage leading to the library, and de- 
fended himself with surprising bravery, 
while the humane Fernandez again 
sought to save hira, and it is probable 
he would have escaped, had not the 
furious Montano arrived at this unfor- 
tunate juncture. Acasto was strug- 
gling to ward off the blows, and re- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 277 

peatedly shouted, ''don't slay liim — 
take him alive:" but his injiuictioiis 
"vvere disregarded when the monk 
pressed forward, who commanded the 
crowd not to impede each other, ant] 
(he combat could not last more than a 
few moments. The door of the cham- 
ber was now flung open by Alexena, 
who had rapidly pressed through the 
armoury, for the purpose, hoping to 
save her lover by that means ; however, 
the die v/as cast; Montano cut the frail 
wood, which had so long protected him, 
asunder, but received a violent blow on 
the temples from the remainder, which 
stunned him. Acasto tlien seized his 
sword-arm, and shrieked, "save him, 
save him !" "Hell gape for him !" cried 
the bloody monk, as he levelled a 
pistol, which instantly sped a fatal bullet 
through his head, and he fell lifeless 
into the arms of our fainting heroine. 

"■ Oh, cursed hour !" exclaimed Acaslo, 
'' this is not Mortimer, it is my neigh- 
bour Cerasco, Mho chose to die, rather 



273 alexena; or the 

than beg his life from an old enemy. 
Bear his body to the state chamber, 
and there let it receive every honour ; 
then carry this wretched, insensible, in- 
fatuated girl to her apartment,*' Louisa 
and Margaret now appeared, and our 
heroine was committed to their care, 
while the soldiers bore the body to the 
apartment, mentioned by Don Philip, 
andMontano retired to dress the wound 
he had received, breathing impreca- 
tions against the blind fury which so 
repeatedly led him to the commission 
of murder ; but totally regardless of 
the opinion of those who had been 
witnesses ; and being lost to every 
fading of remorse, he consoled him- 
self with the idea, that the man whom 
he had slain, was obnoxious to Acasto. 
Shortly after Alexena revived, Louisa 
informed her, that Don Cerasco had 
been mistaken for Mortimer, and had 
fallen in his stead; but she found 
it impossible to convince her, until 
INIargaret ofTered to conduct them 
to the room where the body lay; this^ 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. S7J> 

however, was unnecessary, as a little 
reflection pointed out the folly whicli 
had led her to believe, the possibility of 
his lordship's being a prisoner, as 
nothing could be more unlikely. Car- 
racci was his friend and guardian, never 
suffering him to leave his cavern^ or the 
castle, no, not for a moment ; yet it was 
strano:e, that he had not entered the latter 
to her knowledge, for the last ten days, 
and it was a circumstance which gave 
birth to many doubts of Belzo's fidelity. 
This night was passed in vain conjec- 
tures as to the cause, and day returned 
without either Alexena or Louisa's 
being able to form any decided opinion 
on the painful subject. Morning 
brousrht with it new cares — new sorrows. 
Acasto, irritated and enraged at the 
events of the preceding night, ordered 
Alexena to attend him in the library, 
where she was oblii::ed to follow Mar- 
garet, accompanied by Louisa. On their 
entering, Don Philip was leaning on his 
hand, his face pale and thoughtfully ex- 
pressive; and they had been in the room 



^SO ALEXENA; OR THE 

some moments, before he was aware of 
liis inattention, but on perceiving- them, 
anolo2:ized, and led our heroine to a 
seat. Montano lay in a recess, extended 
on a sofa, his cowl drawn close round 
his features, through which his eyes 
were scarce distinguishable, and was 
carelessly tossing over the leaves of a 
Ijook, apparently searching for some 
particular passage. Louisa stood ])ehind 
Alexena's chair, while Margaret slowly 
and reluctantly retired. After a painful 
pause, Acasto reverted io the confusion 
of the preceding night ; lamented the 
fall of Cerasco ; appealed to both 
ladies, whether he had not used his 
utmost exertions to save the unfortu- 
nate man, when he believed him to be 
Lord Mortimer ; and then expatiated on 
the continued state of agitation and 
menial suffering, which Alexena sub- 
jected herself to, in consequence of 
grasping the vain hope of again seeing 
her lover; he proceeded by saying', 
" that it was absolutely necessary to his 
own peace, and that of his household^ 



CASTLE OF SAKTA MARCO. 281 

ihai these alarms should be finally 
suppreysed, and that this desirable 
point conid only be effected by our 
heroine's consenting to unite her fata 
to his.'' He concluded this speech 
with an avowal of his passion, and 
many promises of lasting- attachment. 

When he had ceased, Alexena re- 
plied with a firmness which astonished 
all present, by saying, '' that empires 
could not purchase her consent, nor 
tortures extort it ; she could not even 
say, that she felt grateful for Don 
Philip's attachment, as she was con- 
vinced, his every word had been 
studied, and spnuig from views that 
were as mean as they were base ; she 
valued not his resentment, nor did she 
fear death ; her peace of mind had 
been continually preyed on, by the 
conviction, that the life of her friend 
was exposed to every whim or burst of 
•resentment, which influenced a being, 
whose form alone entitled him to the 
fiame of human ; murder and reven^:e 



;582 alexena; or the 

had been his favourite play things ; by 
him reliiiioii was treated with derision ; 
and more than oiice, lie dared to brave 
bis God, at his very altar. He had the 
power, and seldom wanted the incbna- 
tion, to insult her, and never had been 
denied such permission, by the man 
wlio now solicited her hand, and for 
whom slie could not help feeling- con- 
tempt and abhorrence. Her spirits were 
almost wearied out in the detestable 
controversy, and were it not impious, 
she could not only hate her tyrant, but 
beg of heaven to hide her from him in the 
tomb; she cautioned him not to put too 
much confidence in his strens^th, not to 
provoke an offended Deity, to pour on 
liim the via!.; of his wrath ; nor by a 
repetition of monstrous abuses, and a 
cruel, hopeless persecution of herself, 
expose his life to the laws of his offended 
country, and his soul to everlasting- tor- 
ments. " Learn," said she, as she rose 
to withdraw, 'Mearn to fear Him who 
wields the living thunder ; your know- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 2S3 

}e^\^re of his Almighty power, should 
awaken you to a sense of those enor- 
mous criuies^ which cry for vengeance. 
Yes; I see your hrow tells }"ou can kill 
my body ; but were 1 ueaci, your domi- 
iiiou ends ; it cannot extend farther. — 
Nay, threaten not ! — Vv lien you send 
your assassin, 1 shall point to my heart, 
and you may then triumph, if you 
wili." 

Acasto's looks were extremely ex- 
pressive during the time he listened 
to Alexena's spirited reply ; but the 
latter part of it having deprived him oC 
every shadow of hope, from gentle 
means, he resolved to resort to harsh 
ones, and to try whether she was proof 
ai>:ainst them to that extent which her 
last words implied. Thus resolved, he 
frowned, and, in a voice that shook the 
apartment, ordered Alexena to stay, and 
hear his final sentiments. Slie, how- 
ever, refused, conceiving he was about 
to insult her with a repetition of his 
late detestable avowal ; but on her 
moving towards the door, lie sprung 



2ti ALEXENA; OR THE 

forwarJ (o prevent her, wlien Louisa^ 
who had not ventured a siii<>le obser- 
vation, now glided between him and it, 
and in a tone tliat bid defiance to every 
threat, ordered him to desist. *' Be- 
hold," !?he said, " this mnrderous dag-- 
s:ei\ which is encrnsted with the blood 
of the martyred Chirissa — advance one 
pace fartlier, and I'll bnry it in your 
bosom ; while, for your confessor, I 
have the pis'ol by which Cerasco 
fell. — Ah! ah! you cowards! can a 
w Oman scare you both ?" 

Louisa seemed inspired ; she scarce 
lonc'hed tlie solid floor ; her soul flut- 
tered on her tonane, lending; it words 
to fri<iht those ruffians, whose strenoth 
•was blighted by her bravery, and she 
was sufi'ered to lead our heroine oi?, 
without farther molestation. 

In less than an hotu', Don Pliilip 
wrote a note to Alexena, and sent it by 
IMargaret, in which he promised par- 
don for her late oflence, and ever^a^^- 
jng love and constancy, should sl.d^ 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAHCO. 285 

liless him with her hand ; but if not, 
he vowed his determination of availinii: 
himself of her helplessness, and after 
renderin<;- her miserable, would then 
deliver her into the hands of Montane, 
to be treated by him with all the rigour, 
and all the eruelty, that she was aware 
he knew how to inflict. " lie shall," 
said Acasto, " have full powers to sub- 
due your proud, rebellious, stubborn 
spirit ; yet I will allow this night for 
reflection ; to-morrow decides your fate. 
You are to consider whether it is bet- 
ter to enjoy all the goods of fortune, 
or yield your last sigh in the noxious 
vapours of a filthy dungeon, where 
your beauty shall fade, neglected and 
unpitied; and, at length, sink into an 
obscure grave, unknown, without a 
single friend to shed a tear, or pile over 
your wasted form, the smallest portion 
OtVen of unhallowed earth." Alexena 
read this scroll in no enviable state 
of mind, and, in a short time, became 
so faint, that Louisa endeavoured to 
persuade her to retire to bed ; but she 



286 alexena; or the 

resolved not to let her feelin<is ovef- 
power her fortididc, as by giving them 
unbridled sway, she would deprive 
herself of the po-aibiiity of resisting 
Acasio ; and, therefore, entreated her 
cousin to walk with her on the ram- 
parts, where, she trusted, the air would 
revive her. 

While they continued walking-, one 
of the soldiers approached, from whom 
Louisa required an explanation of the 
cause of the late attack, to which he 
replied, that " the troops of Beizo 
Carracci had fired a few vollies at the 
centinels, as they passed the castle, 
which was returned by them, and short- 
ly after, Acasto ordered Fernandez to 
fire the cannon towards the spot, w hich 
caused the ensuing confusion. It was 
Jnan, ladies, who is always doing mis- 
chief, that led my lord to believe Don 
Cerasco was Lord Mortimer, because 
he had been a servant of his about two 
years ago, and was turned from his 
place, in disgrace, for malpractices. 
Revenge prompted him to take advair- 



XASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 287 

tage of the alarm, and cause his old 
master to be murdered, which, unfor- 
tunately has happened." 

" Had the robbers any artillery ?" 
demanded Alcxena. 

"Oh! no. Donna; it is impossible 
4o drag cannon over those mountains.'' 

•' Then how did Don Philip contrive 
to brinsT those here V 

" By sea, lady, and then hoisted (hem 
on the walls, by the assistance of a 
windlass." 

Fernandez now appeared, and the 
ladies pursued their ramble. They 
strolled on until they reached a small 
grass-grown court, long since disused, 
Avhore they stood remarking the regular 
beauty of the adjacent towers. While 
they yet conversed, a soldier ap- 
proached, and when within a few paces, 
looked cautiously round, then made 
signs that he wished to speak, or com- 
municate something. Louisa advanced, 
and asked what he required. '' I come. 
Donna, to inform you, Lord IModimer 



£88 alesena; or tuE 

has frieiids in (be castle, who have 
adnntted him ; atid if Donna Alexena 
attends tliis night in the armoury, she 
will meet liim there." 

*' How can you convince us of the 
truth?" 

*' I swear by the name of Belzo," 
replied the soldier. 

" I now understand you," observed 
Louisa. 

'' Then you will both be in the ar- 
moury at midnight." 

" Certainly," said Alexena; " but as 
the monk approaches, you had better 
retire." 

The centinel drew his cap over his 
face, retreated with all possible speed, 
and reached a small arched door-way 
that led into an outer court, through 
which he vanished before Montano 
came up, who appeared almost breath- 
less. 

" So, ladies, you have been tam- 
pering with the soldiers, to assist you 
in the old project of escape; have you 



CASTLE OP SANTA MARCO. 2S9 

been so monstrous clever as to prevail/ 
and entertain well-founded ho^'ies of 
success?" 

" How much we should feel oblioed/* 
replied Louisa, ironically, '* for the 
interest you always so kindly take in 
our affairs ! Do now, dear father, 
oblige us by taking- yourself off, that 
we may get rid of your most detestable 
company." 

Montano gnashed his teeth, but was 
loo much enraged to reply ; while she 
continued — '' Nay, I beseech your 
reverend impertinence to withdraw, 
and when within that cell, to which, 
no doubt, you are about to retire, re- 
member us in your prayers, and 1 shall 
think of you in mine.''' 

" Perdition seize you, impudent bag- 
gage!'* vociferated Montano, ''I will, 
this instant, toss you from the ram- 
parts !" He then rushed forward ; but 
Louisa coolly drew forth a pistol, which 
she presented at him, and then said— 
" I doubt whether you now recollect 

TOL. II. N 



'230 .alexena; or the 

your threat ; but a ball in the hf a\l 
may refresh your memory, if you have 
already forgotten the purport of it. — 
Say, shall I fire ? ' 

The monk was petrified with amaze- 
ment, and stood Jnesolute, 'vvhile Alex- 
ena remained a speechless observer of 
this scene. Again the spirit of Louisa 
was roused; and, in a voice of com- 
manding dignity, she ordered Muntano 
Ci'om her presence. — She was armed, 
and he obeyed : twice he turned, and 
gazed on her figure; but we must {cr- 
bcar the wish we have to describe his 
countenance : the reader, however, 
already acquainted with his character, 
iXiay form a much juster idea of it, llian 
any feeble attempt of ours could give. 
When he was no longer discernible, 
Louisa's assumed courage fled ; and sli« 
■was so much exhausted by the late effort, 
that she sunk insensible at Alexena^s 
teet, who now forgot her own feiu'P, 
and was about to hasten for as'iistance, 
vvben Don Philip appeared. He raised 
her in hi« arms, and Tfhen respiration 



CAStLBOP SANTA MARCO. 29t 

returned, assisted her to tlic caslle, 
where he ordered Margaret to trei\t her 
with every possible attention, saying, 
he woukl dispense with our heroine's 
presence at dinner, in consequence of 
the indisposition of her friend ; a!id JT 
ever she felt grateful to him, it was at 
that moment ; while he, having- observed 
the expression of her countenance, re- 
solved, if possible, to improve the jjood 
opinion which, it seemed to say, she 
entertained, and shortly after with- 
drew. 

Louisa's illness was neitlier alarming 
nor serious, and after the lapse of a few 
hours, she appeared most anxious for 
the approaching- interview, as there 
was a possibility they mig-ht escape that 
Slight; tlierefore, at the appointed hour, 
they hastened through the mazy wind- 
ings which lay between their apart- 
ments and the armoury. On entering* 
its gh)om, they held tlicir lamps high, 
and waved then-k round, that their lig^ht 
might dispel (he dark [shadows of the 
adjacent pillars, and shew whether 

X 2 



*j;2 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

friends or enemies lurked behind them; 
but though their rays did not peoelrate 
far into the dusky obscurity, yet they 
partially revealed a flitting figure, who, 
on seeing them, instantly crouched, 
and remained motionless. Alexena said, 
"It is Mortimer! — let us advance.'* 
Louisa caught herariTij and whispered, 
''No! we are betrayed; behold that 
gigantic armour to the left ; this mo- 
ment a man has vdided behind it, whonn 
I recos^nize as Huijo ; and as his mas- 
ter cannot be far o{\] therefore, let us 
retire carelessly, that we may lead 
them to believe, we are unsuspicious of 
any intended injury." She then gave 
the lamp to Alexena, and cautiously 
prepared the pistol which had been 
concealed in the girdle f*f her robe; 
but had scarce effected it, before her 
companion screamed, and on turning, 
bhe beheld Juan approach on tip-toe 
with a drawn dagger, whose intent 
being manifest, she instantly fired, and 
he fell. Montano, on seeing this, 
rushed from the opposite side, followed 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 293 

by Hugo, their eyes blazing with crime' 
and cruelty. Louisa now dashed the 
lamp from Alexena's hands, who, being 
overpowered by fear, fainted ; and 
then, availing herself of the darkness, 
fled for her life, she knew not whither, 
while her footsteps were closely pressed 
on by her blood-thirsty pursuers. Her 
only hope was in fieetness ; she fled 
from corridor to corridor; from cham- 
ber to chamber; from gallery to gal- 
lery; up one stair-case and down 
another, until she had traversed a vast 
number of apartments; but, both her 
breath and stren<j:th beini>- exhausted, she 
was obliged to slacken her pace; and 
at length ventured to pause and listen ; 
— all was silence, and she trusted she 
had outran her pursuers. *' Wretched 
Loui?a! they are within a few paces, 
ready to plunge (heir merciless daggers 
into your panting bosom.'' The room 
she was then in appeared to be 
spacious, but the gloom rendered it 
almost impossible to distinguish ob- 
jects. Yet this, she fondly lioped, 

n3 



59-i 



AL2XENA; OR THE 



would prove a favourable circumstance, 
as its darkness slieltered, while its echo^ 
promised to aid her in discovering the 
approaching foe. Her conjectures were 
right, she lieard the cautious tread of 
her hunters, who were ah'eady in the 
chamber ; but, after a low and very in- 
distinct whisper, they separated, and 
apparently retired through different 
doors. In a few moments she ventured 
forward, and having incautiously passed 
the window, her figure was observed, 
and her assassins then turned to execute 
their vi!e purpose ; while she, unmind- 
ful of the necessity of silence, began 
to pray in a lovv voice : — " Oh ! my 
God," she said, '' save me, I beseech 
thee, from their grasp, and receive my 
thanks for this short respite. They have 
retired, and I trust that another night 
is to be added to my life, as to-morrow 

{ may be able to inform •." 

She paused on hearing the suppressed 

breathings of a man, who almost 

tone lied her, and shrunk back, but 

found her rctrogade motion was dis- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. §95 

covered. She now recognized the 
forms of those savages, and conceiving 
herself witliout a chance of escape, 
exckiimed, '' Strike your devoted vic- 
tim!" but was that instant firmly clasped 
in the gigantic arms of Carracci ; who, 
while she screamed, sunk with her 
through the floor. jMontano then 
bounced forward with a tiger's spring 
lo strike his prey, and plunged his 
dagger deep into Hugo, who he mistook 
for the innocent object of his malice, 
and laid this vile agent of crime dead 
at his feet. 

It was some time before the monk 
discovered this fatal mistake, who, with 
a torrent of execrations, reviled the 
folly of his wretched attendant, for 
approaching so unguardedly within his 
reach ; at a time too, when it was im- 
possible to ascertain his figure. The 
scarf which Hugo had procured for the 
purpose of striking Louisa with super- 
natural terrors, caused his destruction, 
as the dusky light being sufficiently 
strong to shew its whiteness, led his 



29G alexexa; oa the 

murderer to believe, he was Louisa.^ 
IMoiitano did not at first imajjine that- 
Hugo was past recovery, but when he 
laid his hand on his rough beard, and 
found he neither made a reply to his 
repeated entreaties, or the slightest 
motion to obey him, he became con- 
vinced of the dreadful certainty, and 
hurried to his apartment to procure a 
lamp, that he might bury him in ihe 
cemetery, relying on his ingenuity for 
some plausible tale, which would 
account for his absence. The lamp 
that he had brought from his cham- 
ber was extinguished by Hugo, on 
the first appearance of the ladies in 
the armoury, and there the monk 
determined it should remain, as worlds 
would not tempt him to seek it. 
" Alexena," he said. " must hove louir 
since alarmed the attendants, who have 
found Juan's body, and for whose death 
she has accounted ; therefore, if I am 
(.aught before Don Philip can interfere, 
the probability is, they will knock me 
on the head, for the attempt on tliis 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAUCO. 297 

Louisa; who, may the devil fly away 
with, if he has not ah'eady done so; but 
she certainly was killed, for what less 
than a death-blow could produce (he 
yell she gave? Oh ! it must be so ; she 
has staggered a few paces, then fell ; 
and I, not having laid my hand on 
her when I stooped, idly conceived she 
escaped." 

Having thus, in this soliloquy, 
arranged the circumstance to his satis- 
faction, his mind became composed, 
and when he had procured a light, 
he proceeded to the tragical spot 
where his ill-fated attendant lay wel" 
tering in his blood, and by whose 
stiffened hand, an instrument of de- 
struction was still firmly grasped, and 
whose poisoned point had deeply per- 
forated the flooring of the chamber. 
Montano stood leaning in horror over 
the pale aiid gristly visage of the breath- 
less corpse, and when he laid the lamp 
on the bloody boards, in order to lift 
it, he could not avoid feeling the stings 
of remorse. He was a murderer — an 



258 ALEXENA; OR THE 

object of universal hatred, contempt, 
and detestation : and althoiioii in tliis 
instance, he did not intend to kill his 
sen ant, was not the dagg-er by vvliich 
ho fell, raised with the intention of 
committing, if possible, a still more 
horrible crime? But such feelings were 
quickly stifled in his bosom ; he was 
overwhebned in iniqiiity, and, in a few 
seconds, relansed into all his orii2:inal 
depravity. 

While endeavouring to raise the 
black and livid form of lluj^o on 
his shoulders, he gnashed his teeth, in 
the agony of disappointed revenge, 
and vras niany moments before he ef- 
fected his purpose ; but having, at 
lengUi, accomplished it, he grasped 
his lamp, then left the gory stage for the 
burial ground, and moved along, with 
all the haste (he weioht of his bm-iheii 

o 

would permit him. Having now and 
then stopped to listen, he more than once 
conceived he heard the mour'iful jiotes 
of the organ, which created sensations 
it is impossible to describe^ and of which 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. !^9 

few can have an idea. He was tlicii in 
the dreary corridor of an. ivn liquated 
castle, stealing towards a grave-yard^ 
bearing the body of a man who had 
fallen by his hand, when both were in 
the act of perpetrating a deadly, cow- 
ardly, vile, and bloody deed, at the 
bare mention of which^ human nature 
shudders. The fall of Hugo vTas evi- 
dently a punishment decreed by an 
All-seeing Eye, and the monk felt it 
was such, yet dared to brave the Al- 
mighty vengeance. 

He had gained the south aisle of (he 
chapel, and was almost ready to sink 
under the weight of the body, when a 
deep groan burst from one of th(= pillars 
as he passed. Nature was exhausted; 
he could proceed no farther; his lamp 
fell from his powerless grasp ; Hugo 
tumbled from his shoulders on the flags, 
and his fall echoed through the distant 
galleries. The senses of the monk then 
fled, and he dropped motioidess beside 
the cold corpse. On recovering, he be- 
held, with horror, a placard written ift 



oOO ALEXENA. 

red characters^ fastened to the bloody 
bosom, comniandiiis: him to take the 
body, and cast it over the ramparts into 
the sea, or bury it in the courts ; also, 
threatening to punish him with death, if 
he persisted in carrying it to the ceme- 
tery; but this threat was needless, as 
Montano turned from the remains al- 
most frantic. To be obliored to touch it 
again would have been a most dreadful 
punishment; for his superstitious fears 
were awakened by the novelty of his 
situation, having imagined that the 
body grew tremendously heavy the last 
moments he had borue it. On reflec- 
tion, he found the frightful placard had 
not forbade him to leave Hugo where 
he then was ; he therefore determined 
to drag him into an adjoining pew, 
and leave the rest to fate. 



END OF THE SECOND VOLUME. 
ALEXENA; 

OB, TUB 

Castle of Santa Marco. 

A ROMANCE, 
IN THREE VOLUMES. 



Vcl.III.Pa<ye35. 




BAOCjtS Sf- 



ALEXEN A ; 

0»5 THE 

Castle of Santa Marco, 

A romance; . 

IN THREE VOLUMES, 



EMBELLISHED WITH ENGRAVINGS. 



*i Ye gods of quiet and of sleep profound! 
Whose soft dominion o'er this castle sways ; 
And all the widely silent places round. 
Forgive me, if my trembling pen displays 
What never yet was sung in mortal lays.'* 



VOL. III. 



LonDon: 

Printed at the Minerva Press, for 
A. K. NEWMAN AND CO. LEADENHALL-ST. 

1817. 



V. 3 



ALEXENA; 



OR THE 



Castle of Santa Marco. 



CHAPTER I. 

*• O ! bid me lesip ■ ■ 

From off the battlements of ycnder tower; 

Or chain me to some steepy mountain's top. 

Where roaring hears and savage lions roam ; 

Or shut me nightly in a carnal-house, 

O'er-covered quite with dead men's rattl'ing bones> 

With reeky shanks, and yellow chapless sculls ; 

Or bid me go into a new-made grave, 

And hide me with a dead man in his shroud ; 

Things, that to hear them told, have made me tremble ; 

And I will do it, without fear or doubt. 

To live an unstained wife to my sweet love." 

RoM. & Jdl» 

>T HILE Montane and his unfortu- 
nate servant were pursuing- Louisa 
through the deserted chambers of the 
caslle, Alexena lay senseless in the 

VOL. III. A 



JS ALEXENA ; OR TH-E 

armoury, until Carracci sent Clarissa 
to her assistance, vvlio found her so 
ill, that she was obliged to call on the 
chieftain, and beg he would bear her 
to her apartment. He was then endea- 
vouring to sooth Louisa, who had 
been safely conveyed by him into a 
subterranean chamber, and was almost 
inconsolable, in consequence of being 
separated from our heroine ; but, on 
hearing her melancholy situation, she 
resolved to brave every peril, and see 
her once again before their final sepa- 
ration, though Belzo positively swore 
lie never would allow her to return ; 
therefore, it was not without many 
tears, and the earnest entreaties of 
Clarissa, that he suffered her to accom- 
pany him ; but having, at length, as- 
sented, he first despatched Monfrane to 
watch the monk, and prevent him from 
burying Hugo in the cemetery. 

When Alexena re2:ained her men- 
tal powers, she found herself in the 
arms of the robber, who bore her 
swiftly along-, through many secret 






CJISTLE O^ SANTA MARCO. 3 

patliways ; but >vhGre tliey led, she 
was unable to demand, yet felt little 
uneasiness, \vhen she saw her friends 
on each side of her. Carracci was 
pleased by the silence she observed, 
as it seemed to say she confidently re- 
lied on his honour; and when extreme 
weakness compelled her to rest her 
head on his bosom, it thrilled with 
delight. Mortimer was envied for an 
instant; yet Carracci became more 
seriously interested for his welfare 
than ever ; and as to Alexena — woe 
betide those who dare breathe her 
name with disrespect ! as the grave 
alone could hide them from his ven- 
geance. His every thought was so 
devoted to her service, (hat his eyes 
beamed with such excessive brightness, 
that their lightnings served for torches 
to guide him on his way ; and had he 
been attacked while she rested on his 
shoulder, they would have blighted the 
forms of his enemies — scorched them 
to the very bones — withered their 

A 3 



iA * . ALEXIN a; or the 

strenacth^ and overvvlielmed them witiji 
confusion. You might 

*' — — Ken the manner of his gait ; 
He rises on his toe : that spirit of his 
In aspiration lifts him from the earth," 

^s he moves forward with his lovely 
burthen, who, in a few moments, he 
placed in a chair in her own apartment, 
>vhere every thing remained in the 
same situation in which she had left it. 
Clarissa was now obliged to say that 
Louisa could not remain wilh her any 
longer, as her life liad been proscribed, 
and would certainly fall a sacrifice 
to the unrelenting barbarity of either 
Acasto or the monk, if she was not 
immediately removed to a place of 
safety. This was sad tidifsgs ; but 
Alexena loved her friend too sincerely 
to entertain one selfisli wish ; on the 
contrary, being assured of the necessity 
of the measure, she insisted on its in- 
sriant execution, though the separation 
should prove a death-blow to her peace. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARGO. O 

Gurracci admired the fortitude, the 
patience, with which she supported this 
painful trial, and blessed her, as he 
retired into an adjoining' chamber, 
where he waited until such time us 
Clarissa and Louisa had assisted her 
to undress, and when they again joined 
him, he was deliirhted to find she had 
been soothed by their promises of 
meeting- her, at least, once every other 
day, and oftener, if possible. 

^Vhile they pursued the frightful 
])ath which led to the cavern, whose 
horrors Louisa had yet to encounter, 
she asked numberless questions re- 
spectinf^ Lord Mortimer, who, she was 
dreadfully shocked to hear, had been 
dangerously ill for the last fortnight, 
and was only then slowly recovering. 
Agitation, and the unwholesome air of 
the subterraneans, had undermined his 
health, and almost reduced liim to the 
last extrernity ; but, father Zelo's skill, 
aided by a naturally good constitution, 
with the uiiremitting attention of his 
friends and domestics, subdued th<5- 



t) alexena; an the 

disease, and promised to restore healili 
and happiness; as Belzo had been in 
Rome, \vhere his mission was crowned 
with success, and promised joy and 
felicity to all those, about whose wel- 
fare our readers may in any wise be 
interested. 

Let us now return to Montano, who 
Yve left tortured by all the pangs which 
rend a guilty soul. On regaining his 
chamber, he cursed his misfortune, until 
early dawn, and then rose for the purpose 
of seeking Don Philip, who he was sur- 
prised to find already dressed. Much 
astonished, he entreated to know 
the meaning of such an unusual cir- 
cumstance, and was almost petrified, 
on beii5g ififornied, that a courier from 
Italy, had brought in the course of 
the night, a letter ffom one of Don 
Philip's trusty agents, which stated, that 
an accurate and true account of all 
their recent tratisactions were laid 
before tl>e Inquisition, by the ponlifT 
himself, with strict injunctions to the 
holy tribunal, to bring the perpetra- 



GA5TLE or SANTA MARCO. f 

iots to immediate punishment; ** and 
you see/' continued Acasto^ '' that you 
are the first on the list ; and not a 
single soldier or domestic have escaped 
the proscription." 

*' Since we are so unfortunate/' said 
Montano, *' it is better that all are 
included, as it will convince them, 
nothing but a desperate resistance can 
ensure their safety." 

*' 1 am iiiclined to think/' observed 
Don Philip, " that there is at least one 
traitor in the castle ; yet, who in my 
lioushold can it be: all are named, 
except Margaret, and she has not ihfi 
power to do mischief, even if she had 
the inclination." 

*' Let me see the list/' anxiously de- 
manded the monk, " as you may have 
overlooked it rather negligently." 

Acasto placed it in his hands, and he 
kaving read it wiih great attention, 
after a thoughtful pause, said, " there 
are three namqs not written here, but 
to one only can suspicion attach." 

" Name the three/' demanded Do:. 



8 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

Philip, " that I may exterminate 
them" 

*' Fernandez, Ijarco, and Vv'illiams, 
the? English seaman." 

*' On the fidelity of the two first I 
Mill stake my existence, but as to the 
other, the succeeding hour shall be his 
last ; and the two former must he im- 
prisoned, until I hear from Home." 

" Father Ambrose can easily satisfy 
you/' replied the monk ; '^ 1 know him 
well ; he is in the confidence of the 
chief inquisitors, besides being a mem- 
ber ; therefore, you are most fortunate 
in having such a friend." 

'^'That is not what interests me at 
present," he pettishly muttered, "go 
instantly, tell Fernandez to seize 
Williams, and order all the soldiers and 
domestics to attend in the great hall at 
noon, as I then mean to read this letter, 
and shew them ihe "reainess of their 
danger." 

" I do not approve of those precipi- 
tate measures," said Montano, ''and if 
I may oiTer my advice, you will not 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 9 

persist in such an intention, as the 
consequence will be obviously this ; — 
the fears of the inquisitorial tortures may 
induce many to endeavour to escape, 
and should this happen, the consterna- 
tion w'lW become general, and it is 
likely, will end in mutiny, if not in 
n>urder.'' 

While they yet remained undeter- 
mined how to act, a second courier 
arrived, whose information almost drove 
Don Philio distracted. The kiu2: had 
discovered the falsehood of his accusa- 
tion aii-aiiist Don Mi^fuel, and iu consc- 
quence thereof, set an enormous price 
on his head ; he had also been publicly 
impeached by Henri Count Bolerno, 
as a murderer and outlaw, and with 
having- imprisoned Alexenade Guzman, 
for the iniquitous purpose of compel- 
ling her to receive his hand ; in v.hich 
numerous offences, he was aided and 
assisted by one Montano, a monk of the 
Dominican order, who had recently 
been tried in effigy, found guilty, and 
fcurnt, tor sacrileiiiouslv robbinir thi^ 

A 5 



10 ALEXENA; OR THK 

monasteiy of his order ; and further, 
that the said monk did commit murder, 
in the presence of the said Henri, in 
tlie court-yard of the Castle of Santa 
Marco, and the soldiery of Don Philip 
in the passes of the Pyrenees. 

'•' What say you to all this?" said 
Acasto, when he had finished, " Did I 
not read it distinctly?'* 

'' Oh ! plain enough ; but the quere 
is, how shall we escape the joint venge- 
ance of the king and inquisition ?" 

*' There is no safety in the neigh- 
"bouring kingdoms, not even in Eng- 
land, nor in France, as the power of his 
liolinessis acknowledged everywhere." 

*' Then," exclaimed iMontano, "here 
\Te shall stand the hazard of the die, 
and perish rather than yield ; but, it 
were well this Alexena was your v.ifr^ 
as if slic could once be induced to 
acknowledge you as her husband, the 
Guzman family would save you on 
their own account, and,, probably, by 
their unbounded influence, hush this 
business altogether." 



iTASTLE or SANTA MARCO. 11 

'* Confounded ass that I am! I would 
jiever Iiave(houi>'lit of that. — Yes, yes* 
Alexena^, thou shalt be niine^ and save 
the life and fortune of Acasto." 

'' I hope Louisa is safe/' said Mon- 
tano, interrupting him, *' as she will be 
demanded at our hands ; therefore, if 
Hu2:o missed her, all is well." 

'* Let instant search be made, and if 
found, she shall not behold heaven's 
light, until you bestow the nuptial 
blessin.<r on Alexena and mvself." 

The monk now heartily despised 
Acasto for his versatilitv.asone moment 
he was sad, and ready to expire in 
despair; the next almost frantic with 
joy, about that which it was possible 
might never happen ; and while he 
gave orders to Torqiio, to have (he 
castle carefully examined, the former 
was devising the most likely means to 
induce our heroine to submit to this 
detested marriage. The result of his 
deliberations were, that Vjm Philip 
should use force, unless she consented 
^'ith^igosd grace ; and rnsfanlly af(er 



Jg alexena; on the 

advised liim to that effect. lie 
readily assented to tlie necessity of the 
measure^ and desired the monk to try 
every means, except tliose by whicls 
her life mioht be endanijrercd : and that 
lie would be guided by his advice. 

" Then 1 promise you success ; the 
proud girl shall willingly be your's, 
Aviihout suffering any tortures,, except 
a few mental ones, which we could not 
effect our purpose without resorting 
to. I shall bring her before you, and 
unless she is all you can wish, deliver 
her over to my government, and leave 
the rest to me." 

Thus Montano flattered him with 
sanguine hopes of speedy success, and 
instantly afJer went in pursuit of Alex- 
ena, with whom he returned, accom- 
panied by Torquo, who attended to 
say, that every habitable part of the 
castle had been investigated, but Louisa 
could not be found, and m.ust, therefore, 
liave sought shelter in those chambers 
which had been disused for several 
years past. 



•m- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAUCO. J.I 

'' It is not now material/' said Don 
Philip; '' lo-morrow, or in a few days 
liencej we will seek her there." 

" She may starve in the mean^time^ 
or expire in terror," observed the monk. 

" 1 do not wish to be troubled about 
her at present, as I have many other 
things to think of, which are of greater 
importance ; therefore^ be so good as 
to drop the subject." 

" May I request to know what are 
Don Acaslo's commands?" timidly de- 
manded our heroine, who had been 
listening to this dialogue. 

*' IMay you? — Oh, Ladj Alexena, 
forgive this excessive rudeness; and 
believe me, I shall feel most unhappy^ 
if I have, even unintentionally, offended; 
but my mind has been sotortured about 
that young woman, who had the honour 
to wait on you this some time, and 
who has now either thought proper to 
withdraw from the castle, or secret her- 
self, that 1 was likely to expire with 
srief and terror." 

'' Oh ! yes ; very likely; but am I to 



It alexena; or the 

iinderfstandj I have been brouglit here 
merely to have this most unpleasant 
news communicated in the presence of 
\\\G wretch who has driven her to the 
dreadful allt^rnative of " 

"Of what?" demanded Acasto. 

'' You must finish tlie sentence^ as I 
cannot." 

" Well, whether am I to suppose 
she has escaped in the disguise of a 
soldier, or leaped from the battlements?* 

" Louisa could never entertain a 
thought of suicide ; therefore^ I think 
the former is most likely." 

" And Williams is gone off with her,.. 
to conduct her in safety to court." 

" I should be delighted was that 
really the case, and I sincerely trust 
you have prophesied the truth, (hough 
1 am aware what you have ah'cadysaid 
has been for the purpose of both fret- 
ting and insulting me." 

Torquo now entered, and Acasto 
ordered him to bring up Williams, that 
lie might convince Donna Alexena, her 
feu.spicicns were groundless respecting 



CASTLE OF SANTA T.IAIIGO. I3V 

Signiora Louisa's escape ; but \Tas 
tlniuderstruck on lioarin^^ ho could not 
lie found, and that both Larco and 
Fernandez were also missing. 

'' Fly !" excUiimed Acasto, who wa& 
now outra^-eous; " fly ! and order every 
court arid tower to be searched^ and 
shouhl Ihe fni^iiives be found, conduct 
<hom to the keep instantly. Now,. 
Donna Alexena, hear me: letters from 
Rome and Madrid^ which I received 
last niarht, state, that Louisa's brothcv 
was in this castle some time ago, and 
after his liberation, went instantly to his 
majesty, before whom he laid a state- 
ment, in which he accused me of many 
enormous crimes, which never were 
eommilted ; but the consequence is, my 
life is endangered, and there is no pos- 
sible means by which I can escape, ex- 
cept by marrying, or sacrificing you ^ 
now, as my personal safety renders one 
orthe otlicrabsolutelynecessary, I think 
it best to be thus exi)licit, and here are 
the letters, which must remove every 
doubt oi^ the truth of what I have 



IS alexena; or the 

stated. From this, you can form an ^ 
idea of the perils by which I am en- 
compassed, and the utter impossibility 
that exists, of your having- any thin«j 
to expect from my clemency, unless you 
consent to be mine; should you bless 
me with your hand, my future life shall 
be devoted to your happiness ; if not — 
oh! drive me not to the cruel alter- 
native ; your form, beautiful as it is, 
must fall beneath the stiletto of an 
assassin. The existence of every in- 
dividual beneath these walls, call on - 
me to decide instantly; therefore, in 
two hours, prepare either to receive my 

hand, or the monk will inform you 

of the rest." 

Don Philip then hurried from the 
chamber, in order to seek his trea- 
cherous domestics, and to assemble his 
soldiers, on whose fidelity to himself, 
and incorrigible wickedni3ss towards the 
rest of mankind, he determined to rely, 
and in his opinion of them he was not 
mistaken, for when he informed them of 
llieir dang-cr, and his determination to 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAF.CO. 17 

resist, he was received with loud accla- 
mations. Ill the mean time, our 
heroine sat in the chamber in which he 
had left her, praying- for fortitude to 
support her through the last sad scene, 
as she had ah-eady resolved to die 
ratiier than marry him ; and while in this 
state of mental torture, Montano fre- 
quently passed through the chamber, 
to observe, whether Don Pliilip had any- 
thing- to expect, and was surprised to 
find her quite calm and collected, 
though she refused to answer his ques- 
tions, or even drop a sentence, from 
which he miiiht form an idea of her 
resolution ; but the two hours having 
expired, Acasto re-appeared, and on his 
entrance, begged to know her final 
determination. Our lieroine then rose, 
and with a firmness which surprised 
both him and the monk, said, "she was 
resigned to her cruel and undeserved 
fate, yet freely forgave him, and all her 
other enemies ; requesting, if she was 
to die, that she might not he insulted iu 
her last moments^ and relied, that the 



18 ALES.ENA ; OE TUE 

manner of it would be as speedy, aud 
^Tith as Utile pain, as possible. 

Acasto beheld her with adiniratlon, 
bordering on pity, but on finding his 
hopes blasted by her resignation, he 
burst into a violent fit of rage, and 
exclaimed, '' Infatuated woman ! from. 
Montano only can you expect clemen- 
cy ; my oath, my honour^ is pledged to 
my soldiers, who with me have openly 
bid defiance to the king and holy 
tribunal; but, lest we should be de- 
feated, I have pledged myseli^ to^ 
remove every living witness who can 
injure us. Believe me, my heart never 
f^ustaiiied so severe a trial as it has 
done within this last hour ; your 
obstinacy has novv^ removed every sha- 
dow of future comfort of your life. I 
cannot save you ; but tliis j-our last re- 
quest shall be attended to. — IMontano, 
let her die by tlie sword, dagger, 
poison, or suffocation ; which ever fancy 
may point out as the gentlest method 
of destruction ; humanity forbids me to 
say more ; — Alexena, fare^^cl ! a!id mn; 



CASTLE OF EAKTA MARCO. 19 

angels waft you on celestial wings to 
paradise." 

*' One word more, Don Philip ; stay, 
1 conjure you," faultered our heroine. 
*' Siiould Lord Mortimer ever become 
your prisoner, save and send bim to Ijis 
own country, and I will pray for you 
with my latest breath/' 

" May lightnin<^s — no, never — he 
dies by this hand, if ever in my power; 
but, repent — say you are mine, and let 
him live, for " 

'' Enough! Don Acasto. Father, lead 
on ; 1 am ready to brave your most 
cruel torments ; for as promises are 
but wind, I much fear you will not lose 
this opportunity of feasting your eyes 
on the aixonized form of the afhanced 
wife of that Mortimer, who defies vour 
malice, and will, as sure as justice 
reigns in heaven, punish you." 

" When ladies are feverish, bleeding, 
I understand, relieves them," replied the 
monk ; "" and a? you seem unwell, it is 
my intention to try the experiment." 

Acasto now rushed from the cham- 



20 ALEXEKA ; OR THE 

her, while the former stamped on the 
floor^ and was instantly attended by 
Torquo, and two savage ruffians, who 
he ordered to bind Alexena, and con- 
vey her to the western tower." 

*' There is no necessity for rudeness^ 
siiiniors. I will walk there, and submit 
without a murmur, or offering Iheslii^ht^ 
est resistance." The men now appear- 
ed unwHling- to obey ; while the monk 
liavins: observed their expressive looks, 
and conceiving' her beauty and inno- 
cence mi2:ht induce them to save her, 
ordered them to follow him, but to 
wait without, and be in readiness, should 
he require their assistance. Torquo 
had, by this time, bound the fair hands 
of his victim behind, and having 
thrown a veil over her, led the way to 
the fatal prison, which she had scarce 
entered, before Montano placed her en 
a bench, at the same time saying, " it 
was his intention, notwithstanding 
n\\ her ill treatment, to give her the 
choice mentioned by Don Philip." 
Onr heroine gazed wildly round ; there 



-(•ASTLE OF SANTA MATICO. 21 

;\vas 110 friend nigh ; and Acasto had 
really given orders for her execution. 
Death hovered over her ; there was no 
means of escape; no tears could move 
the obdurate Montano, who, on finding 
she would not make a choice^ bound 
one of her arms, which he uncovered ; 
yet, for a moment, i(s snowy v. hile- 
ness delayed his purpose ; it felt so 
soft, was so elegantly formed, so round, 
so beautiful — but it was Alexena's. — 
The monster frowned, and prepared a 
lancet, while he said, *' Lady, commend 
yourself to heaven, for you have only 
a few moments to live; as, being young-, 
your blood will flow quickly ; and, I 
suppose, it is unnecessary to say, I 
shall drain those veins of their last 
jdrop — Torquo, hold her." 

" I repeat it is unnecessary,"* she 
replied ; " I am resigned." 

Torquo retired behind the monk, 
who had taken Alexena's hand, and 
while he raised the instrument of death, 
observed — "The point of tisis is poi- 
soned ; a touch ensures destruction. 



fS alexeha; oa rii2 

Dne moment is yet allowed ; will you* 

marry Acasto ? or shall I ." She 

heard him not ; her eyes were rivetted 
to the form of Carracci, who stood in 
a breach formed in the wall, and was 
at that instant, by liis gestures^ medi- 
taUni»: the most direful veno'eance. He 
irnashed his teeth, shook his mailed 
arm, and when the monk raised his, 
with the intention of perpetrating- his 
horrible purpose, the former stamped 
his foot with such violence, that the 
chamber shook, and before either Mon- 
tano or his assistant could ascertain 
the cause, the floor fell from beneath 
their feet, and they were precipitated, 
with dreadful violence, into an apart- 
ment below, from which their groans 
ascended, giving a convincing proof 
that they had not fallen into a bed of 
down. The boards instantly resinned 
their former position, and then Carracci 
advanced into the room, and while he 
Unbound our heroine, said, " Fear 
nothing; I am always watchful of your 
safety; and, if it please God, a very 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. S3 

fe'.v days shall expire before I restore 
Vou to liberty and your friends, many 
of whom have already arrived, and arc 
in my cavern ; but as it is incumbent 
on me to be absent for a short time, I 
request you will not irritate Acasto by 
a steady refusal of his hand, and before 
it is possible for him to resort again to 
harsh measures, his power shall end 
for ever." 

" Oh ! why not save me now V' she 
exclaimed ; " why not restore me to 
the arms of my Louisa V' 

" Believe me, I would most v»illin<*'- 
ly ; but the attempt would be attended 
by destruction ; for if the castle was 
too minutely examined, all our private 
paths would be discovered ; and there 
are other reasons which I have not time 
to explain. So, may heaven bless you ! 
— Farewel !" 

He now disappeared ; and the soldiers 
who waited without having become 
impatient, knocked at the door, and 
were admitted by Alexena, who, on 
entering-, were surprised to find her 



24 alexena; or the 

alone; but became tenified/on obserr- 
ing (he chamber had but the one door, 
through which they had entered, and 
that Montano could not have passed 
through that without their knowledge. 

*' Lady/' said one of the men, in a 
stammering voice, '' may I ask what 
has became of the monk and Torquo V* 
A deep groan now rolled along the 
walls, which encreased their terror, 
while Alexena replied — *• Heaven, in 
its mercy to me, snatched them from 
this room, the floor of which has open- 
ed, and they have fallen, I know not 
whither." 

'' Into a lake of brimstone, I fear," 
observed Pedrillo; ''and tliat is the 
end Bill Williams has prophesied for 
both, an hundred times." 

" Where is that good creature?" in- 
quired our heroine. 

'' We do not know, lady: but it is 
suspected, he, Fernandez, and Larco, 
have 2:one off tosrether in the Brioan- 
tine, as she has been missed from her 
usual anchorage." 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. tj 

" Have they been pursued ?" 

"No; that was impossible, as Don 
Philip has but one other vessel, v^hich 
is many leagues from this, and it was 
in her that you were conveyed from 
13ayonne." 

*' 1 trust," continued Alcxena, " that 
his escape is unquestionable, as he is a 
kind, good-natured fellow." 

^ Tliat he is, lady, and brave as a 
lion ; but vvhat are your confimands ? 
shall we relate what we have heard to 
Don Acasto ? if we do, he will order 
this floor to be torn up in search of the 
fether." 

'" Oh, certairdy !" she replied, " and 
i am reprehensible for detaining you so 
long, when the wretched man may re- 
quire your assistance." 

" Reprehensible ! — oh ! the virgin 
will forgive you that offence; as it is 
not clear to us, but he has had orders 
to murder you." 

"■ And did you not know it?" she 
demanded. 

VOL. III. B 



fO ALEXENA ; Ott THE 

" Know it ! exclaimed Launcelot — 
" Saint Jago forbid ! I never was 
backward in cutting throats in a battle ; 
but am not altogether so great a scoun- 
drel as to turn assassin, and murder 
women. If that was Montano's errand 
liere, I hope he will never grope his 
way into the world again ; and for my 
own part, I shall not serve such masters 
an hour longer, if I can help it." 

" Nor I, neither," said Pedrillo; 
''^ and may a plague rot them all," 

They now left the apartment, and 
•went in search of Margaret, who they 
promised to send to our heroine as 
fcoon as possible. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAP.L'O. £7 



CHAP. II. 



If thou didst but consent 



To this most cruel act, do but despair ; 

And, if thou want'st a cord, the smallest thread 

That ever spider twisted from her womb 

Will serve to strangle thee; a rush will be 

A beam to hang thee on ; or, vvould'st thou drowQ 

thyself, 
Put but a little water in a spoon, 
And it shall be as the ocean. 
Enough to stifle such a villain up." 

King John. 



V? IIILE MonJano was tormenting 
our lieroinGj Acasto v\as busily em- 
ployed searching for Louisa, who he 
was most anxious to discover, as if he 
had her again in his power, he made 
no doubt but Alexena would consent, 
rather than allow her to be poisoned, 
which it was his intention to threaten 
to do, unless the former gave him her 
hand. He had, by this time, given over 
the idea of being able to seize Fernandez 
or his companions ; therefore, his search 
was entirely confined to the former, 
who he every moment expected to find 



B 2 



'28 alexena; or the 



in some desolate chamber; but lus 
labours ended in disappointment, and 
be V, as about to give up tbe fr'uitless 
attempt, wlren the moans of" some per- 
sons in distress excited his attention ; 
having ascertained from whence tlicy 
proceeded, he ordered the door of an 
adjacent cell, "which light had never 
visited, to be burst open, and tlien dis- 
covered JMontano and Torqno King on 
the lloor, almost sensele^^s from cold 
and loss of blood. Astonished beyond 
measure at this extraordinary circum- 
stance, he assisted them to the hall, 
from which they were removed to their 
chambers, extremely ill; and several 
hours elapsed before either could satis- 
fy his impatient curiosity. On hear- 
ing what had occurred, Alexena was, 
exami^ned as to her knovvleclge of the 
event; but avoided an explanation, by 
saying that a messenger of an All- 
seeing Providence had thus punis'hcd 
them for their wanton cruelty. 

The monk received instructions not 
to inflict any bodily torture oa the 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 29 ' 

person of our heroine ; bnt by every 
ingenious art, to work upon her fears, 
and although he, lieretofore, felt an 
unnatural pleasure in tormenting, it 
never was his inte^.tion to destroy her ; 
but Hugo's deatii, and the bruises 
which he liad received in his fall from 
her chamber^ wound his debased mind 
to a state ofsavage ferocity, beyond idea 
brutal, and he then impatiently looked 
forward to the hour when renovated 
strenirth svouid enable him to wreak 
Ids vengeance on her. In a week lie 
was able to walk on the ramparts, and 
in less than a fortnight had our heroine 
ones more under his tntorai^e, who, 
after suiferinij: innumerable insults from 
his barbarous treatment, was, at length, 
condemned to be chained in one of the 
■ most gloomy dungeons, and starved, 
liutil such time as her stubborn spirit 
feliould yield to Acasto's wishes ; and 
scarce had this horrible sentence been 
protiounced, ere the monk carried it 
into execution. It vvould be tedious 
to eniimerate all the argv.ments Don 



50 ALEXENA; OR THE 

Philip used to persuade her to aban- 
don her lover's hopeless cause ; but 
let it suffice, she was immovable, 
and Avas, in consequence, borne by 
^lontano into the most frightful of the 
subterranean prisons known to him, 
and as he passed through the windings 
of the vanity avenues which led to them, 
lie taunted Alexena with every expres- 
sion likely to add to her mental suffer- 
ings. " I bear you/' said he, '^ to a 
rocky couch, where a stone shall be 
your pillowy and chains your only 
covering ; there, in gloomy damp- 
ness, you may feast on reflection, and 
when your lips are parched with thirst, 
lick the mothy dew off the clammy 
walls; but it is possible, if you call loud 
enough, Mortimer will hasten to your 
assistance, and, assuming some seraphic 
shape, bear you through the regions 
of the air, to his native clime, where 
you will become a convert to that mon- 
strous doctrine which again spreads 
her demoniac wii)o:s round his devoted 
land ; for know — its guardian angel. 



6ASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 31 

Mary, the queen^ sleeps with hey 
fathers." 

The monk had now reached a fliirht 
of stone stairs, which terminated in a 
low, but spacious cavern, and in it, at 
regular distances, there were small, 
square doors, through which, cries and 
j^roans of anguish, accompanied by 
the clanking of chains, were distinctly 
heard. 

''Are not those sounds deiiijhtful:" 
demanded Montano. — " Do they not 
raise your drooping spirits? — Oh! they 
certainly must; and, to prove how 
sincerely 1 wish to make you comfort- 
able, you shall have an adjoining 
chamber. — Look here ! — what think 
you of this?" 

The inhuman villain now dragged 
her into a loathsome vaults in which 
there was a miserable flock bed, half 
rotted by damp, and nigh devoured by 
vermin, with a small table, whereon 
.some meat and bread was already 
placed ; a rocky bench served for a 
chair, and to it were fastened several 



32 ALCXENA ; OR THE 

massy iron chains. Moiitano raised his 
]amp, that she might, at one vicvy, see 
all its liorrors, then set it down^ and 
prepared to chain her to the wall. 
Her conrage now waA'ered ; twice she 
was about to demand liberty on his 
owh terms ; but the visions of fancy 
presented the trembling- shade of Lord 
Mortimer, which seemed to upbraid 
her with inconstancy, and not bein^ 
able to bear the torturing picture, she, 
with a sigh, presented her beauteous 
hands to the monk, who instantly loaded 
them with fetters ; while, with a demo- 
niac grin, he observed, they were 
charmiiiij weddinir bracelets. '' You 
yet want the zone of brilliants," he 
continued ; " but here they are ;" then 
encircled her waist with a strong, though 
light chain. " By my beads, you look 
killingly lovely, and a bold adventurous 
knight seeing you thus, could not do 
less than raise the castle from its foun- 
dations, for sheltering such an instru- 
ment of cruelty as myself; but that 
you may have some food for the mind 



CASTLE OP SANTA MARCO. 3S 

in this solitude, observe me :" — He now 
drew forth from his bosom, a small box 
of powder, wliich he shook over the 
viands on the table, and rubbed it on 
them with his hands. — " This powder 
is a deadly drug, endowed with the 
sin^^ular property of giving lengthened 
and exquisite tortures to tliose Mho 
maybe obliged to taste it. Its smell' 
is pleasant, and invites the appetite; but ' 
beware — you know its baleful influence, 
and if yon eat of those provisions, you 
can only blame yourself for the conse- 
quences.'' 

*' Wretched man, heaven forgive 
you !" said Alexena, as the monk with- 
drew;'' but he having heard her, turned 
on his heel, and in a pathetic voice 
murmured : 

" Lovely mourner, dearest damsel of 
this cave, farewel !" The massive door 
now clashed alter him, and shut oi!i* 
poor heroine within i!s doleful prison, 
deprived of light — of food — of every 
comfort ; chained in darkness — toads 



24: ALEXENA ; OR THE 



her companions, and the groans of 
fellow-sufferers, her only means of 
judging- she was in the vicinily of human 
creatures. Where then vvasCarracci, 
or Mortimer, or Williams, or Louisa, or 
any of her friends? were they all igno- 
rant of her melancholy fate? Alas! 
the succeeding hours too clearly prove 
Ili3y were. When nature at length de- 
manded nourishment, she found the 
terrors of her situation encrease ; there 
was nothing to appease its clamorous 
cravings, but the poisoned viands, or 
the black and venemous reptiles, whose 
s;laring eyes were the only lights which 
bhone on the humid walls of her dun- 
geon ; every succeeding minute en- 
creased the pangs of hunger, and with 
frantic screams she vainly endeavoured 
to recal the obdurate monk ; echo 
mocked her with the repetition of her 
cries, but none came to her assistance ; 
she rattled her bonds, that their clank- 
ing might fright the horrors of solitude, 
and by repeated exertions of this 
description, she became so much 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO, 35 

fatig'ucd, that sleep promised to snatch 
her for a few hours from misery ; but, 
ao'ain unkind fate wreaked her wi(h 
frii^htful dreams, and the cold paws of 
a monstrous toad, whose eyes, to her ima- 
gination, blazed brighter tlian torches, 
awoke her out of one scene of despair, 
to plunge her into a still more frightful 
one. She shrunk from the noxious 
animal, and with the chain, pushed it 
from the door of its rude habitation, 
which lay behind the rock, that the 
moment before had supported her head. 
Hunger inflicted the most direful pangs, 
and reduced herto the dreadful alterna- 
tive of choosing poison, rather than 
suffer any longer, but on attempting to 
reach the (able, the chain was too short, 
and she could not touch it. At this 
moment of despair, Montano entered 
with an olio, whose savory smell was 
sufficient to invite a languid appetite; 
but, Alexena's was not of tliat descrip- 
tion; yet, she had scarce tasted it, ere 
a hollow voice, which seemed to issue 
&om the rocky ceiling of the dungeon, 



56 ALEXENA; OR THE 

commanded her not to feast on that 
Avhicli was thickened with the blood of 
]jer murdered friend, Louisa. The 
monk started. Oiir heroine turned 
deadly pale, and the accursed dish 
would have fdllen from her hands, had 
it not been timely prevented ; while she, 
sickening at the idea of having tasted 
two or three morsels, turned away ia 
horror and disgust, which completed 
the wishes of her vile tormentor. Thus, 
her want of refiection as^ain caused her 
innumerable sufferings ; for had she 
not seen her cousin safe under Car- 
racci's protection, there might be just 
grounds for attending to the late mys- 
terious caution ; but the agitation of 
her mind concealed its Harins: false- 
hood, and the mere mention of such a 
circumstance deprived her of every 
wish to eat, which her brutal gaoler 
no sooner observed, than he stamped 
his foot, and Torquo entered with a 
long iron instrument, formed like a 
ha:;d-vicc^ in which he threatened to 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 27 

squeeze her jaws to pieces, if she did 
not instantly swallow the food he had 
provided. 

" It is not made of blood/' he gruffly 
muttered, " nor any thing' filthy ; there- 
fore, partake of it quickly.' She re- 
fused, and Acasto's steward advanced 
with the terrible machine. 

" Oh ! 1 will do as you require/' ex- 
claimed our heroine." 

" Well, despatch ; for I have yet 
much business to attend to." 

She took the food ; looked at it; but ; 
revolting nature forbade her to taste, 
and the tears which fell from her pale 
cheeks evinced her encreasins: disgust. 
, Montano, having now become impa- 
tient, grasped and shook her, while she 
dropped on her knees, and with uplifted 
hands, besought him not to force her 
inclination. 

" Give me the iron," he vociferated, 
" and I'll try to coax her appetite." 

'' Oh, heaven ! — let me go ; — I will 
eat." 

Again it was placed before her; and. 



SS ALEXENA : OR 1I1E 

With deep sighs^ whicli the cold perspi' 
ration that trembled on her brovY 
proved the pahi of, she forced down a 
few mouthfuls, then faultered — *' I can 
eat no more ; you may kill me, if 
you will." 

" Finish it every morsel, or I will 
inflict horrible tortures.^ — Here, Tor- 
quo, put out her eyes." 

The old villain drew forth a clasp- 
knife, and prepared to execute the 
savage order, and again Alexena 
shrieked — " I will! — I will!" and was 
about to comply with the monk's cruel 
mandate, when the food was dashed 
from her hand by a reeking scull, which 
fell at Torquo's (eet. Montano saw, 
and turned to leave the prison ; but 
had not power to move, until he was- 
stunned by a blow on the head, from 
another that was more frightful than 
the first, and with difficulty escaped a 
third, which wrung against the door the 
moment it had closed after him. In 
his fright he forgot one of the lamps, 
and il served to shew our distressed and 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 2£ 

terrified heroine a most fnglitfui crea- 
ture, similar to that which had saved 
Louisa from Acasto's da*>-g-er. In one 
hand it l)randished a wrencliing'-iron, 
while in the other it held a human head, 
and, on observing Alexena, lauglicd 
horribly, then, with a blow, broke the 
chain which bound her to the rock, and 
scampered back into the gloomy recess. 
She beheld this strange creature with 
infinite terror, yet had not power to 
speak, though she felt confident the 
form was real; but, being now at liber- 
ty to examine her dungeon, she lifted 
the lamp, and in a very few minutes 
after began to explore it, having first 
gathered up the chain that remained 
about her waist, and rolled her liand- 
kerchief round those (hat confined 
lier wrists, to prevent their clanking. 
Thus prepared, she wandered into the 
savage windings of the cavern, and 
having, in a short time, reached a vast 
number of rocks, which were so close 
together that there was scarce room to 
pass, she paused ; but proceeded en 



40 ALEXENA; OR THE 

rinding they constituted a part of ihe 
cave, and seemed to support it in many 
places, while tlieir projections formed 
doorways and uncooth arcades of a 
most gloomy and terrifying descrip- 
tion; yet she fearlessly proceeded, and 
after passing innumerable turnings, saw 
the faint rellection of a distant light, 
Hopes of escape lent her speed and 
strength to encounter many rude masses 
of rock over which she ventured ; and, 
at length, having peeped from behind 
the projection of one, discovered a large 
vase of oil burning on the ground, and 
a crescent hanging from the vaulty ceil- 
ing, which distinctly served to show 
the horrors of the place. A savage 
creature sat on a coffin quite close to 
the lamp, with a scull between its legs, 
on which it beat time to a melancholy, 
mournful tune ; presently it stopped, 
and took up this extraordinary musi- 
cal instrument, which it smelt, then 
grinned, laughed, and tossed it back 
and forward ; sometimes bursting into 
violent (its of rage, dashing the bones 



tJASTLE OF SAx\TA MARCO. 41 

about, aud yelling' most hideously. 
The form of this unfortunate creature 
\vas encompassed with part of a heavy 
chain, which it ratltled, and shook with 
vain efforts to disengage the festering 
iron from its almost naked body; and 
while our heroine yet observed this sad 
scene, a female approaclicd almost as 
miserable as the maniac ; but who, as 
her voice was familiar, she beheld with 
greater terror ; yet could not recal 
to her imagination any one to whose 
it bore a resemblance. The perecra- 
nium plciT/er received her v^^ith mucli 
civility, and pulled the coffin into the 
middle of the dungeon, on which she 
sat down, and then asked him how he 
felt, and if Torquo supplied him with 
a sufficient quantity of food. To this 
he seemed inattentive, and without 
noticing lier question, offi3red to relate 
the story of his late journey into the 
world. 

*' Pray let me hear it?" 

" Willingly ; listen then, and pay 
particular attention." — 



42 ALEXENA t OR THE 

** Little Hoiribraclio, with the red 
sliauks, catne out of tlie clouds last 
nii^ht, and broke this chain, and told me 
I ini<>ht o'o forth, for these walls were 
rotten; then breatlsed on my face, and 
uixiii, that would preserve me from in- 
fection." 

" Did you go?" demanded his com- 
panion; while she evidently belield him 
with pity. 

" Yes, certainly, and saw the most 
strauirc things that imagination can 
form ; the world vvas rotten, and every 
person in it; ali animals were alike, and 
desolation prevailed universally; the 
air was unsuiTerably bad ; rivers stood 
still, and emitted a deadly stench ; those 
that walked in the streets were only 
half human, their flesh ^^as rotten on 
their bones, and had tliere been a breath 
of wind, it v.'ould have blown it 
away. Curiosity led me into a 
chnrcli, where two lovers were about 
to be married, and as soon as the cere- 
mony was performed, the husband 
kissed his wife, but what wasithe conse- 



GASTLE OF SANTA MARCO . 45 

qiience, the flesh fell from the cheeks 
of both, and they screamed, and detest- 
ed each other. Neighbours met and 
shook liands, and this motion of friend- 
ly greeting, stript the decayed covering 
from those members; they then depart- 
ed, cursing the hour of their birth, 
until they spit their tongues from their 
putrid mouths. At lengthy the sky 
partook of the general plague, and fell 
in heavy masses; yet, when it struck 
the house tops, it caused no noise, and 
crushed the inhabitants, v\ithout their 
seeming to feel the pains of death. 
One man got dust in his eyes, and iu 
the attempt to relieve himself from the 
agony which it inflicted, rubbed these 
most useful members from their sockets^ 
accompanied by a large portion of the 
face, then sat down and howled, until 
another out of compassion knocked 
him on the head ; but the exertion 
which the latter used, rent his shoulder 
from his body, making a hideous gash, 
into which filthy insects crept, and fed 



Ai alexexa; or the 

on his vitals, until he died vomiting 
imprecations. Next came too young 
men,, who had apparently escaj)ed the 
contas^ion, riinnins; towards each other, 
but when quite close, I found they had 
no eyes, and in their darkness, they 
struck together, instantly a yell announc- 
ed the pair.fnl shock, down came their 
ratdinsr bones, and they expired flesh- 
less skeletons! I now v.andercd on 
into tlie great square of Madrid, where 
the holy tribunal held an auie da fe, 
but the fires were rotten, and the criiiii- 
iials walked unliurt ihroui>'ii the harmless 
llames; at this moment, a wind arose, 
that carried with it millions of putrid 
smells, adding misery to misery, and con- 
tagion to contagion ; the storm dashed 
one man against the other, and house 
tumbled against house ; all fell together, 
and with screams and curses, became 
nothing ; one was left, he stood nigh 
me, and I asked the meaning of such 
universal destruction ; but on opening 
lijs mouth to answer, I saw the inside 



CAStLE OT SANTA MARCO. 45 

was rolten, and his voice being lost in 
putridity, I heard hiin not. The w'md 
now ceased, and I then proceeded to 
Valladoiid ; but there the cahn was 
worse than the storm : Steeples fell 
piece-meal on the heads of the wretches 
r.ndcrneath, without having given the 
' slightest indication of such fatality. 
Long, rank weeds sprung up in the 
streets, and smothered the inhabitant5^ 
who vainly endeavoured to struggle 
throuoh them. The land was covered 

o 

with rotten toads and filthy animals ; 
the fountains were either dried up, 
or thickened by corrupted carcases 
that had fallen into their waters, in 
vain endeavours to quench their burn- 
ing thirst ; and it was there I met Philip, 
Montano, Torquo, and Hugo, and 
found those, my old tormentors, a 
thousand tim.es more abominably rotten 
than the rest of mankind. Rheum 
streamed from their eyes, which soon 
became sightless ; pains of every de- 
scription accompanied their unsound- 
ness. The cold sciatica cramped their 



46 alexena; on the 

limbs; leprosy, stitches, blains, rheu- 
matiani, tooth-ache, fever, ulcers, can- 
cer, and all damned pains, tortured 
their loathsome forms, while they 
laughed, with sickening derision, at 
each other's torments, praying that 
some more subtle and devouring plague 
might light on their heads, off which 
both akin and hair had fallen, while 
vermin crept forth at their ears, mouth, 
and at those orifices where eyes had 
been I turned from them in disgust, 
and forgot my late revengeful thoughts ; 
nay, I did pity them. Rage, at length, 
at each other's abuse, aided by tor- 
tures, roused their fury to a pitch 
exceeding madness, as they groped 
for each other's shapeless forms; and 
you would have felt surprised to see 
how hatred lent them them sight to 
destroy each other. In a few moments 
they grasped and buried their fingers in 
each other's eyeless sockets, and with 
reiterated shrieks, dashed their skele- 
ton forms on the ground, slipping on 
the filth that had fallen from them, and 



CASJTXE OF SANTA MAnCO. 47 

after united struggles^ sunk into eter- 
nal misery; while I, affrighted at what 
I had ah-eady seen, returned thither, 
to piay with dead mens' bones, until ' 
doomsday." 

While the maniac related this horrid 
and disgusting tale, his female friend 
did not interrupt him ; but when he 
had concluded, she exclaimed, in the 
bitterest accents of woe — 

" Alas ! unfortunate Velasco ! to what 
a pitiable state of derangement have 
you been driven, by that monster, 
Acasto ; and I, luckless wretch ! con- 
demned to pass the remainder of 
my days, the only witness of your 
w rongs, without having the power to 
ameliorate them ; and you, most un- 
fortunate Alexena ! the mistress of 
the mansion, in whose dungeons youl' 
frantic brother, and miserable aunt, are 
confined, without exciting your pity, 
or even ruffling one of those tranquil 
smiles, ever attendant on worthlesis 
prosperity, I forgive you ; and, oh ! 
may heaven grant you timely rcpen- 



18 alexena; on the 

tance, and that I, though amongst 
women the most unfortunate, may yet 
see and bless you, before I die." 

" <jrracious Providence support me !" 
exclaimed our heroine, as she rushed 
from the place of her concealment — 
" it is my aunt !" and the next moment 
sunk senseless at her feet. The rattlingof 
her chains, as she approached, attracted 
the attention of Mrs. Hastings, who 
instantly recognized her, and with in- 
expressible joy, raised her senseless 
form to her throbbing bosom. Velasco 
beheld this scene in stupid amazement ; 
but as he was blessed with lucid inter- 
vals, he, in a short time, recognised 
his sister, and the consequence w as, joy 
had the most salutary effects ; it restored 
his wandering reason ; and when he 
found she was still the same pure and 
spotless angel he had always believed 
her, his feelings became so much com- 
posed, that he conversed rationally, 
and on his knees, entreated her forgive- 
ness, for the innumerable evils, tor- 
tures, and hardships, to which he had 



Cattle of santa marco. 455 

exposed her. She embraced, and v,ith 
tears, bcsouoht him to believe she had 
never thought on his past follies, ^vl{h- 
ont praying for his restoration to virtue; 
and as to her forii'iveness, he had tluit 
Ions: since — Louisa havinj^ convinced 
her he was worthy of it. 

" Then ! then !" said he, '' you have 
seen Louisa. — Oh ! my sister, say she 
yet lives, and you complete my happi- 
ness/' 

*' My dear brother, she does ; and is 
beyond the reach of the vile Philip, 
safe under the protection of Lord Mor- 
timer and Carracci.'* 

" Carracci ! — in heaven's name, who 
is he ? and what is the meaning; of 
your words ?" 

'' Be composed, Velasco, and listen to 
the wondrous tale I have to tell, and 
then with me return thanks to Almighty- 
Providence, for saving you from crime^ 
and me from destruction." Alexeua 
then related, wi(h precision and accura- 
cy, every event Mhich had occurred,, 

VOL. III. C 



so ALEXEKA ; OR THE 

from the night lie left her in the 
Dominican convent to the present 
minute ; and when she had concluded^ 
the unfortunate Velasco was greatly 
affected by her little natrative, la- 
inenling the barbarity with which he 
had treated both her and Lord Morti- 
iTier, for whom he then felt the higliest 
veneration and respect. Mrs Hastings 
now observed, it was possible that 
Monlano might return, and succeed in 
tracing her, which would ensure their 
immediate destruction. This alarmed 
them considerably, and our heroine was 
about to hurry back to her cell, when 
the distant wall, with a hideous crash 
rent asunder, discovering to their 
astonishment, the martial form of 
Carracci, accompanied by his lordship, 
Louisa, and a number of the troop, 
amona: whom Alexena discerned Fer- 
nandez , who, to her incredible surprise, 
she found was Belzo's lieutenant, Man- 
frone, who with Rourke, Larco and 
Albert pressed forward, to congratulate 
her on the prospect of f?peedy liberal iow. 



G!AStLE OF SAxVTA UAKCO. &! 

while Carracci ordered Mrs. Hastinsrs 
and Velasco to be removed to his 
cjjveni, vvliere Theodore, Arabel, Don 
Carlos, and Virjjiiiia, with a riumber 
of otheii, impatiently awaited their 
arrival. They were very unwilling to 
party,vvith Alexena ; bnt the robber was 
absolute, and commanded his preda- 
tious gan-^ to hasten with all possible 
speed, as Montano and Don Philip 
were to wait on our heroine in her 
cell, in a very few minutes. " Be not 
alarmed/* said the chief, addressing 
her ; '' support your spirits, and before 
this time to-morrow night you shall be 
free and happy. If Acasto should 
threaten to inflict any new torment, in 
order to obtain your hand, consent to 
be his wife, and leave the rest to Pro- 
vidence, and your friends." She was 
then conducted back to her cell, but 
not without considerable difficulty, 
as its labyrinths had not been visited 
by him for many years before, and, 
when at length found, he scarce had 

c 2 



52 alexena; or the 

time toM'ithdraw, before the monk en- 
tered with a ijuard of soldiers, armed 
\\ith carbincSj and led liis prisoner iu 
silence from liei dungeon. After she 
had been obbged to traverse an im- 
mense extent of subterranean cavern, 
tlie monk paused l)efore a low^ grated 
door, through \Ahich a faint li^ht feebly 
glimmered, and called on Torquo to 
produce the key, which he seemed 
most unwilling- to do, ^^hile his palid 
looks too plainly told terror was the 
cause. On entering;, they advanced 
a few paces into this '' darkness 
visible," and then Alexena was asto- 
nished to find the light proceeded from 
behind a black curtain, which was 
drawn across the cell. Montano rushed 
forward, pulled it from its fastenings, 
and the moment it fell, our heroine, 
shrieking, endeavoured to hide be- 
hind the rude soldiery, to whom she 
clung, and whose faces were also 
l)lanched w i(h awe, as what they beheld 
"was sufficient to excite horror in the- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 5S 

most savage breast; no wonder then 
that it shouhl have had a most violent 
effect on hei" feelings. The ruffians gaze J 
at her in silent pity^ and waited, in trem- 
bling expectation, the elucidation of a 
spectacle whicli presented such a fright- 
ful group. At the extremity of tlse 
dungeon, a kind of throne was erected, 
on vvhich was fixed, the cokl and sense- 
less form of Cerasco ; his feet resting 
on a cofTni without a lid, in which was 
placed the remains of the nnforuuiate 
female whom Montauo iiad murdered, 
and in a shallow grave lay the bodies 
of her mutilated attendants, with sufS- 
cient room between them for a third 
person, '.vliile round ihcir rude tomb, in 
the frcHh-turned earth, a number of 
black wa>: Lapers blazed, emitting a blue 
flame, v.hieh reflected a sickly light on 
the faces of the lifeless victims of the 
moiik's barbarity, adding additional 
horrors : and at (he foot of the irrave 
next the soldiery, there was a small 
post, to which a chain was fastened, 
and to it INIontano dragged our wretched 



54 ALEXCXA ; OR TKE 

heroine, m despite of all her prayers, 
tears, and cries — tears that failed to 
excite pity in his flinty bosom. When 
he had secured her, he said, '' Behold 
those putrid carcases — between them 
you shall lie in less than a moment, as 
cold and senseless as either, if you do 
not ini^tantly swear to marry Acasto. — 
Aye! this nii^ht, the very minute you 
are released from those fetters, and on 
no other condition whatever shall you 
exist. See ! a corrosive preparation 
is already prepared to waste that form, 
of whose beauty you are so proud ; and 
if you do not si^n with your lips, a 
solemn oath on this blessed crucifix, it 
shall be mixed with the filthy clay that 
encompasses the bones of those bodies, 
in less time than I have taken to pro- 
nounce your doom.'' 

He now paused for her reply; but it 
came not ; her thoughts were eno^afs^ed 
in prayer, and not until the soldiers 
advanced and presented their carbines, 
did she seem sensible of her dani^er. 
Beina: determined to die rather than 



'1^ 



CASTLS OF SANTA MARCO. 55 

take the oath, though she liad been 
assured by Carracci he would rescue 
lier from those toes ihe next day. she 
quickly rose from her knees, and, 
with a voice of commandinir di^rnitv , 
ordered the soldiers to lower their arms ; 
then addressed Montano : — '' 1 have 
made a choice/* she said^ *' which may 
affright the pusilauimous ; but is it not 
better to rest with those mangled bodies, 
who, when living, were faithful to their 
unfortunate mistress, than wed with 
their murderer ? This choice is mine, 
though a few hours, or, at most, a day, 
would save me for ever from the brutal 
tyraimy of Acasto ; yet, as the con- 
trary seems to be the will of heaven, 
I humbly submit, and now, soldiers, 
you may release my soul, which, I 
trust, w ill fmd a place of refuge in an 
eternal kinodom ; bear witness that I 
die rather than submit to infamous 
degradation ; n\y forgiveness is with 
you all." 

The soldiers jjroaned with aufjuish • 
they pitied, yet had no alternative- 



5(5 ALEXENA; OR THE 

Mont ano ordered tliem lo present; but 
in that, dreadful moment of suspense, a 
voice seemed to issue from the corpse 
of Cerasco, commanding them to de- 
sist. One word was sufficient ; they 
fled in terror, and in their flight, over- 
threw the monk, who, while struggling 
to rise, was a second time crushed to 
the earth by the bloody figure of Hugo, 
which had fallen on him from the roof. 
On discerning the cause of this second 
disaster, he screamed wild and piercing- 
ly, and sunk, senseless, under the body 
of Ids late attendant. In an instant 
after, the same disgusting phantom 
which had terrified Don Philip in Alex- 
ena's chamber, rushed from behind the 
throne, and seized the monk bv his 
fleecy locks; then raised his stiletio 
to slab him to the heart, and would 
have done it, had not Carracci seized 
Ins arm. — '' Williams/* said he, " the 
awful moment has not yet arrived ; — 
disappear." Williams (for it was that 
seaman,) obeyed, and Belzo then lifted 
the monk from the ground, flung him 



CASTLE OF SAXTA MARCO. 57 

irtto the grave, and threw the body of 
Hugo OM the top of him ; then released 
our heroine, who he rapidly bore to the 
library, where he placed her on a sopha, 
aiid left with her a lamp which ha had 
brouofht from the dungeon. "You will,'' 
he said, ''be again threatened; but 
consent, rather than expose yourself 
to further trials^ which may prove fatal 
to your reason. By this means you will 
gain time, and lull Acasto's fears, while 
I shall complete those arrangements 
on which our every hope of happiness 
depends." Carracci now withdrew, 
and in a few minutes after^ Margaret 
entered, with every demonstration of 
the deepest sorrow pictured on her 
countenance; but on seeing our heroine 
she screamed, and was about to fly, 
when she was recalled by her, who, 
beseechingly, requested to know the 
nature of her fears. Margaret stood 
aghast; her eyes distended, and her 
hair on end ; while she faullered — " Oh ! 
holy virgin, protect me! — dearest ladv, 

€5 



58 ALEXEXA ;'0R TUB 

wltat can I do for your poor troiihlet! 
solrit ? — Oh! God foririve ihohe that 
have your death to ansuer for!'' 

" Say/' said Alexeua, impatiently 
interrupting her^ '' what foolery is this? 
or is it possible that you, too, have 
leap^ued against my peace?" 

The fearful old woman raised her 
Jamp, and approached a few paces, but 
spoke not; she could not believe the evi- 
dence of her senses, until the former rose 
from the sopha, and again demanded 
an explanation. Then, and then only, 
Margaret was convinced it was a reali- 
ty, and not a shadow she beheld, and 
instantly dropped on her knees, and, in 
an audible voice, thanked heaven for 
saving her '' poor, dear child," as she 
affectionately named our heroine. 

" Oh, Donna ! dear, dear Donna ! 
forgive me, and do not wonder at 
my mistaking you for a ghost, when 
Sebastian swore he saw you shotdead^ 
and tliat the devil flew av>ay with the 
wifcuk the same moment." 



CASTLE OF SAiVTA MARCO. 6^ 

'' Well, now that you are convinced 
that his statement is not the fact, will 
you have the goodness to assist me to 
my chamber, but first go, beg of Don 
Acasto, that 1 may not be again alarm- 
ed or disturbed the remainder of this 
night." Margaret was about to comply, 
when Don Philip entered ; lie had over- 
heard Aiexena's request and message, 
and in reply said, " the fault was cer- 
tainly her own, but as it was not yet too 
late to apply a remedy, he would vouch 
not only for her happiness, but safety, if 
she was not absolutely blind to her own 
interest." 

" If Don Acasto has any thins: to 
expect from me, it is not by insult and 
cruelty he will ever extort it ; therefore, 
I trust, I mav have time for reflection, 
without being remanded to a dungeon; 
for should 1 ever again be subjected to 
Montano's brutality, I solemnly vow, 
that no tortures shall force an avowal, 
much less my consent. I will say 
nothing further; but Don Philip is at 



C0 ALEXENA; OR THE 

liberty to draw whatever conclusion he 
may fancy troin this declaration." 

"Dearest an^el!" he rapturously 
replied, " I sincerely, g-ratefiilly, thank 
you, for tlie illimitable happiness you 
have conferred. I sha'iit enlarjre on 
this delightful topic, lest I should dis- 
tress you, but ere I retire, believe me, 
no further violence shall be offered your 
person or feelings ; on the contrary, 
every attention and " 

" I beg you may not misconceive 
me," she hastily observed ; " for " 

"Misconceive — no, no! — the thing 
is hnpo^^sible; but pardon me, business 
requires my immediate attendance; 
Margaret, see Lady Alexena wants for 
nothing:. Adieu ! — £:ood night." He 
now vanished through a distant door, 
kissing his hand, and disappeared so 
suddenly, that it was impossible our 
heroine could utter that which she 
would have given worlds to have said, 
unl became absolutely miserable, lest 
lie should have construed her late 
words into an avowal that she consent- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 61 

ed to be his wife : but her thouii'hts 
were interrupted by her old attendant, 
who observed, the night was far spent, 
and begg'ed leave to lii»ht her to her 
chamber. She apologized for her in- 
attention to this faithful creature, who 
had been silently gazing- on her lovely 
countenance, and mentally invoking 
the protection of heaven, for this, her 
darling child, who, in a few moments, 
slowly and thoughtfully pursued the 
way to her own apartment. 



i 



C}2 alexena; or thf 



CHAP. III. 



O, thou day o' th' world, 



Chain mine arm'd neck ; leap thou, attire and all, 
Through poof of harness to my heart, and there 
Hide oi) the pants triumphing.'' 

Ant. & Cleo. 

Jl'lONTANO, on regaining his men- 
tal powers, became Iransfixed wilh 
horror, on finding himself in Ihe grave 
vhich he had prepared for Alexena ; 
and, on risins; from nnder his lifeless 
servant, his terror was increased by 
reading a scroll, which was grasped by 
a lifeless hand, whereon was inscribed 
this short sentence — " Montano, we 
shall meet ao ain !" 

" Yes," he maddeninn^ said, " in tor- 
inents ! but since this is the decree of 
inevitable fate, I will do things which 
shall gain the applause of devils ; lin- 
gering hope, farewel ! and now, accursed 
memento, that blasts my sight before 
the allotted hoiir, thus 1 dispose of 
tkee." lie now tore the placard to 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAltCO. 65 

pieces, and then rushed from the 
diinj^eon. By this lime, the fears of 
Torquo had dispersed ; he, therefore, 
retinned to seek the monk, whom he 
met at the door of that carnal-house. 
Montano started back on behohlin^: 
this hoary-headed villain, who, at first, 
he conceived was the person who had 
placed the torturing placard in Hugo's 
hand; but, on reflection, abandoned the 
idea, and demanded whether Don Pliilii) 
had yet retired to his chanriber. On being- 
answered in the neirative, he hurried 
forward, and entered the library a very 
few minutes after Alexena had left it. 
Acasto had b^en in search of him, and 
at this moment chanced to pass throuj^h 
the adjoining' corridor, when the light 
of Torquo's lamp induced him to re- 
turn, to ascertain whether our heroine 
liad retired, and was surprised on ob- 
servins: the monk, whose hands he 
instantly caught, and shook violently, 
thanking him, in the most fulsome 
terms, for the great service he had 



61 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

rendered him. IVIontano was puzzled 
to guess his meaning, as it never 
occurred to him that Alexena would 
consent, and when he heard she had, 
he hesitated to believe it, until Acasto 
referred him to Margaret for a confir- 
mation of the joyful news. Astonished 
beyond measure, he accompanied him 
to his apartment, where they retired 
for the purpose of digesting their fu- 
ture plans, and to fix an hour for the 
celebration of the marriage, which they 
determined should be solemnized next 
evening, at farthest ; and while they 
were busily employed making those 
arrangements, Alexena sat in her lone- 
ly chamber, recalling the past events 
of her life, and with grief beheld a 
map which displayed nothing but 
shoals and quick-sands ; not one week 
of the last two years having passed 
without bringing some grievous mis- 
fortune or disappointment. She ac- 
counted herself a tenis-ball of fortune, 
and, as yet, there was no absolute 



CASTLE Of SANTA MARCO, 65 

certainty she would escape further 
persecution. Her dainask cheek pen- 
sively rested on her hand, vvliile 



Patience and sorrow strove 



Who iliould express her goodliest. You have seen 
Sunshine and rain at once : her smiles and tears 
Were like a better day; Those happy smiles, 
That play'd on her ripe lip, seem'd not to know 
Whit guests were in her eyes ; which parted thence, 
A« pearls from diamonds dropp'd. — In brief, sorrow 
Would be a rarity most beloved, if all 
Could so become it," 

And in tliis most interesting situation 
she was startled by a noise, which issued 
from the dusky recess of her apartment ; 
but her alarm was dissipated by the 
well-known voice of Carracci, who, the 
next moment, stood before her ; his 
countenance was more than usually 
expressive ; — an expression which in- 
spired terror, and tliere was a hol- 
lowness in his voice, almost more than 
mortal. 

" Lady Alexena," said he, " all is 
completed ; your persecution ends, 
and before this hour to-morrow, mv 



»(> ALEXENA ; OR THE ' 

enemies perish for ever. This nia^ht t 
might ste^p them in each other's blood; 
but my great revenge would then be 
incomplete. The cause of my intru- 
sion here is, to ask a request, and ob- 
tain a promise; the first is, that should 
I prove successful, you will accept of 
Lord Mortimer's hand, and allow me to 
bestow on him the most })recious gift; the 
otiier, that voii will apparently coi^iply 
with all Acasto's orders, as (he aj^art- 
m.ent which T wished he might appoint, 
is ahcady chosen by himself, where 
Montano vainly hopes he will perform 
the ceremonv. Your weddina;- £;;arments 
have been provided by me ; here is 
a key ; yon will find them in yonder 
cabinet; and I beg you will use them 
as the gift of a man, who pants for the" 
moment in which he v^iil be able to 
prove himself worthy of your respect. 
Acasto must see you in all your love- 
liness — must imagine joys that shall 
never be realized ; and when he is 
about to raise the cup of happiness to 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 67 

his lip, I hope to dash it from him for 
ever. — Yes, tlie treacherous, remorse- 
less, venomous, lying, ungrateful vil- 
lain, shall feel what it is to brave a 
Spaniard's veng-eance. — Oh ! forgive, 
Lady Alexena, this effusion of a vio- 
lent temper ; but if your tender bosom 
knew the pangs that he has rent mine 
with, you should not wonder that I do 
hate him." She, at this moment, raised 
her fine, expressive eyes to Carracci's 
coimtcnance, which was awfully terri- 
ble; his eye flashed indignant fires. A 
revengeful Spaniard, in all the gloomy 
horrors of his nature, stood confessed, 
and thouiili she felt tlie conviction, that 
he had been monstrously aggrieved, 
she could not excuse the expression of 
such implacable nmlice, and almost 
sunk from her seat with fear. The 
dark nodding plumes of the helmet 
which shaded his impatient brow, his 
tall majestic figure, his deep and sono- 
rous voice, his pale and quivering lip, 
while denouncing- destruction on Don 
Philip and the monk^ gave an awful 



f8 ALEXENA : OB, THE 

something to his form and appearance, 
that impressed the timid Alexena with 
the idea tliat he was superhuman ; but 
as soon as his reliections turned into a 
different channd, as soon as they were 
soothed with the hopes that he would 
be able, in a few hours, to restore the 
adorable creature before him, to her 
lover^ to her brother and her friends, 
his countenance brightened like the sun 
peeping forth from beneath a summer 
cloud, and the terrible Carracci became 
the elegant, the respectful courtier. 
Our heroine marked, the change, and 
with it her confidence returned — her 
fears vanished ; she promised toobscrvo 
his directions with the most rie:id ex- 
actness, and to do as he would have 
her. The deep blush that now suffused 
her pale cheek, told Bcizo that Lord 
Mortimer had every reason to be happy, 
and she rose in his estimation more 
than ever, by this tacit acknowlegement 
of her affection. " Such artless inno- 
cence," said he, mentally, " is the'pe- 
€uliar attribute of angels; and surely 



fASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 69 

If ever human being was perfect, this 
is that beiiio;;" then resuminij: the 
conversation, observed — '' to-morro\T 
night you shall be happy — and I re- 
venged ; hereafter you^will hear some- 
thing of my history, and be able lo 
jud'^e th^ cause I have for hatred." — 
Again his countenance fell, while Alex- 
ena, without venturing to look at him, 
said, " I have always been taught to 
consider hatred as the worst, and most 
detestabU of the human passions; and, 
therefore, feel grieved it can, for a 
moment, find a place in the bosom of 
my friend." 

'' Your friend ! — oh ! is it possible 
that Carracci, the outlaw, the chieftain 
of a predaceous gang, is so highly 
honoured." 

*'I do not reco2:nise him as such,'* 
she faintly answered, while she involun- 
tarily shuddered at the ideas he had 
awakened. " I know he has many 
inestimable qualities, and among them, 
I can point out some splendid ones." 
" May I entreat to know which," said 



70 / AI-EX£JfA: Oft TIIS 

he, snpplicatingly ; at. the same time 
venturino^ to take her hand. 

*' Steady friendship, compassion for 
the wretched, with a heart and hand ever 
ready to relieve them." 

" Oh ! yon are a flattering panegyrist ; 
bnt 1 cannot allow a particle of com- 
passion to interfere for either Acasto 
or the inoidi ; it would he an insult, a 
mockery of justice to let either escape ; 
accursed villains! that could be so 
diabolically savage, as to load those 
wrists of your's with chains," 

Again our heroine caught his eye, 
he smiled, but the smile was ghastly ; he 
let her hand fall from his, she having 
repeatedly, though gently, endeavoured 
io withdraw it, then turned away, and 
walked back and forward with en- 
creasing agitation. At length he 
suddenly said, " I am not w^ont to be 
savagely unmerciful, but the doom of 
both Acrfsto and his confessor is un- 
avoidably sealed ; the united beauties 
of this world in tears, nay, on their 



CASTLE Oi? SAMTA MARCO. Tl 

Isiiees^ would not induce me to pardon ; 
but the rest of their ^vi!d associates 1 
will not punish with deaih ; no ! Lady 
Alexena has saved them all, except 
Torquo ; yes, the infamous, detestable 
Torquo, shall have reason to curse the 
hour of his birth, and perish!" 

" Blessed is the merciful," she timely 
observed. 

" Yes," said he ; '' and the peace 
maker, for his is the kingdom of 
heaven ; but those villains were neither 
merciful, nor peace makers; thej were 
roaring- wolves, hyennas, demons ; — ^ 
pardon," he continued with quickness, 
'" pardon the repetition of this most 
disagreeable subject, and forget, if 
possible, that you have ever heard it. 
I have already trespassed on your 
patience, and the hours allotted to 
repose, therefore, shall now wish you 
happy slumbers; but before I retire, let 
mebeg youvrill to-morrow confine your- 
self as much as possible to your cham- 
ber, aud should any strangers arrive to 
witness the iut^-nvkd ceremouY. receive 



?2 alexena; on the 

tliem with all tlie ease you can command, 
that every suspicion may be hushed 
in Don Philip's bosom, and at the same 
time, sedulously avoid any species of 
conversa(ion with Montano ; — farewel, 
and may guardian seraphs watch round 
your couch, and drive every evil thing 
from your pillow." He now, bowing, 
vanished through the recess, whose 
solid stone-work yawned to receive him ; 
and once more our heroine waslefttothe 
silence, tlie solitude of her apartment; 
on waking in the morning, the first 
subject that recurred to her recollection, 
was the interview with Carracci the pre- 
cedino' ni^ht, and she then remembered 
the key of the cabinet, where her dress 
was deposited ; on examination, it 
proved to be more splendid than ima- 
gination could devise ; but how to ac- 
count to Acasto, when he should see her 
arrayed in it, she knew not, therefore, 
determined, if he made any observa- 
tions, to inform him where she had 
found it, and then leave him to unravel 
the mystery ; but for this, there was no 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCQ. 73 

necessity, as Margaret brought her 
many beautiful habits, which Don 
Philip had ordered some weeks before ; 
and as he had not seen them, could not 
form any idea whether it was one of 
them or not. Alexena looked forward 
to approaching night, with such a 
i3iversity of sensations, and of fears, that 
it is impossible to give a just description 
of them ; anxiety was traced on every 
line of her countenance, and she started, 
nay, almost screamed, at the slightest 
noise, while Margaret, who had been 
informed of the intended marriage, 
tortured her with questions, to which 
prudence forbade her making any 
reply. Several persons of suspicious 
appearance had arrived during the day, 
among whom were a number of females, 
who, from the lightness of their behavi- 
our, disgusted our heroine, and made 
her shudder at the idea of being united 
to a man who Was even regardless of 
appearances. He had waited on her 
several times, with his earnest entrea- 

VOL. ill. D 



74 ALEXENA ; on THE 

ties, that she should consider every 
thing in the castle at her disposal, and 
order whatever she might judge requi- 
site to add to her happiness, or give 
lustre to her beauty on that most joyful 
occasion : and at those moments^ the 
dreadful denunciation of the robber 
recurred to her recollection, and she 
trembled at the idea, that the unconsci- 
ous vrretch was doomed never to behold 
the light of the succeeding day; then 
she reviewed the character of Carracci, 
and saw much to find fault with, parti- 
cularly, that inveterate hatred which 
he nourished ; she allowed he might 
hare sustained a number of injuries of 
the most trying description, but were 
they such as warranted that unforgive- 
ness; — no! nothing shou5d induce us to 
submit to that most vicious vice; for 
when encouraged, it rankles and 
corrodes the bosom which gives it 
birth, and but too often leads to the 
commission of unnatural crimes — often 
to murder. We should, therefore, be 
always cautious against its effects, and 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAnCO. 75 

in ourselves, carefuliy crush the first 
buds of this malignant pas^iion, lest 
thej might blow, and bring forth the 
fruits of everlasting shame and infamy. 
Such were the reflections of Alexena, 
but she felt confident Carracci was a 
much better character than liis terrible 
avocation, avowed habits, and reputed 
criminality, led the world to suppose he 
was. In him, report exhibited a strange 
contrast of vice and virtue. She had 
branded him with the opprobrious 
epithet of outlaw, robber, felon, mur- 
derer! — '' No, no, no ! — this last cannot 
be/' said Alexena to herself; '' the 
friend of the oppressed, the parent of 
the fatherless, the terror of evil doers, 
the protector of Mortimer, Louisa, and 
myself, cannot be so debased." She 
drove the idea from her mind with ab- 
horrence, and wondered how slie could 
for an instant entertain, harbour, or con- 
ceive it. " But I am not to blame," she 
continued, "it was not I who gave the 
horrid name^ nor do I believe him 

d2 



76 ALEXENA : OR THE 



guilty.'* Thus are we always apt to 
form favourable opinions of our friends, 
notwidistanding there may be the most 
glaring' defects staring us in the face. 
Ourheroine, in the first instance, wished 
Carracci good and virtuous, from her 
own pure and beneficent nature; and in 
the second, because her slight know- 
ledge of him, led her to believe he 
had been formed to move in the most 
brilliant and distiM2:uished scenes of 
life. '' It is impossible," slie said, "he 
can be a mean and unenlightened 
peasant; he certainly is not; his accent, 
noble deportment, piercing eye, and 
elegant address, announce the courtier 
rather than the cottager. Then who can 
he be? — I know not ; this night pro- 
mises to elucidate the mystery. Well, 
until then, I must have patience.'* 

Here she concluded her mental ob- 
servations and inquiry, then com- 
mended her spirit to the care and 
protection of her Almighty Parent, and 
.returned thanks for the late sweet and 
refreiihing sleep, of which the guilty 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 77 

vainly seek the consolation. Guardiafi 
annrels had hovered round her couch, 
whispering peace and joy to her bosom, 
while, in dreams, they foretold the com- 
forts and happiness to come ; they 
soothed her for all sorrows past, and 
promised to bestow all the felicity t!iat 
can be enjoyed by mortals in this life, 
and everlasting joys hereafter. Then, 
no wonder that she awoke refreshed ; 
assured and enconra^red to bear the 
approaching change with calmness and 
fortitude. On her knees, she petitioned 
for steadiness and strength to support 
this great and eventful trial, on which 
her every hope was at issue ; and hea- 
ven smiled, and granted her requests. 
She, therefore, descended to the break- 
fast parlour with a calm countenance, 
firm step, and a heart exulting in hav- 
inn; deserved the reward which the 
Almighty Di.spenser of good promised 
to bestow, as a compensation for the 
intrepidity with which she had com- 
bated in the cause of virtue. 



78 ALEXENA; on THE 

On entering the room, Don Pliiliji 
rose to receive, and announce her as his 
bride,, which was distressing beyond 
measure, as all eyes were fixed on her, 
and the \ovf wld^pers of — how lovely ! 
how extremely beautiful ! — reached her 
ears every instant ; but breakfast, at 
length, diverted their attention, and 
the moment it was over, she retired to 
her chamber, where Margaret being 
summoned, said her marriage would 
have been solemnized at noon, had it 
been possible to procure a notary in 
time to prepare a proper instrument, by 
which her lord could m.ake a settlement 
suitable to the immense fortune he was 
to receive, and to which she had been 
entitled since her brother*s death. ''I 
overheard father Montano read a letter, 
slating the particulars, and which was 
.sent to a lawyer last night after you 
left the library ; it set forth all about 
your uncle, Don Diego de Guzman, 
and somefhing concerning an abbess of 
Dominicans, vrith other matters that 
this poor old brain of mine cannot 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 79 

remember ; but unless IMustapha ar- 
rives with that paper before eiglit 
o'clock this evening, the ceremony will 
be postponed until to-morrow." 

Alexena now comprehended the ex- 
tent of Acasto's villany. It was evident, 
the moment she signed the deed meis- 
tioned by JMargaret, his intention was 
to consig^n Velasco to the tomb. " Yes! 
Carracci/^she said, ''yon expected this, 
ar.d lest some fa'ality miiiht arise, have 
most kindly removed my unfortunate 
brother beyond his reach." She dwelt 
on this subject uiuch longer than sh;; 
intended ; but v,as, at Iet]gth, awakened 
from her reverie by Margaret, who en- 
deavoured to give a description of the 
CTC'di portrait apartment, wliich was 
already fitted up as a cliapel, under the 
insprction of Montano, who had not 
retired to rest the preceding night. 
" It is mighty beautifnl," she observed, 
" yet you don't seem very liappy to 
hear about all those fine doings ; but 
don't grieve, for your goodness cannot 
fail to reform mv lord, who, if not 



so ALEXEXA: on THE 

badly advised, would be a good man ; 
at least, on your account, I hope so." 
Aiexena smiled at theaukward attempt 
poor Margaret made to excuse her 
master, and was about to reply, when 
the former was called on to attend the 
affairs of the houshold, and had scarce 
left the apartment, before Fernandez 
entered with a billet from Carracci, in 
which he requested she would steadily 
refuse to sign any written instrument 
whatever, should one be presented for 
lier signature, before she was led to 
the altar. He also stated, that two 
lovely girls would attend her, who were 
the diiug'hters of a noble of the first 
dislinction, and who he had contrived 
to impose on Acasto for persons of a 
different description, that had been 
sent for by him. " I have/' continued 
Belzo, " intercepted them, and have 
taken the liberty to substitute those 
who are my friends, and worthy of 
the confidence of Lady Aiexena. Mus- 
tapha, the lawyer, shall be served in 
the same manner; therefore, when you 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 81 

are once before the altar, sig-n,, without 
fear or doubt, the contract which will 
be presented ; but should you recog- 
nize the pretended notary, be silent 
as the grave. — Farewel until nine! 

B. C." 

Our heroine read this with a painful 
variety of sensations. The robber 
mii^ht yet be an agent of Acasto's, aa 
where could he procure the daughters 
of a Spanish grandee, who would vo- 
luntarily consent to risk their lives to 
oblige him ; but had he not repeatedly 
saved Louisa and herself? Yes; but 
that might be a snare laid to entrap her, 
and what to do, she could not deter- 
mine. Mortimer was in the power of 
the bandit, and had always been most 
kindly treated. This thought, in a 
great measure, dissipated her fears ; 
and when she recollected the conver- 
sation she had accidcn'ully overheard 
between Don Philip and Torqiio, re- 
lative to Clarissa, her doubts vaiiisljcJ, 

D 5 



^5 ; ALEXENA ; OR THE 

and Villli a smiie of grateful thankful- 
ness, she toid Feiriaudez, who, in 
future, we shall call MontVane, that 
she would be ])articulariy attentive to 
his cautions, and then inquired whether 
Acasto knew he was iu tlie castle. 

" Certainly not; but he will be sur- 
prised to see me this night, particularly 
when I wash this oliye dye from my 
complexion ; but it is now the hour 
you s'lould dress for that dinner which 
shall be the last Philip will ever partake 
of in il^is world, unless you are able 
to prevail on Carracci to pardon him." 

*' The wretched man/' she observed, 
" is ill prepared for eternity, and heaven 
forbid I should not interfere ; at all 
events, I trust I shall be able to have 
liis sentence mi(iga<ed to banisljment, 
sliould his fate be absolutely at the 
disposal of yonr chieftain." 

*' Not absolutely, as the inquisition 
liave taken cognizance of his crimes; 
liut more of this hereafter, as I should 
have returned Ions: since." 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 8 



n 



Monfrane now respectfully withdrew, 
and our heroine sat down to her toilet, 
which she finished with much di'iicuity, 
not from the want of accustoined assist- 
ance, but from the excessive agitation 
of her mind. On descendin*^, she found 
tlie saloon crowded with stran^-ers, at 
which her surprise encreased, particu- 
larly when she heard many of tlmpa 
say they had just arrived from ?uadrid, 
others from Valencia and Toleflo, and 
found many among them were gay 
females, who, from the vivacity of 
their looks, did not seem much fatigued 
by travelling ; but Don Philip, she 
thought, miglit, nay, must have invited 
them some weeks before, to witness 
this detestable union; *' and they have 
now arrived," she mentally said, *' to 
witness his execution." 

A few moments after the desert, the 
ladies retired to the drawing-room, 
where Don Philip followed them, and 
then introduced lli« two lovely girls, 
mentioned by Carracci, to oar heroine, 
as the daughters of a most particular 



S4 aleilena; cr the 

friend, who were anxious to attend her 
to the hymeneal altar. Alexena gave 
each an expressive look, as she cur- 
tesied, which they understood, and 
shortly after, tliey stole from the room 
together, unnoticed, except by Acasto, 
who now chided lazy time, and almost 
every moment sent domestics to the 
draw-bridge or the ramparts, to ascer- 
tain was there any sign of Mustapha's 
approach. At length, the lawyer was 
announced, which created great bustle 
among the guests; the ladies hastened 
to their chambers, to array themselves 
in weddinggarmrnts, while our heroine 
was attired in tliat magnificent dress 
which had been presented to her by the 
robber., Iler maids were very lovely, 
very young, and very accomplished, 
and by their attention and kindness, in 
a great degree, soothed her agitation. 
It had been aareed that caiuion should 
give the signal when every thing was 
ready. The firing of a gun was to 
summon every individual to the great 
reception-room— of two, that the bride 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 85 

and groom stood before the altar — of 
three^ that the marriage contract was 
signed ; and a grand salute from every 
cannon on both tower and ramparts^ 
the moment the words were said. 

When the great clock struck eight, 
Alexena's terror encreased to a painful 
degree ; before another hour, how 
many dreadful events would occur ; 
Acasto, and it was possible, Mortimer, 
Carracci and herself, might be in eterni- 
ty ; if one, nay the m.ost trifling, of the 
bandit's plans should miscarry : what 
blood would be then shed, what horrors 
ensue ; Lucinda and Zorayda saw and 
felt her terrors ; but they were not 
forgetful of Belzo's caution, and repre- 
sented the impossibility of any failure 
on the part of her friends. While they 
yet conversed, the thunder of a gun, 
declared the dreadful moment was at 
hand, and our trembling heroine slowly 
proceeded towards the reception room, 
supported by her beauteous maidens. 
We shrink from the task of describing 



S6 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

the bride, the most fanciful imagination 
cannot form any thing- so enchantingly 
lovely; the varying colours of her 
cheek, now pale, now dyed with virgin 
blushes; her sylph like ibrm, arrayed 
in matchless beauty; her sufferings 
past; her present trying situation ; her 
extreme timidity. Oh ! our readers may 
conceive, but we cannot do adequate 
justice, to her exquisite charms ; then 
imagine, also, what must have been the 
feelings of Don Philip, when he led her 
towards the altar. The moment she 
appeared before it, the second guns 
were fired ; the procession having 
reached it in the foUov/inijorder: First, 
a number of elegant cavaliers and 
ladies ; next, the bride and groom, 
her attendant maids, his gentlemen; 
behind them IMustapha with the con- 
tract; a crowd of visitors and domes- 
tics, guards, &c. followed. Montaiio 
was already robed, waiting in tljis 
emporary chapel, which was a room of 
}\T,mcnse dimensions^ being one hun- 



CASTLB OF SANTA MARCO. 87 

dred and forty feet lonj^, eighty wide, 

and fifty feet high; galleries wound 

round it on the outside ; by day it was 

lit by glass domes placed in the roof, 

but at night, by twelve chandeliers 

suspended from the ceiling, by an equal 

number of massy gilt chains, and a 

vast profusion of variegated lamps^ 

formed into emblematic fiijures, which 

displayed considerable taste. The 

walls were decorated by full length 

portraits of the Santa Marco family, as 

large as life, pourtrayedin the different 

costumes of their dav : some as states- 

men, bishops, grandees, knights, others 

as admirals and generals, warriors who 

ha<l gained immortal honors in their 

country's service, and were crowned 

w'ith never-fading laurels ; the opposite 

side of the aparlment was occupied by 

the likenesses of the females, among 

whom many had been eminent for every 

virtue, beauty and accomplishment; 

and, at this moment, the eyes of each 

seemed endowed with life, while 

imagination gave an air of anxious 



&8 alexena; or the 

expression to their features^ as they 
seemed to gaze on the beautiful bride, 
uhose usurping lord had trampled on 
their ancient rights, and who had rude- 
ly thrust their son and representative 
from this, the venerable mansion of his 
ancestors. Alexena, in return, apparent- 
ly looked towards them for protection, 
and seemed to beseech them to save her 
from relentless tyranny, until the weak- 
ness of her spirits had actually endowed 
them with animation. 

The nuptial party had entered this 
apartment from the galleries on each 
side, as the great folding doors, which 
constituted the grand entrance, were 
immovable, though every exertion had 
been used by Acasto to force them 
open ; the space on their outside form- 
ed a kind of aisle like that of a 
cathedral, which made him more 
anxious to have them forced, that it 
might add to the beauty of this tempo- 
rary chapel. When he and our heroine 
stood before the altar, Mustapha came 
forward with the contract, which he ex- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 89 

plained without reading-, and then pre- 
sented a pen to Don' Philip^ who knelt 
on a velvet cushion, placed the solemn 
instrument on a small desk, which was 
fastened to the railing, and then signed 
with a triumohinor heart ; he rose, and 
with a smile of exulting anticipation^ 
placed the pen within the agitated 
hand of Alexena, whose taper fingers 
were so trecnulous, that she held it with 
difficulty. She dropped on one knee; 
Acasto gazed on the deed, while Mon- 
tano's sparkling eyes and fitful counte- 
nance, expressed undefinable feelings. 
Our heroine now ventured to look 
round — all were silent. " Oh ! my 
God!" she mentally said, ''support 
me ;'' she caught an expressive glance 
from Mustapha — her bosom throbbed 
violently — she felt the conviction all 
was well, and instantly signed the con- 
tract ; tliere were two other seals and 
marks for signatures, and Acasto re- 
quired their meaning. " They are," 
said the lawyer, '* for the names of the 
trustees," '' And who are the fittest 



90 ALEXENA; Oil THE 

persons," he demanded. — " Lord Mor- 
timer and 1!" said a voice, which 
seemed to outvie the thunder, and 
instantly the heavy doors burst open, 
and struck the solid walls vsith such 
violence as shook the castle to its base, 
displaying the form of Belzo Carracci, 
armed cap-a-pie; his eyes glittering in 
the fires of venireance, and his brow 
crowned with a thousand horrors! lie 
stood in the door-way, and behind, in 
the dark corridor, a train of his lierccst 
banditti, part of whom seemed lost in 
misty distance; but those next his 
person bore torches, whose red glare 
shone on his armour, adding terror to 
terror ; his voice was fate — his frown 
death; all eyes were rivetted to his 
figure — all hearts quailed with fear ; 
a scarf of crimson velvet, richly em- 
broidered, was the only ornament he 
wore ; in his right hand he grasped his 
sparkling falchion, in his left, a llaming 
torch, and before he advanced a single 
step, stamped his foot ; the signal 
whistle runG: throui^rh the distant cham- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARC». 91 

bers, and instantly all the portraits 
vanished, while each aperture was fdled 
by two savage rutfians; onepresentiuij 
a carbine at Acasto and his confessor, 
the other armed with a sabre, display- 
in<j atone view, the en tire troops of this 
predaceous chieftain. All motion, all 
hope, seemed extinct ; all were petrified 
with horror — with fear — with amaze- 
ment; until Carracci, in a voice ever 
to be re-nembered, said, " Alexena 
saves all — !iut two ; therefore, let no 
man move on pain of instant death. 
Mortimer appear and detend your 
wife I'' His lordship, who had been 
until then concealed behind some of 
the banditti in the lower apertures, now 
sprung- from his hiding- place, and as 
he bounded o[i the floor, presented a 
pistol at Acasto — another at the monk, 
exclaiming, " to stir is to perish!'' here 
our heroine, in despite of her utmost 
exertion, became faint ; but. Sir 
Edmond Hastings, in the person of 
Mustapha, flew to her assistance. Car- 
racci approached ; each eye was on him. 



92 ALEXENA; OR THE 

he passed in solemn silence, m^attended 
by his guard, and the next instant 
stood before Acasto ; who, despicable 
wretch! was pale asdeath. Th^^ hour of 
retribution had arrived ; escape was hn- 
possible ; but he tried to pluck courage 
from misfortune, and desperation was 
fast kindling a flame, which might have 
been fatal to some, had not Carracci, at 
that eventful moment, uncovered his 
brows, and in a hollow tone, deep as if 
it had issued from a tomb, demanded, 
'•' Philip, doit thou knov/ me?" Acasto 
ventured to raise his eyes, only to 
gaze in horror; instantly his face became 
distorted, his limbs convulsed, his 
bosom heaved, almost to bursting ; his 
breathing became short ; the cold, chill 
damps of death dropt from his brow ; 
every joint trembled; his eye-lids fell 
over their blood shot orbs; liis heart 
ceased to throb ; nature was exhausted, 
he sunk — groaned — and with a faint 
struggle, pronounced the name, " Don 
Miguel !" and expired. A deep silence 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 93 

followed, but the words of Acasto were 
not likely to allow its loni^ duration. 
A busy hum repeated the name — 
" Don Miguel/' an hundred times, ac- 
companied by the exclamation of — " Is 
it possible !" " Yes, iti the robber 
Carracci, behold Miguel Saint Marco, 
once more the liege lord of this castle, 
with a character unstained, unpolluted 
by crime. Those holy inquisitors, to 
whose power I deliver those arch 
villains, Montano and Torquo, have 
the kin»c*s writ for reinstatinj: me in 
my rights, and that instrument which 
Acasto has signed, is nothing more than 
a detail of the numberless crimes which 
he has couimitted, and for which he 
demands pardon from Lady Alexena 
and this English noble. Had he read, 
it is likely it would have produced 
the same melancholy effects, which ray 
appearance caused ; for while affixing 
his signature, he felt convinced he was 
wronjrinff a man who he had almost 
irreparably injured, and who, it was his 
avowed intention to murder, before the 



S4 ALEXENA; OR THE 

sun should rise io-monow; (hat person 
is Vclasco de Giszmari, who you here 
behold rescued from the filthy dungeon 
in which he has been buried those many 
months ; — but I am trespassing on the 
happiness of two of the miOst deserving 
of beings. Remove that monster, 
Montano, to a distance from the holy 
altar, which is defiled by his presence, 
and let the kind Zelo resume his place."' 
The good father advanced when the 
troop had removed the monk. — " Let 
him/' continued Don Miguel, *' not be 
taken to prison, until he first beholds 
the fruits of his industrious villany 
blasted, until he sees Donna Alexena 
the happy wife of this happy English- 
man. — No reluctance, lady ; you know 
I hate your promise." Our heroine 
presented her haiid to the adoring 
Mortimer, who received it as the kind- 
est, first, best gift of heaven, while 
silent tears announced the heart-felt 
joy of all present. The very robbers 
were afi'ected, and gazed with delight 
on this scene, while their countenances 



CASTLE or SANTA JIARCO. 95 

were almost softened to harmonj. — 
Zelo bestowed the nuptial blessing, 
assisted by the Rev. William Jones, 
Avhose joy was perfect, and in a few 
moments our heroine became La<1y 
Alexena Mortimer, tlie wife of the idol 
of her heart. Such happiness repaid, 
more than repaid, years of painful 
anxiety, and the past was forgotten in 
the bright prospects of the future. The 
guns liaving announced the celebration 
of this most wished-for ceremony, the 
gay crowd gathered in groups, to let 
the inquisitors lead off their prisoners, 
and the banditti to secure the soldiers 
of Don Philip, who, as yet, had no 
intimation of what was passing in the 
castle, as all the avenues of it were 
filled with Don Miguers troops, and 
those of the inquisition. The signals 
for firing the caiuion v^ ere conveyed by 
the former, to those who were ordered 
to attend for the pru-pose, and they 
were afterwards secured without a blow, 
so that, by proper precautions, blood- 
shfd was prevented. 



96 ALEXENA ; OH THE 

Before the soldiers retired, the writ 
for Don Miguel's restoration being 
read, he bade all welcome, and when 
his domestics had removed Acasto's 
body, he thus addressed his auditory : 
— " IMy ever dear friends, and you 
my faithful band, I rejoice that our 
late misery has thus terminated ; that 
good order is restored ; and believe me, 
my dependants shall have cause to 
bless the propitious day, which has 
restored Miguel to the hall of his 
fathers. The wretched man whose 
remains has been just borne from your 
sight, was the cause of all my suffer- 
ings ; he involved me and my dearest 
relations, in misery and disgrace ; 
among whom were my sister and her 
husband Don Selib — those I had the 
happiness to rescue from the jaws of 
death. In the latter. Lord Mortimer 
may recognise his guide, Monfrane; 
and Lady Alexena, her friend Fernan- 
dez ; in the person of the flippant and 
talkative Larco you behold their son 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 07 

Celio, who has happily escaped ; ]}nt 
CerascOj my unfortunate neiglibour, (A[ 
Moiitano's victiai, at the moment ho 
Was piu'suin^ the equally unfortunate 
Geraldine, who also perished by the 
monk's hand ; for it was she whom he 
shot on the ramparts, when the fatal 
ball was intended for Bolerno As 
Don Philip is now' before an Eternal 
Judge, I shall be silent, let his vices 
die, and be buried with him in an 
obscure grave ; but as to that subtle 
villain, that pander of crime, Montano, 
the justice which he has scoffed at shall 
overtake him ; she shall be appeased 
for the social ties on which he has 
trampled, and for the peaceful homes 
he has destroyed. By him, the kind 
and benevolent have been deceived ; 
the vicious goaded on to crime ; God 
has been blas{)hemed — his laws per- 
verted — chastity violated — the w ithering 
hand of murder levelled at numbers, 
and the altars stained with blood and 
pollution. The spot is accursed on 
VOL. iir. B 



9S alexena; oa THE 

wbicli he breathes ; his touch is conlij- 
gion ; his words dtigg-ers ; then is it 
r.ot just, that he shall be crushed, to 
prevent a repetition of furlhcr crime; 
to prevent the poison of liis precepts 
blighting the yet unsullied ; and to 
save human nature the p:'.in, the dis- 
gTace, of giving food and sliellcr to 
such a reptile; but enough — let us 
now retire to the banqueting cliam- 
ber, where, in a very few moments, I 
I hope to see the happiest group on 
earth. He was then follov^ed by these 
friends, who vicre, in a short time, 
arranged round the social board, at the 
head of which was Mrs. Hasting?, (who 
seemed the happy mother of all the 
females present,) with Don Vasquez on 
her right, and M. San'ianellc, Arabcl's 
father, on her left ; at the foot, Don 
Miguel, with our heroine on his right, 
her lover next her ; on his left, Louisa 
and Yelasco; on each side of the two 
Ibrmer, Don Selib and Clarissa, Vir- 
gina and Carlos, Arabel and Theodore, 
Eveline and Antonio, Lucinda and 



CASTLE OF SANTA fllAttCO. 99 

Zoraydii, the latter of whom was 
evidently a great favourite willi Don 
Mi2:viel ; Sir Edmontl and Bolcnio : 
LarcOj now Don Celio, Tn-hose eyrs 
often wandered towards those of Lucin- 
da, while her kindling blushes gave 
])irth to no very silent whispers ; llie 
fathers Zclo and Bernardo close to 
their ilhistrious enterlaincr; Mr. Jones, 
Galafron, the chief inquisitor, and 
above forty others, among whom were 
many lovely females from the adjacent 
towns, with Rourke, Albert, Williams, 
llenriquez, &c. attending. Tills world 
could not produce such a happy assem- 
blage, and while they enjoyed the good 
things above, the banditti were en- 
tertained below, where Margaret pre- 
sided as mistress of the ceremonies ; 
and once more the halls of Santa 
Priarco rung with joy and innocent 
merriment ; for the real terrors of the 
troop were merely vested in their name, 
It was nigh two o'clock in the morn- 
ing, ere the charming Virginia, now a 

e2 



100 alhxena; oa the 

mother, led our heroine from (he sup- 
per-room, who retired witliout exciting 
any particular observation, accompa- 
nied by her beauteous maids. Imme- 
diately after, Eveline withdrew, and as 
^he passed his lonlsliip, signi(i< d, iliat 
he should be sent for very t^jorlly; he 
evinced his gratitude by a gentle prrr- 
snre of her liand ; but his impatience 
rendered it impossible to await tlie 
\vished for signal; every minute was 
an age — a moment became insupporta- 
ble ; and he stole from the bamnut 
unperceived. When at tlic door of the 
nuptial chamber, lie paused — feared — 
yet wished to enter ; but did not linger 
long, until it was opened !}y Lucinda, 
Avho, with Zorayda, had bade Alcxena 
adieu; slie was at that time standing 
almost undressed, attended by Virginia 
and Eveline. His lordsiiip was now 
obliged to retire into an adjoining gal- 
lery; but, in a few moments, the latter 
passed, with the intention of sending 
for him, which he no sooner observed, 
than, rushing from liis hiding place. 



CASTLSOF SANTA UARCO. 101 

he kissed her hand, and those of her 
fair companions, then flew to the 
apartment where his bride lay expect- 
ing-, trembling', blushing. lie quickly 
ascended the bed of blisses, and clasped 
her to his throbbing bosom ;~ and here 
we shall draw the curtain. 

Don Miguel sat with his happy guests 
until early dawn, who then retired, 
astonished and delighted at (he joyful 
termination of the last few evenlful 
hours^ uhile he — dread chieftain ! re- 
paired to Galafron's chamber, to con- 
sult with him how they should disqiosf- 
of Torquo and the monk. 



102 alexena; or the 



CHAP. IV. 

" Away with , and to a death 

Of nameless horrors bear them !" 

EXT morning, at early dawn^ 
Galafton despatched a messenger to 
tlie inquisitorial tribunal of Madrid, 
w'lih information that every thing had 
succeeded to the utmost of his expec- 
tations — that Montano had been seized, 
and was to be tried on the evening of 
that day. of \Those conviction there 
could not be a doubt — and that he had 
iient for the superiors of two neigh- 
bouring monasterieSj to assist on the 
solemn occasion. 

It was noon before Lord and Lady 
Mortimer, with their friends, assembled 
at breakfast, where our now happy 
heroine received the congratulations of 
all present. She was pitiably distressed, 
and her burning blushes added to her 
confusion, until Don Mijr-uel 'lood- 
uaturedly changed the conversation, 
and «»'ave a new turn to the thougrhts of 



CASTLL OF SAXTA JIAUCO. 103 

his gucstg, by requiring;, in the nainc 
of the holy tribunal, the attendance 

-and testimony of ail those who knew 
Montane, or had sutiered by his cruel- 
ty. An immense subterranean hall had 
been appointed^ which was to bo fitted 
up as a temporary court for the purpose, 
the inquisitors havin^V declared it con- 
trary to all rule to try a criminal by 
day-light, against whom so many atro- 
cious chari^-es were e:shibited. This re- 
quisition cast a momentarj gloom over 
the lively group ; bu the attention 
of Don Miguel, and his unceasing en- 
deavours to amuse them, i-estorcd their 
usual gaiety, until the monk s judges 

, arrived, who having partaken of some 
refreshment, issued orders to conduct 
Montano forthwith to the court, where 
Lord iMortimer was shortly alter re- 
cjuired to give evidence against him. 
On his entrance, he was astonished to 
find that a few hours had been sufTi- 
cient for Galafron and his ofiicers to 
erect a throne of terrors, very little 
iufciiei- to that of ^Madrid ; bencuth 



It)! ALEXENA ; OR THE 

which, on a kiiu! of platform, lay the 
))0(]y of Acasto; his countenance dis- 
torted, arid bearing ail those mariis 
which distinguish persons Avho die in 
convulsions ; at the furtiier end, there 
were two pos!.«, to which the monk and 
Torqno were chained, while ordinaries, 
Inniiliais, mutes, and all other necessary 
officers, attended. 

Bv Don IMignel's request, Montano 
was allowed to be prerscnt at his trial, 
which was both fair and impartial, and 
during ils continuance, he displayed 
great })rcsence of mind, by asking a 
number of qtiestions, which were un- 
<'qnalled for subtiity, malice, and deep 
cunning: many of them having startled 
Galafron himself; but all his wiles 
were likely to be unavailing, as every 
moment new witnesses appeared, who 
bore tcslimony to his vicious course of 
Hie. The examination of Lord Mor- 
timer was of considerable length, as he 
was obliged to enumerate every cir- 
cumstance that had occurred, from the 
lu^ht of Montano's shipwreck on th« 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 10^ 

^coast of llollyvvooii castle, to the hour 
ill which the inquisitorial troops had 
entered Santa Marco. The second 
witness was Lady Alexena,she deposed 
to several important facts ; the death of 
Cerasco ; the prisoner's cruelty to her- 
self; his attempt against Louisa, and 
tnany other circumstances, with whicii 
our kind readers are already acquainted, 
©on Miguel was the third person, and 
Ills examination occupied two hours, as 
it was deemed necessary, he should 
give an accurate statement of every 
transaction, from the commencement of 
his acquaintance with Don Philip, down 
to the present moment. He, there- 
fore, stated, Acasto had been for many 
years previous to their introduction 
connected with a number of inftimous 
sliarpers, who shared the iniquitous 
spoils gleaned from the vile and 
detetsable vice of gaminj^, and on 
which they not only existed, but were, 
by such plunder, enabled to indulge in 
the most licentious courses. II u vvus 

e5 



}0G ALEXEXA; OR T LIZ 

only twciity-sevcii vcars old, when in- 
troduced to v.itiicas, vet had been a 
professed gambler for some years be- 
Ibre their friendly intercourse, which 
>viis only for a period of four months; 
but in iliat time he had effected 
the ruin of the latter, in the manner 
stated by Clarissa, wiih this difference, 
that on the night after Don Miguel 
left IMadiid, accompanied by Henriquez, 
his faithful German servant, he, by his 
inquiries, learned that every member of 
the holy brotherhood had received 
ii description of his person ; there- 
fore, to elude their vigilance for any 
lenj^lh of time, would be impossible ; 
and was also aware, that if he sur- 
rendered when public opinion ffov,ed 
]]ip!;h against him, it would be voluntary 
bubniissioii to the axe of the execution- 
er. Thus situated, he determined to 
circulate a report of his being assassi- 
nated, which was the most likely means 
to stifle all exertion that would other- 
wise be made for his ap[)rcherjsiqn ; 



CASTLE OF SAJJTA MARCO. 107 

ills afiectioiiate doriiestics approved of 
the piaij, undertook to give it publicity^ 
mid afterwards to return to tlie Pyrenees 
to join him; as he had purposed visit- 
ing- Santa Marco, where tliere was yet 
some valuable jewels ?^nd a small sum 
of money deposited i:i a ypot known 
only to himself. iiiU before Don 
Miguel had reached the castle, he was 
ca})tared by a horde of banditti, who 
had recently lost their chieftain ; ana 
before he had been their nrisoner manv 
weeksj was unanimously chosen. 'Vh'-.) 
desperation of his atfairs, and liis 
resentment against a government which 
had treated him with such rigour, in- 
duced him to embrace their offer; 
besides, the power he would possess, 
promised ample means of revenge, 
not only on Philip, but all his othe.: 
enemies. The retreat of tiie banditti, 
at that period, was precarious and 
unsafe; their new chiei'tain, therefore, 
led them to those caverns already 
described, as soon as he had exacted a 
.^oienin oath- of implicit obodieiicj. 



ICS alcxbva; or the 

Their late leader was named Belz© 
Carracci, he therefore adopted the 
ajDpcilation, and in a little time was 
looked up to by his ferocious troops as 
the most heroic of mortals ; he softened 
their manners by his example, and by a 
sort of sophistry, directed all their 
cxnloits aoraiiist those who, from the 
viciousness of their private life, or pub- 
lic character, merited punishment; 
those, and those only, were the persons 
v\ho suffered, ill either person or proper- 
ty, which, in a short time, gave him a 
distiiit^uishcd name amons: freebooters. 
In one of his excursions, in the wilds of 
the mountains, he found Don Selib in 
the cottag-e of a poor peasant, wounded 
and insensible, with a little girl weeping 
beside his heathy couch ; surprised and 
grie-ved beyond measure at this unlook- 
ed-for misfortune, he divided the troop 
into small parties, and sent them in 
dillerent directions, to seize, if possible, 
tlie perpetrators of the dreadful out- 
rage ; about day-light the following 
inoruinr-, the band returned^ and fouf 



-CATTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 1Q3 

''of them brought iiiforiTiation, that they 
had overtaken a noble, with a numerous 
retinue of armed domestics, who con- 
veyed a lady and a child into the castle 
of Santa Marco. This was sufficient ; 
Don ^*liguel had not a doubt, but 
Philip was that person, and as soon as 
Don Selib recovered the use of his 
speech, he confirmed his fears. It was 
many weeks before the latter could bqi 
removed, and during that time, the 
peasant and his family had been unre- 
mitting in their attention, particularly 
their daughter Geraldine, to whom Don 
Miguel became so much attached, that 
he prevailed on her father to allow him 
•to send her to a neiiihbourins: convent, 
■the superior of which was his relation, 
and to whom he confided his real 
situation : havinij: first obtained a 
•solemn vow of secjvcy. Geraldine was 
extremely handsome, and in a few years, 
became an object of universal admira- 
tion ; but her beauty and simplicity 
e;ided in her destruction. The gay and 
-dissipated Cerasco heard of hercharm?^ 



<T10 ALEXEXA; OR THE 

and pressed his inoUiar to iiivita her to 
their mansion ; there promised hermar- 
riaiie, and she afterwards fell a sacrifice 
to his infamous strata^^ems. When Don 
3iiguel heard of the ruin of his favourite, 
he led his troop to her betrayer's 
residence, and there punished him 
severely ; after which he conveyed the 
fair mourner to a distant conyent^ 
where she remained several months; at 
length, havini^ expressed an earnest 
wish to t&ke the veil, he sent Bondello 
and Spantani to conduct her to his 
relative, as she wished to return to 
her molherlv protection. . Cerasco iiad 
always regretted, and would have 
married her, rather than snbmit to an 
eternal separation; llierefore, had the 
convent incessantly watched, and ijn- 
mediately obtained ini'ormalicn of her 
removal. Deliglit ~1 at the prospect of 
reiiaininir his treasure, he armed a few 
■domestics, and comsnenccd a rapid 
pursuit, but onlv arrived on (he spot 
v,here her attendants were slain, just 
^I'AiQ cnoui^h to learn she v/as in the 



CASTLE OF SANTA JIARCO. lit 

powei- of Acasto^ and tiien on her way 
to the casLlo, and there he ako wiliiugly 
submitted to be conveyed. Boiidclio 
and Soaatiinij were the fiercest robbers 
of the troop, and fought with surprising* 
bravery iu her defence^ cofnbatiag' 
eight times their nnriiber^ and felj, 
sword in hand^ v.ithout utteriag- a 
groan. Like wolves they contended, 
and like those animals, died in silence. 
Oil Selib's restoration to perfect 
health,, he was elected iirst lieutenant 
by the mutual consent of the banditti, 
Avho named him Monfi'ane, and then 
Don Miguel, for the tirst time, initiated 
the robbers in all the dreadful secrets 
of the caverns, at the same time de~ 
daring his real name, and proving it 
by his knov.iedge of all the private 
entrances and passages of th« castlq, 
and by many document^:, which re- 
moved every shadow of doubt, it was 
while accideutaiiy roaming through its 
privacies, that be overheard Acasto 
threaten to murder Clarissa's child, and 
by his timely appearance prevented 



312 alexena; on the 

Ihat horrid deed. Selib wa?, at fhlj 
tune, slowly recoverinj^' from the effect 
of his wounds, otherwise Don Miguel 
would have made him acquainted wifh 
her dangerous situation ; but he feared 
to inform him, lest his impatience 
should retard his recovery. 

At the time Torquo so inhumanly 
wounded Clarisssa, her brother was on 
his return from Italy, where he had 
been, in hopes of interesting two car- 
dinals, his particular friendsj who could 
effectually serve him, by tlieir influence 
with the pontiff, and not only have him 
recalled from such disgraceful exile, but 
punish his enemies for their infamous 
treachery. Most unfortunately, hoW'. 
«ver, those sons of the church were 
both absent on iinporlant missions, and 
Don Miguel was forced to return, dis- 
])irited as well as disappointed, and 
was on his way to the cavern, when his 
s-ister's piercing shrieks s'.immoned him 
to her assistance. Before he went to 
illome, he informed her he was C^ar- 
,X*icci the robber^ and .promised to be 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAtlCO. H 



o 



her rriend, but had not discovered his 
affinity, iind, his visor being always 
down, of his countenance siie could 
not for:n a conjecture ; therefore, her 
surprise and joy may be easily ima- 
gined, when she not o:dy found a 
brother, but a husband, iii the persons 
of Carracci and Monfrane. The happy 
tidings v\ere communicated by Don 
Mii^uel himself, immediatelv after her 
recovery, and, in a short time, it was 
judged expedient far IMonfrane to take 
the name of Fernandez, and enter into 
the service of Acasto, that he should 
•always be able to account for any 
strange occurrence that the frequent 
visits of the troops might render neces- 
sary; and also, that he might, if requi- 
jsite, supply them \vit!i ammunition, 
-and render the arms of Acasto's people 
-useless. But it was not Don Miguel's 
intention to resort to those measures, 
until such lime as he had effectually se- 
cured the pontiff's friendly interference^ 
and then he knew success must eventu- 
«My ensue. Thus sixteen years had 



114 ALEXENAJ CR TIIS 

clapsedj before our hei'oirie ^vas con- 
veyed to Santa Marco, and during that 
time, the name of Beizo Carracci was 
known in everv province of Spain ; ijnd 
he was equally well acquainted with 
almost every circuinatance of peculiar 
interest in them. At the period Lord 
I\Iortimcr and Alexcna Iiad arrived at , 
Eayonne, Selib and Hcnriqcez, under 
their fe!.«rued names, discovered Acasto 
tind the monk, with whose persons and 
characters they were but too well ac- 
quainted ; and, as soon as they learned 
the-intcntions of the former, they com- 
municated with Don Mii^ucl, who was 
then in a colta;::e on the Frciicli side cf 
the Pyrenees. By this tim^e, it was 
notorious thatMontano had robbed the 
Dominicans in the vicinity of Sigucnca ; 
also, that our heroine, and several 
others, had escaped therefrom. This 
inforiiiation gave Don Miguel consider- 
able satisfaction ; th'st, because so 
many lovely women were restored to 
society; and, in the second place, the 
Dominicans were justly punished fo.^ 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. J 15 

thek ciTK'Uy and credulity, Notwill:- 
ytpaiciiiig, he determined to punish 
Montano^ and, if possible, rescue our 
Iieroiiie ; thercforej corr.nianded Seiib 
to be in readiness to conduct Lord 
Mortiiner to the caslle, where he was' 
to be seized, and conveyed to the 
cavern ; which was accordingly done. 

Zelo was next examined ; he gave 
evidence of the scene in the chapel, 
where Montano wounded Lord Morti- 
mer, without havin^^ any warrant from 
the inquisition, and in which affray 
many had lost their lives. 

Bernardo followed ; he had known 
the monk a number of vears. and enu- 
merated many of his .atrocities. In the 
course of his evidence, he implicated 
the abbess, and notes of his deposition 
against h^r, were taken separately, by 
Galafron himself. Virginia was then 
sworn, and gave a circumstancial de- 
tail of her sufferings in the convent, 
and. identified Montano as the person 
•'.who had personated the prior on the 



116 ALEXENA; on TilE 

jiigljl of her trialj and wlio liaJ aftec^ 
wards passed the sentence of death. 
Here Lord Mortimer and his lady were 
ag-ain called, and, on being questioned, 
described Elleiia's execution ; of all 
which, nninutes were entered. They 
were no sooner dismissed, than Eveline 
and Arabel were separately examined, 
and proved the cruelty with which they 
had been persecuted in the convent; 
and their testimony effectually ruined 
the abbess. 

The next witness was Ilourke, who 
was excessively surprised on being led 
^inio the hall ; he gazed wildly round, 
and no sooner perceived Montano, than 
he said, '^ Arrah ! you're welcome home, 
jewel! — I suppose you are soon to he 
with your oul master, who is just where 
be ought to be." — Here he was inter- 
rupted by a familiar, who, in a whisper, 
ordered him to be silent, if he valued 
Jiis life. At this he seemed much 
amazed, but made no reply ; and in a 
moment after, when desired to repeat 
the oath, exclaimed — " Och ! 1 can't 



CASTLE OF SA:^TA MARCO. 117 

Speak not a word ; for if I do, this 
black Turk at my elbow will stop my 
wizc7i.'^ GalalVon now, in a voice that 
made him start, commanded him to 
repeat it, wliich lie had no sooner 
done, than he spit out, shrugged his 
shoulders, looked at the monk, and 
apparently wished for liis blackthorn. 
At length, his examination began with 
the usual question — " What is your 
name ?" 

" Tom Rourke; and from the north 
of Ireland, at your service." 

'• Do you know Mon'ano de Gus- 
pard. a Dominican monk ?" 

" Och ! hushla-ma-ehfee, is it game 
you're making ? — know the monk? — 
bim my soul that's no bad joke." 

Galafron did not understand this 
sort of answer, and the question was 
again put.- 

" Know him! arrah, do you thiuk I 
don't know my lefj hand fron> my riglit ? 
Yes! I know him to be the biggest 
blackguard that ever crossed hiniseU"/' 

The inquisitors now sent for Ljrd 



lis alexexa; on, the 

JMorlimcr, to act as interpreter, a* 
Tom's English, Irish, and Spanish, 
jumbled together, were totally nnintelli- 
gible. On his lordship's appearing-, the 
rxamination recommenced ; but, as this 
v.iiHcss knew very little, his answers 
are not \7orth relating; his evidence 
being only corroborative with respect 
to Montano's landinijr in Enijland : 
Gonzales' declaration ; the scene in the 
chapel; and escape from the Dominican 
convent. Albert was examined to the 
same facts. Then Donna Louisa; her 
evidence was the most conGiusive and 
convicting, if we except that of Boler- 
PiO, at whom the monk fired, and in 
whose presence he killed Geraidine. 
Williams was the last witness, and if 
Ronrke was unintelligible, lie was ten 
times worse. On beins: desired to 
explain the scene in the cell where 
Montano had chained Alexena to the 
post, and was about to sacrifice her, he 
thus described it: — ''Do you see ; I 
hap'd to be under hatches, when this 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. I IP' 

pirate broaclied his foul vveatlici' plai], 
for boardin«' that littie skifF: triistinfx 
fear wonld ohliije her to strike her 
colours; and that dead shark there, 
(pointing to Acasto,) v^ho is novf in ;i 
brimstone latitude, cheered him on; so 
when the Uibber fired a gun to brin<;' 
her too, and saw <hat she honied xxo a 
stout spirit, and determined to give 
battle while she had a timber standing-, 
he commanded his mamelukcs to ponr 
in a broadside ; hut I, seeing her about 
to sink, drificd in odd rigging on their 
starboard quarter^ and they taking me 
for a fire-ship, soon cleared the deck; 
aye, aye! ihey cut cable — crowded all 
. sail, and left that dog-fish sprawling 
\¥ith his lee jaw broken by a bomb shot. 
Damn my eyes! I \T0uld have closed 
Ids cabin lights, had not our commodore 
Don Mi2:aeL shouted avast ! at;d rr.n him 
aground between two scuttled liulks." 
Our heroine listened to tliis detail^ with 
tearful eyes, and could scarce explain 
the :^alla!]t tar's meanin.":, beins: so 
much gfTec'cd by the kindness and 



120 ALfeXEXA; OR TKE 

bravery \\liich he had so nobly display- 
ed in the moment of danuer : for had 
he been discovered, instant death must 
have followed. 

Williams could not behold her tears 
unmoved ; he knew the source from 
which thoy (lowed, and comprehended 
the feelings that summoned them. 
Therefore, having tossed his quid from 
onejavv to the other, with great rapidity, . 
he exclaimed, " Why this foul weather ; 
cheer up! the storm's blown by; we 
sail right before the wind, so, no more 
of these salt-water pearls," Alexena 
smiled through her tears, and Williams 
observed, " Aye, aye ! that's right ; 
sunshine and rain betokens a fair day. 
Come captain," he continued, address- 
in": Lord Mortimer, '' tow her on deck, 
as this here hold is rather raw, and 
she's only fit for summer gales; — no 
disparagement lady, God bless your 
heart." 

''My good friend, no oflence whal- 
ever," replied our heroine, *' receive 



CAStLE OP SANTA MARCO. l)il 

my most sincere and grateful thanks, 
and believe me, I will feel most happy, 
if you will remain with my lord, wlio 
will return to England next month, 
and where, I trugt, you will allow us to 
make the remainder of your life com- 
fortable," Williams was about to burst 
into a string- of ejaculations, when they 
were all ordered to be silent, and 
shortly after were permitted to with- 
draw. ' 

When Lord Mortimer had retired, 
Galafron read the depositions of the 
witnesses, and after a few moments 
consultation, passed sentence of death 
on the two wretched criminals ; in a 
most impressive manner, he enumerat- 
ed their several offences; dwelt on their 
horrible nature, extent, and atrocity; 
reverted to the dreadful punishments 
that awaited them hereafter, unless they 
sincerely repented, and concluded, by 
saying, *' Thatthe doors of mercy were 
shut on them for ever in this world ; 
then ordered them to be executed at 

VOL. III. F 



122 ALEXENA ; OH THE 

twelve o'clock the following' nin^lit 
Where tlieii were Montano's airj-built 
castles? they had vanished, leavirio- 
him a prey to all the torments of a 
guilty conscience. In the gloom of his 
dungeon, bitter recollection held a 
mirror before his half distracted fancy, 
in which he beheld those who had 
(iillen by his hand, and tlicse whoso 
ruin he had caused by nameless wiles 
and treachery ; remorse for a monjent 
visited his flinty couch ; but the cata- 
logue of his crimes was of such exces- 
sive length, that hope forsook him, ere 
he had scanned one half its contents; 
desperation followed, and he would 
have closed the scene by suicide, had 
not two familiars sat in his cell, to 
prevent any attempt of that nature. 
Zelo attended both him and Torquo 
alternately, but they were incorrigible ; 
the latter, indeed, appeared toavrait his 
approaching death with much less 
fortitude than the monk, and seemed 
to expect some dreadful torments ; he 
was apparently insensible to the kind 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 133 

exhortations of the good father, \t}io 
explained with great feeling-, the bound- 
less extent of God's mercy ; tried to 
impress his mind with an idea of future 
rewards and punishments ; besought 
him to repent, but he continued im- 
movable, until a few hours previous to 
his execution, when lie was induced to 
repeat several prayers ; yet, at the 
conclusion of each, observed, they 
would be of no avail, that he knew his 
doom ^Tas sealed, and that years of 
penitence could not save him ; his 
thoughts were tinctured with despair of 
the blackest hue, and he even wished 
for death to end his mental misery; 
however, before the fatal iiour arrived, 
his worthy confessor had succeeded in 
soothing his spirit to a degree of 
composure that could not have been 
expected. 

Time glides rapidly — the day passed 
—night returned — the clock tolled 
eleven — and the men of death entered ^ 
Montano's dimgeon to strike off his 



F 



9 



151 



ALEXENA ; OR THE 



irons, preparatory to the awful mo- 
iTient, On their arriTal, \\q appeared 
much agitated ; but before his limbs 
were freed from the fetters, he seemed 
to have collected strength to meet his 
fate with fortitude; but this assumed 
coura^je vanished on beinir led into the 
deep and drearj/ dung-eons of the castle ; 
his eyes roamed over their dark soli- 
tudes, in ghastly earnestness, particu- 
larly when hedistmguishcd the roaring 
of the subterranean torrent ; its horrors 
were, as yet, unknown, and he gazed 
wildly round, wishing to ascertain the 
cause of the ahnost deafening din that 
assailed his ears; at first, conceiving it 
was a noise occasioned by the dasliing 
of the sea against the rocks, and that 
he was to be led through some passage 
which communicated with the foaming 
surge; to be there aliot, and thrown into 
its an«Trv waves. But who can pretend 
to describe liis horror, on beholding 
the real cause from the hall that over- 
looked the terrific cataract? The little 
boat was already at the steps; a kind 



tASTLt: OF SANTA MARCO. 123 

of platform was fastened to the iron 
barrier, and the draw-bridge below 
\Yas distinguishable by the light of two 
torches^ which almost touched the wa- 
ters that impetuously rushed under it. 
There Moiitano comprehended the ex- 
tent of the horrible fate the inquisitors 
had prepared for him ; and Galafron 
stood on the rocky bank, until ho was 
bound, and placed in the crazy vessel 
appointed to convey him and the 
executioners to the platform. Num- 
bers of the banditti had assembled on 
the bridge; manj^ were gazing through 
the dripping roof; others hanging on 
the friglitful precipices, in momentary 
danger of being dashed to pieces. Tiie 
stream ruslied over the rocks v.ith 
unusual fury ; the torclies Ih^rcd in the 
gloomy distance, and the countenances 
of (he rude spectators of this dismal 
scene, were expressive of the awe which 
chilled each bosom. When the boat 
had arrived at the fatal spot, INlontano 
Avas placed on the platform, and from 
thence beheld the jaws of destruction 



126 ALEXEXA ; OR THE 

open to receive liim. It was a moment 
of horror ; for a wild cry starlled all 
present, and on the monk turning his 
eves to ascertain the cause, he saw 
Torqno lowered by a rope, with his 
hands and feet tied together, who, as 
he screamed and struggled, twisted his 
distorted form to gaze on the black 
gulph into which he was about to be 
})recipitatcd. The former now forgot 
ijis own situation on observing his 
fellow-sufibrer ; but for him he felt 
no compassion ; on the contrary, he 
grinned with satisfaction, on the exe- 
tnlioner drawing his sabre, for the 
purpose of cutting the frail cord by 
which lie was suspended ; but a deep 
groan, accompanied by a sudden flash 
of light, drew his attention to the 
bridge, and he there beheld the de- 
cayed figure of Hugo rise from the 
deep, with a scroll in his right hand, 
\\hich he held so close to one of the 
torches, that the writing could be ac- 
curately distinguished ; and Montano\s 
blood froze on reading those words — ■ 



GASrLE OF SANTA MAIICO. i'27 

'* Hu<xo waits to conduct his master to 
the mansions of darkness !" lie trem- 
bled ; the cold perspiration fell from 
his agitated brows into the dark waters 
of the gulph. Galafron gave thedread 
signal ; the rope was severed, and Tor- 
quo fell headlong into the rugged deep ; 
the plunge made the cavern ring, and 
his last moan ascended as Hugo's body 
sunk, while the impatient soul of r>Ion- 
tano fluttered in his bosom, willing to 
relinquish its polluted tenement, raiher 
than endure such harrowing sights. 
The inquisitors now uncovered their 
heads, and the executioners disrobed 
the monk, ar.d then returned in the 
boat to the hall. All eyes \Nerc fixed 
on him ; his fate was inevitable, and 
while he yet gazed on the surrounding- 
horrors, the remains of Acasto de- 
scended, and stood beside him. Moii- 
(ano's hands were at that time unbound ; 
he laid them on Philip's shoulders, and 
held him from him ; but the cord by 
which the latter was lowered beingcut, 
he fell into the monk's arms, and the 



12S ALEXENA ; OR THE 

same instant the platform turned over^ 
plunging both into the foaming abyss, 
where the former was clashed to pieces ; 
no trace of either ever appeared, and 
we hope their vices, like themselves, 
will be forgotten ; or, if remembered, 
only with abhorrence, accompanied by 
a sincere desire, that such monsters 
may never again degrade the human 
form. 



«ASTLE OF SANTA MAUCO. 129 



CHAP. V. 

'-' Love is a smoke rais'd with the fume of si^hs ; 
Being puig'd, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes 
Being vexM, a sea nourish'J with lovers' tears : 
What is it else ? A madness most discreet, 
A choking gall, and a preserving swreet." 

Rom, & Jul. 

J. ME execution of Montano and iiis 
\'ile associate made a deep and lasting 
impression on all those who had wit- 
nessed it. and assisted in reconciling: 
them to the chan£:e which was about 
to take place. Don Miguel and liis 
friends were i<»;noraRt of wliat sentence 
had been passed on tlieir enemies^ until 
the, day after they were no more, and 
from that hour every individual in the 
castle carefidly avoided mentioning 
their names, so that in a week they 
were apparently forgotten. 

Before Galafron left Santa Marco, he 
ordered every individual to remain in 
it for one montli, on pain of incurring- 
the displeasure of the holy tribunal^ ae 



f5 



ISO alexena; or the 

he said it mi<^ht be necessary for 
many amon^ them to give personal 
testimony against the abbess of the 
Dominicans; but this mandate of the 
inquisitor gave little uneasiness, as the 
entire party were too happy to think 
of separating so soon, and some among 
them could not bear the idea, without 
suffering certain unpleasant sensations, 
inflicted by the arrows of the little 
blind god. Among those, were Louisa 
and Velasco, who were constantly seen 
on the beach, while Louisa and Don 
Celio amused themselves in rambling 
through the delightfully romantic paths 
opposite the castle. Zorayda played 
cnchantingly both on the guitar and 
harp, so that Don Miguel was seldom 
to be found absent from the music- 
room, and Alexena, with her PvJorlimer, 
generally passed their morning in the 
library, either drawing, or reading to 
each other. Happiness and content 
shone on the countenance of every 
individual in Santa Marco. Don Selib 



OASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 131 

looked forward, with much satisfaction, 
to an union between Lucinda and hii 
son, being ah'eady very much attached 
to that lovely girl, whose beauty was 
ihc least of her perfections ; she was a 
descendant of one of the first families 
in Spain, related to the prince, pos- 
sessed of an ample fortune, and though 
not so delicately beautiful as her sister 
Zorayda, had many brilliant attractions. 
Cello loved her with boundless aiTec- 
tion^ and very soon became a favourite 
suitor. Her father, Don Alonzo, ap- 
proved of her choice, and made them 
happy. 

Don Miguel had no reason to com- 
plain ; his manners were irresistible, 
and in a short time Zorayda's bosom 
heaved v^ith that most undefinable of 
sensations — love; and there was not 
many females in Spain, nay, we shall 
only except our heroine, who was so 
likely to inspire that delightful passion; 
gracefully tall in her person, with a 
%ure every way faultless ; fine hazie- 



iS2 ALEXENA; OR THE 

coloured eyes ; her liair jetty black ; 
her complexion fair; her voice soft 
and languishing, accompanied with a 
bewitching smile^ that played round a 
mouth of inexpressible beauty ; in fact, 
every movement gave an interest which 
found the way to his heart ; he was 
the most enamoured of men, the most 
respectful of lovers, tremblingly alive 
to anticipate her wishes, and to prevent 
the possibility of the most trivial of 
them remaining ungratified. Oh! he 
was 



All made of fantasy, 



All made of passion, and all made of wishes -j 
All adoration, duty, and observance ; 
All humbleness, all patience, and impatience; 
All purity, all trial, all observance." — 

And ere the expiration of a month, was 
the happiest individual in the castle. 

Every succeeding day brought new 
visitors, many of whom were Don 
Miguel's most distinguished friends, 
and amon": them our eccentric cha- 
racier^ Don Raphiel de Agrilio, deserves 



tJASILE OF SANTA MAECO. 13S 

notice ; he was a man of rare talents, 
accomplished, blessed with the best of 
hearts, yet, notwithstanding, was exces- 
sively crabbed and morose, particularly 
with those who affected any virtue 
which they really did not possess ; such 
persons were sure of receiving no mercy, 
and seldom a day passed without giving 
him an opportunity of annoying them. 
Alexena and Zorayda were his favour- 
ites, and he generally allowed them to 
lean on his arm for an hour every 
evening, which was considered by all 
his acquaintances, as a most extraordi- 
nary piece of condescension, "and 
proved beyond a possibility of doubt^ 
that those ladies were endowed with 
matchless excellence. During hiss ple- 
netic fits, he was exceedingly diverting; 
all his observations were well applied; 
but his sarcasms, though humorous, 
were rather severe. 

About three v.'ceks after Don MiguePs 
restoration, he sent cards of invitation 
for a grand masked ball, to which were 
invited every family of distinction in 



Iji AliEXENA ; OS THE 

St. Sebastian, Pampeluna, and Sara- 
gossa ; this entertainment promised 
much gratification, particularly to Don 
Ilaohiel, who was resolved to tease all 
those who deserved it, without distinc- 
tion, and from the diversity of cha- 
racters ; he promised himself ample 
satisfaction for the torrents of abuse 
with which he had been mercilessly 
loaded. In the castle, splendid pre- 
parations were made, and with every 
part of them, our cynic was sure to 
find a thousand taults. " The emble- 
matic figures were without meaning ; 
the artificial flowers, like any thing but 
nature; the masks villanously executed ; 
the dresses abominable ; the company 
invited, all fools ; and Don Miguel, a 
downright madman." He understood 
English, and spoke it fluently ; therefore, 
generally conversed with Mortimer in 
that language, and seldom smiled, ex- 
cept when listening to Alexcna's lisping 
attempts at the pronunciation of it. 
Bhe iufiiiitely amused hira ; her playful 



«ASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. Ibd- 

iiinocence won his heart ; and in the 
whole of his careful observance of her 
manners, he saw nothing- with whicli he 
could be displeased. "You are too 
forgiving," he would sometimes say, 
*' but, nevertheless, 1 must love you, 

that is, I mean — 1 mean pugh ! — 

ridiculous !" 

" Me don't like you," Alexeiia re- 
plied, " you be so much sulky.'' 

" No jabber now," observed Don 
Haphiel. " Speak Spanish." 

'' Me much like English." 

'' Aye, because it is your clumsy- 
husband's language.'' 

*' Ah ! ah ! you be ver' merry." 

'' Not I ! — confounded folly ! it makes 
nie sick." 

- Vil ye be sad?" 

" Yes, how can 1 be otherwise, when 
I am in company with such idiots, 
who scarce know how to laugh at each 
other?" 

'' Vake out of it then." 

** I will ; and as I would fain believe 






IS6 ALEXENA; OR THE 

you have some sense, I shall take you 
with me." 

' And me vil take Mortimer/' 
" Oh, yes ! but you would liave been 
better without such an incumbrance ; 
'however, as he is not the most incor- 
3'i^ible ass here^ you may bring him 
alons:." 

His lordship laughed, and having 
drawn an arm of his beautiful bride 
through his, accompanied Don Raphiel 
to the adjacent precipices, which com- 
manded one of the finest views of the 
country and the bay. While they 
wandered along the coast, our heroine 
was highly entertained with the obser- 
vations of her sulky companion, whom 
even the beauties of nature could scarce 
please ; but their attention was diverted 
from this subject b3Mhe sound of voices 
very nigh them, and on peepi4]g over 
the projection of a rock, they beheld 
Don Mii^uel at the feet of Zoravda. 
pouring out the eifusions of a love-sick 
heart, and she listening with approving 
jsmiles and blushes. Lord IMortimer 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 1S7 

and his lady would have made a preci- 
pitate retreat, had not Don Raphiel held 
both; and while the lover continued 
speaking, Raphiel's physiognomy was 
most laughable^ and it was not without 
the utmost diiiicultj his lordship could 
prevent him iVom disturbing- the tele-a- 
ttte. 

" Merciful pow ers !'' he exclaimed, 
" did you ever hear such stuff as this 
silly J ack-o'-th'- Lantern is filling that 
languishing lady's brains wiih? Before 
heaven, 1 should not be surprised, if 
he imagined himself a second Apollo; 
aye, aiid Miss Zorayda, a Daphne ; 
only she seems much more inclmed to 
sit than run away. — Charming thought ! 
how delightful to tumble from those 
cliffs — be changed into a river, and 
mingle with the waves of Biscay !" 

" Vere ye ever in love?" demanded 
Alexena. 

" Vos I ever in bedlam ?" said he, 
mimicing. — " No ! not quite so mad 
as to sing sonnets to the moon, dash 
myself against rugged precipices^ tear 



13S Ai^EXE^A; Oa THE 

my liair out in humlfuls^ insult my 
friends, bake myself in the sum, and 
then blow my brains out." 

*' Lovers are seldom so frantic, be- 
lieve me/' observed his lordship^ laugh- 
in '^'' 

••' Aye, but they are (hough. How 
often have I seen such bamboozled 
automatons move along, like scare- 
crows, to some sunny bar:k, and liiere 
sink beneath a load of imaginary 
misery ; then, stretched at full length, 
enumerate their several woes, begiu- 
iiinu: with the last frown or scornful 
look of their mistresses, who, in all 
probability, at the moment, were wast- 
ing their beauty, if they had any, over 
a chess-board or gaming-table." 

" You be odious man, and our sex: 
vil hate you." 

" Yes, for stating facts; women hate 
to hear the truth ; but was not this the 
case, we should have no marriages, for 
a man must tell a thousand lies, and 
swear to them, before any of you will 
JtcJl him one in return, which is no more 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAr.CO. IS9 

than that you are content to have the 
poor devil for an husband." 

They were now at the draw- bridge^ 
where Virginia met them, witli word 
that Galafroii had returned, accompa- 
nied by Ansehiio, Isabel, and Madeline, 
with the abbess of the Dominicans and 
two nuns, prisoners. Alexena was 
greatly shocked at this intelligence, 
being aware the latter had been brought 
to be tried, and that escape was utterly- 
impossible, when such witnesses as 
Eveline, Arabel, Bernardo, and herself, 
should appear against her. 
- Don Raphiel soon learned the cha« 
racter of the abbess, but refrained from 
making any observations ; he was too 
noble-minded to " load the fallen ;" on 
the contrary, he ventured to join Don 
Miguel and the ladies in her behalf; 
but the stern Galafron ordered all 
to be silent, as he was resolved to 
be entirely guided by evidence. She 
was accordingly tried, found guilty, 
and executed, by being conveyed in 
a boat a considerable way into the bay. 



HO ALEXENA* OR THE 

where two buoys were fastened to her 
person, and she was then flung into 
the waves to perish by birds of prey, 
who literally eat her alive. Thus 
perished Ursula de Baretto, the most 
cruel domina that ever disgraced a 
religious institution ; her wealth was 
immense, and instead of saving, it 
hurried her to destruction. The crafty 
inquisitors divided the spoils which she 
had so infamously amassed — then de- 
stroyed her ; and so may all tyrants 
perish ! 

In a few days after the trial of the 
abbess, Galafron pardoned the n,uns, 
who, he said, merely acted under her 
influence, and rewarded the good 
Madeline, \^ho had saved Virginia, by 
appointing her superior of the Domi- 
nican convent, to the great joy of every 
individual within its walls. The kind 
nun had incurred the displeasure of 
her late cruel predecessor, by inter- 
fering for Ellena, and was punished 
by many months solitary confinement. 
Father Zelo was appointed to a high 



CASTLE OP SANTA MARCO. 141 

preferment in the churcli, but chose 
to remain as confessor to the liimily 
of his worthy benefactor ; and Don 
Miguel felt so extremely gratefnl for 
this proof o his unalterable attach- 
ment, that durin«^ the remainder of his 
life, he paid him every attention. 

Before the inquisitors left the castle, 
they offered an immense sum for it, in 
order to settle within its walls a number 
of monks of the Benedictine order, 
who would shelter the distressed travel- 
ler, or wandering pilgrim, from the 
remorseless banditti which had fora^-es 
infested those mountains, and as a fur- 
ther inducement, they pledged them- 
selves, it should for everbear his name;, 
but Don Misfuel knew the tribunal too 
well to place any reliance on their 
promises, therefore, declined their pro- 
posal in the gentlest terms, saying, ''It 
washis intention to reside in it constantly 
durinc: the summer months.'* The 
inquisitors, however, were indefatigable, 
and finding that he would not part with 
it to them, commissioned others to 



J42 ALEXEXA ; OR TU3 

purchase it for his most Christian ma- 
jesty, under pretence, thatthe king wish- 
ed to convert it into a fortress, for the 
purpose of defending those seas from 
pirates. But this offer he also declined, 
and Galafron returned without effect- 
ing this desirable point. Its gloomy 
dungeons and subterranean caverns 
would have been an excellent place to 
torluro or confine the Moors ; and this 
was the al)ominable use for which it 
was intended ; these were the pilgrims 
and travellers the inquisitors wished to 
shelter ; these were the wretches that 
were to be protected from the banditti ; 
however, the halls of Santa Marco were 
saved from such pollution, and would 
for ages have braved the storm, had it 
not been for the cruelty of those re- 
morseless vipers, who, in a short time 
destroyed this ancient seat of hospitali- 
ty, where joy and merriment had been 
constant guests, and where food and 
fire was administered to those whose 
wants required it. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. H3 

A few days previous to that appoint- 
ed for tlio masquerade, Don Miguel 
won the final consent of the beautiful 
Zoyrada, and had no sooner obtained 
it, than he waited on Don Raphiel, 
wliom he requested to accompany him 
to the altar. 

" Is it I? ara you really serious?' he 
exclaimed^ evidently surprised. 

'' Certainly ; I know few bachelors 
whom 1 esteem so much — none more.'' 

'' By my honour," observed Agrillo, 
'' if you prevail, I should not wonder 
if I follow your example, and become 
a Benedict myself" Clarissa's cousin, 
a fine animated girl, was at this moment 
standing opposite him, and he fixed his 
eyes with so much meaning on her face, 
that she almost sunk with confusion. 

''Eh! girl," he inquired, '' why so 
much rogue? — by my life, 1 believe this 
castle's enchanted, and that you are the 
sorceress; for since these walls received 
you, 1 am most strangely altered." 
Isabella now turned to withdraw, but 
Don Raphiel detained her; — " You 



Hi jllexena; or the 

must not go, Donna, until you say I 
am for/J^iven ; for world's I would not 
offend you." 

" By all that's wonderful," exclaimed 
Selib, ''I believe you are serious, if so, 
Isabella should be proud of having 
made a conquest of a man who has 
resisted the beauties of Spain these 
fifteen years." 

'' Thank you, Selib ; but you give me 
credit for too much." Isabella, with 
difficulty, escaped from this raillery, but 
the instant she disappeared, Raphiel 
declared, he most sincerely loved her, 
and earnestly begged Don Miguel's in- 
terference in his behalf. Nothing could 
exceed the surprise of all present, and 
no unfortunate lover was ever more 
unmercifully teased ; but he displayed 
infinite good humour, so much so, that 
his best friends scarce knew him, and in 
a very few days, actually obtained 
Isabella's consent. Velasco was equally 
successful. Celio had w^on the heart of 
Lucinda, with tlie mutual consent of 
both their parents, and after a most 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 145 

joyful consultation, it was mutually 
aoreed '' by and between the aforesaid 
parties/' that those four happy couple 
should be nnarricd on the same day. 
The auspicious morning at length 
arrived ; the blushing brides were led 
to the ahar, and it V70uld be difficult 
to decide which was the prettiest; yet 
if a decision could be made, Zorayda 
was certainly entitled to the preference. 
But our heroine stood peerless, and 
while present, all others seemed forgot- 
ten by the numerous and gay assem- 
blage Avhich now crowded the castle. 
This day passed happily, though tedi- 
ously, the lovers having wished for 
night, an hundred thousand tim.es. Oh ! 

" Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds, 

Tow'rds Phoebus' mansion ; such a waggoner 
As Phaston would whip you to the west, 
And bring ia cloudy night immediately. 
Spread thy close curtain, love performing nigia! 
That run-away 's eyes may wink ;"— 

For— 

" Lovers can see to do their am'rous ritet 
By their own beauties.'' 

VOL. III. G ' 



ii6 ALEXENA; OR THE 

Night, at length, wearied by their % 
supplications, gathered the bright god 
of day beneath her dusky wings, and 
ere the twelfth hour, the lovers had 
reached the zenith of earlhl) blissv 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAUCO, 147 



CHAP. VI. 

'• His nature is too noble for the world : 

He would not flatter Xeptuue for his trident. 

Or Jove for his power to thunder. His heart's his 

mouth : 
What his breast forges, that his tongue must vent.'' 

Cor, 

AjOVE and joy waited on the bridef5, 
as their respective husbands led them^ 
*' in beauty, blushing like an April 
morn," to the breakfast-parlour, where 
they happily met to congratulate each 
other on bavins: attained the heio^ht of 
human felicity. Don Raphiel, though 
a most attentive groom, had not al- 
toirether forsrotten his old habits ; vet 
managed his satirical humour with 
such adroitness, that it gave infinite 
entertainment ; and the second day 
after, avast number of strangers being 
expected, he resolved to indulge it. 

On the night of the masquerade, Don 
Raphiel promised to give our heroine 
a sketch of the different characters, as 

g2 



148 ALEXENA; OR THE 

they passed fi'om one siiiie of rooms 
to another^ and appointed a convenient 
spot for the purpose. The masks began 
to assemble at an early hour, and before 
eleven o'clock, the apartments were 
crowded. Alexena was dressed as a 
shepherdess, her attire simply beauti- 
ful ; Zorayda was habited as a gipsy; 
Lucinda,, as a sultana ; Louisa, as a nun; 
.Virginia^ as a flower girl ; Eveline, as 
a duenna; Arabel_, as a ballad -singer ; 
Don Mi:^uel assumed the character of 
an inquisitor ; Don Raphiel, that of a 
fortune-teller ; Lord IMortimer, as a 
knight-errant ; Carlos, as a monk of 
the order of St. Dominic ; Cclio, as 
a muleteer; Velasco, as a huntsman. 
The remainder of our friends wore 
plain dominos; but among the motley 
group were kings, queens, princesses, 
devils, bravos, cheesemongers, fruit- 
erers, sailors, tinkers, players, frisseurs, 
courtiers, demerips, harlequins, gipsys, 
Tiuns, and other characters innumera- 
ble, each attentively seckirtg the god- 
dess Pleasure. Among such a throng. 



tJASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 149 

Hapliiel could not fail finding- man/ 
deserving censure, and was not many 
minutes seated in a recess, which oui* 
heroine had converted into an artificial 
arbour, before he beg'an to entertain her 
with their faults and foibles. The first 
who passed was a friar, with an enor- 
mous paunch, and Raphiel exclaim- 
ed — '•' See that overgrown porpoise ; 
he is a rich alcade, having a fortune 
of twenty thousand crowns per annum, 
which has been amassed — heaven knows 
how ! There is not a more ignorant oi* 
uncharitable dog in Spain ; to be poor 
is, in his opinion, to be a rogue, and 
such he is sure to punish, guilty or 
not.=' 

'' Me don't like him," observed Alex- 
ena, in English. 

" ^Vell, look here, that slim figure, 
who, by her habit, we are to suppose 
is a devotee, is really one of the most 
atfected coquettes in Europe ; she has 
a considerable share of beauty ; but 
lier manners are so disofustini!:, that in 



ioO alexena; on the 

a few moments yon imagine you are 
in company with a monster." 

" Be vou not ver' severe ?'' demand- 
ed his attentive companion. 

''No, truly; but, hush! here comes 
a fiashy captain ; one of the most ar- 
rant cowards that ever wore a sword ; 
he has been in one or two skirmishes, 
in consequence of which, it appears to 
be his belief, none are more valiant; 
though it is pretty generally whispered 
he ran away, and that his connexion 
alone saved liim from well-merited dis- 
grace. 

" Do good so he to let him pass." 
*' Aye, with all my heart; we have 
had too much of him already." 

*' Who be this pretty smart figure?" 
'• Oh ! this is one of our learned 
ladies — the greatest plague in exist- 
ence. She drags her knowledge of 
history, geograpliy, politics^&c. head 
foremost into every conversation, no 
matter whether foreign to the subject 
in discussion or not. The other day% 



4;A!ITI.E of SANTA MAR€0. 151 

:for instance, an eminent physician ob- 
served, that a certain young female of 
my acquaintance was rapidly consum- 
ing by a decline, when Miss here, not 
aware of his profession, instantly con- 
tradicted him, by saying, " La Signior, 
yon mistake the poor thing's complaint ; 
I can prove to a demonstration, it is 
nothing more than a nertous fever, 
caught from a seve.re cold. She then 
entered into a learned description of 
diseases, and concluded, in my mind, 
very ridiculously ; all present thought 
so too ; but if any one had opposed 
her, she would not have ceased bab- 
bling yet." 

" Me have enough of her. — Pray 
now who is this that talks so incessant- 

*' Mercy on me ! — this is one of the 
greatest pests of society — a gossip; a 
small-talk vender, a dealer in charac- 
ters, a scandalous chronicle, a she- 
devil in petticoats. From the hour she 
rises, until fatigue closes her ferret eyes, 
her tongue U busy propagating mis- 



J52 ALEXEVA ; OR THE 

chief. What is said in this house she 
will grossly pervert into a different 
meaning', and as her Tarious inclina- 
tions prompt, repeat to the credulous, 
to the ill-natured, or envious, as facts, 
which they believe, or pretend to be- 
lieve, and tell to others, with innume- 
rable additions," 

" I vil h^tc the vorld two times more 
than imagine you, if you can't prove 
me some be good.'' 

'' Ah ! ha ! you speak English like 
a parrot; I should not like to have 
the trouble of making you pronounce 
it 7nuch good, (mimicing.) 

" Vel, me not mind. — Say who be dis 
frisseur?'* 

" That is a butterfly — a moth — a 
senseless powder-monkey, who thrusts 
himself into all companies — flutters 
about the females— talks scandal— hems 
handkerchiefs — composes washes for 
the fair — combs old Tabby's lap-dogs 
— kills characters by the gross — and is 
despised and laughed at for his pains." 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 1^3 

" Ob, my! — lie be worst yet." 

" Aye, but here comes a cheese- 
monger ; how different his real occupa- 
tion! (I should say profession,) being; 
a quack, an apothecary, a vender of 
poison by wholesale and retail ; but 
withal, a useful member; he hides the 
frailty of numbers of your sex, where 
they are seldom discovered — I mean in. 
the o-rave. He has two or three sove- 
reign remedies for all diseases, which he 
applies indiscriminately. If they cure^, 
it is well ; if they kill, it saves farther 
trouble. He has sent many passengers 
to Charon these some years past, and 
as the most of them are females, it is 
but reasonable he should expect a 
pretty storm about his ears the moment 
he crosses Styx." 

*•' Let him begone, and say wlio this 
bravo be?" 

" He is a country squire, with scarce 
a rial's worth of brains — a mere boar- 
hunter, more brutal in his manners 
4ban tlie beasts which conrstitute hi^ 

G 5 



154 ALEXENA; OR THE 

game ; overbearing-, oppressive, ty- 
rannical to a degree, over lliose un- 
fortunates whom relentless fate has 
subjuo^ated to his gating yoke; and 
snealvingly mean and submissive to 
his superiors in wealth and power. — 
I wonder how he found admission 
here!" 

*' Well, he be hateful character ; — 
Avho is this nun?" 

" T feel pleasure in being able to 
gratify you. — She is the mother of a 
fine family, and one of the most ines- 
timable of women. Another time, and 
1 shall give you a detail of her num- 
berless virtues." 

'' I sliould much like introduce." 

" Very well ; I will endeavour to 
f^ratify you, but can't at present, as I 
wish to discover a figure, who, from the 
slowness of his gait, seems to be ad- 
vanced in years, and is habited as an 
itinerant showman. Yonder knight- 
errant, if I mistake not, is your hus- 
band^ and seems much disturbed by 



CASTLE OP SANTA MARCO. 155 

the representaiioti. — Come, let us see 
what it means." 

Don ilaphiel thea led our heroine 
where Lord Mortimer was slandin£»\ 
and as she advuiiced, his agitation 
was apparent. Ourcyuic now beg'ged 
to have a peep, and offered tiie feign- 
ed showman money. His voice was 
known, and Zelo (tor it was hej caught 
him by the arm, asid poifitiiig to the 
glass, in a suppressed voice, bid him 
look quickly. He did, and to his un- 
speakable terror, beheld a villain, in 
the robes of au inquisitor, in the act 
of tiring a train of gun-powder, which 
was represented as concealed in the 
vaults of the castle." 

'' Oh, merciful heaven ! my good 
Zelo, what is the meaning of this 
dreadful picture?" 

" We are all on the brink of destruc- 
tion ; tind Don Miguel, if possible, and 
retreat ia the western tower ; descend 
the stairs by the trap-door you will find 
open ; get on board the boat, and I 
will be with vou as soon as I warn our 



156 ALEXENA; OR THE 

other friends ; for to give a general 
alarm would be the inevitable ruin of 
us all." 

Raphiel turned to protect Alexena, 
and seek for his wife ; but the former 
was gone, and Mortimer had vanished. 
Distracted, he rushed into the adjoining 
rooms, where he met Isabella and 
Celio ; mentioned their horrid situa- 
tion, and sent the latter in search of 
Lucinda and the other ladies. Zelo, 
in the meantime had the ixood fortune 
to meet Don l^.Iiguel, who no sooner 
understood their impending danger, 
than he exclaimed — " 'Tis the bloody 
work of Galafron, who is here in a 
mask: seek our dear friends, and let 
them be conveyed to the place of ren- 
dezvous, while I endeavour to prevent 
Ihis dreadful calamity." He then has- 
tened away, and almost flew towards 
the subterraneans ; but was petrified 
with amazement, on finding Alexena 
quielly following the infernal inquisitor 
lo inevitable ruin. '' Lady Mortimer," 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 

he hoarsely murmured, " Why trc j in 
the footsteps of Satan?" Galafron turn- 
ed, and beheld Don Miguel, habited in 
the robes of the holy tribunal; he knew 
not what to think, but conceiving' he 
was discovered, extinguished his lamp, 
and retreated through one of the pri- 
vate passages. To attempt overtaking 
him would be little less than madness; 
therefore, the former prudently resolved 
to return to the rooms, seize the casket 
wherein his treasures was deposited, 
and fly to the brigantine, which lay 
close under the walls. 

Lord Mortimer, in his anxiety to sav& 
Zorayda, Louisa, Arabel, &c. forgot 
Alexena, who foolishly let go his arm, 
on being beckoned to by the inquisitor, 
and who, by his dress, she mistook for 
Don INIiguel. On his lordship turning 
to request she would not stir from his 
side, judge his consternation, on finding 
she was not even in the same apartment. 
Wretched, frantic beyond conception, 
he rudely pressed through the crowd^ 
and was about to call her, when he 



158 alexena; or the 

Avas again met by Zelo, who told him 
she was safe, and commanded him, as 
he valued her existence, to hasten to 
the tower. 

During these eventful momenta, 
Rourke and Williams had stolen into a 
corner, where ihey diverted each other 
with the most extraordinary observa- 
tions that likely were ever uttered, and, 
luckily, were reconnoitered by the good 
father as he passed ; their late merri- 
ment was woefully changed by his 
communication, and in less than five 
minutes they were in the tower, accom- 
panied by Henriquez and Albert, rhere 
the unfortunate Don Miguel harangued 
them in broken whispers, naming cacii, 
and alter commendinsr them to the 
protection of heaven, he descended a 
.cylindrical flight of stairs, cut in the 
rock, the lower steps of which were 
washed by the swelling surge, on which 
a boat lay tossing, and into it he 
lifted his faintins: Nvife. Mortimer and 
Alexena followed ; Velasco and Louisa 
jiext^ and after them, every individual 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 159 

about whose welflire we are immediate- 
ly interested, accompanied by a very 
few straii ■^ers. The boat was so heavily 
laden, that she scarcely cleared the 
water; however, a gentle breeze pro- 
mised to carry them in safety to the 
brigantine, which they hoped had 
escaped their cruel enemies ; but this 
last refuge was denied, unless they 
fought and conquered ; arms, they had 
none, and the lights on board, too truly 
proved she was manned ; every moment 
their vessel gained on her, and should 
they be discovered, one cannon shot 
would bury them in the deep ; they 
dare not use an oar; every one looked 
to Williams for relief, who sat like a 
stoic, apparently unconcerned, but was 
in reality their sheet anchor. 

" Can any one swim here?" he de- 
manded ; " if so, let him drop overboard 
with me, and we can enter by the cabin 
■windows, knock tiicse sharks o' the 
head, and save this precious freight; 
if not, let Don Mio:uel or Lord Morti- 
mer come to the helm, and Til go 
alone." 



160 ALEXENA; OR THE 

*' 1 can swim like a herren/'' whis- 
pered Rourke, and dive like a dolphin, 
so tumble in and we'll bother them." 
There was no time to lose, the inquisi- 
tors had withdrew, and the languid 
flame of their lanterns was distinguish- 
able, moving along the beach ; lights 
were also visible in a large galley, 
which was ready to get under weigh in 
a moment ; and if our terrified adven- 
turers did not succeed before they 
boarded her, all was lost. 

"What's keeping you, Williams ?*' 
said Rourke. 

" No jaw rope, but drift ahead ;" he 
replied, '* I'm in already." 

"God bless you, my friends," said 
Don Miguel, "i would be with you, if I 
could swim." Lion now became un- 
easy, and Lord Mortimer let him gently 
into the water ; then deciarf^d his de- 
termination of assisting his servant, 
and, notwitlistandinii' the urirent en- 
treaties of the ladies, particularly our 
lieroine, he jumped into the water, 
and swam after the dog to the brigan- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 161 

tiae. The niglit was exceeding dark, 
and had it not been for the lights on 
board, our distressed fugitives would 
have found it extremely difficult to 
discover her ; but Providence assisted 
them in every thing, for Williams 
gained the cabin window, and had 
entered before his lordship appeared ; 
he and Rourke tfien hauled him up, 
and as all within was silent, they 
groped about in search of arms, 
and luckily found two carbines and a 
cutlass. The boys were in bed in a 
lillle room adjoining, and them they 
easily secured ; then cautiously crept 
upon deck, where the men were walking, 
expecting tlie return of their compa- 
nions, who had gone to assist the inqui- 
sitors. Tiieir lanterns served to point 
them out, and before they could make 
the slightest resistance, were all seized, 
bound, and conveyed to the hold. Don 
Miguel, in the mean time, ran the boat 
along side, and the ladies were quickly 
assisted on deck, from which they 



162 ALEXENA; OR THE 

retired to the cabin, where Albert pre- 
pared a fire, and procured lamps. 

It was now necessary to get under 
weigh with all possible dispatch. Wil- 
liams took the command, and was as 
promptly obeyed as tlie first admiral of 
the British fleet; his orders were issued 
in low whispers, as the galley was 
too close to admit of their conversing 
freely ; and in ten minutes they stood out 
from the s'nore, having cut their cables ; 
poor Bill had very indifierent seatnen, 
but their good-will made amends for 
their want of knowledge, and his little 
■vessel had got a-head of the enemy's 
ship, above a cannon shot, before (hey 
observed the lights of the inquisitors 
glide rapidly along the beach The faint 
plasliing of oars was now heard, and 
instantly after the destructive train was 
fired, in less than half a minute the 
castle blew up with a drcr^dful noise, 
for a moment illuminatingthe surround- 
ing woods and sea coast ; large beams 
of burning timber, and numbers of 
.scorched and mutilated bodies, fell round 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAaCO. 163 

the vessels ; the groans of the many 
vv'ounded were wafted from the shore ; 
v.hile the piercing shrieks and wild 
cries of those who had escaped rent 
the air. Numbers had been alarmed, 
by a few mysterious hints vvhich fell 
from Zelo, and instantly withdrew; 
these and their attendants, witli several 
of the baud, who had been informed of 
their danger, had Inckily passed the 
draw-brid^j^e time enoui^h to avoid in- 
evitable destruction. 

The burning pile quickly discovered 
the retreat of our adventurers, which 
was no sooner observed by Galafron, 
than he commanded them to be pur- 
sued. Williams now crowded all the 
sail he could muster, but finding it 
woidd not do, the guns were loaded^ 
and the deck cleared for action ; as 
every njan on board had solemnly swore 
to conquer or perish. The ladies were 
busily employed heating balls, with 
vvhich Captain Williams hoped to fire 
^the rii^ging of (he galley, and in twenty 
.rainui.cs they were within pistol shoi. 



164 ALEXENA: OR THE 



The brigantine had tlie advantage 
of the wind, but the enemy hud more 
hands, and a larger vessel, besides 
their men were trained ; however, to 
fight they were resolved, and Bill seem- 
ed confident of victory. '' Come, lads/' 
he shonted, " clap the jigger tackle to 
your spirits, and off with the muzzle 
lasliing's — batter their hull — splinter the 
deck — come, scud away my hearties — 
already the enemy hardly know their 
fore-sheet from thi maintop bow-line.'* 

The yards were secured ; the bull- 
dogs ready : and being now muzzle to 
!nuzzle, the brigantine poured in a 
broadside in gallant style. This con- 
fused tlie inquisitors, who had not an 
idea of meeting with resistaiice-; but 
were most disagreeably undeceived ; 
Rourke fought desperately ; between 
every broadside, he bawled—'' Bow- 
wow ! — what spattering! — rake them 
starboard and larboard — more car- 
tridges — blow them up! That's my 
honies! (to the cannon,) speak out!" 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 165 

" Do you see," cried Bill, " they 
sheer off ah'eady. — Now for a red-hot 
ball in their powder-room." 

Albertj at this moment, received a 
severe wound in the hand, and^one of 
the inquisitorial seamen, who had been 
previously liberated to assist in the 
action, had his head carried away by 
a cannon shot. 

Lord Mortimer anxiously inquired 
who was wounded? 

" Your servant," replied Williams ; 
'' but he has only got his ticklers 
smasiied ; send him down to have them 
foddered by the ladies, as they must 
be our surgeons now," 

The galley, by this time, had set 
all her canvas; but kept firing as she 
retreated. 

" Ah ! ah !" cried the captain, *' me 
knowed she'd start about. Point well; 
take time, and bear a hand — that's it !" 

Mere Williams ordered a discliarsj-e 
of several red-hot sliot and shells, 
■which did considerable execution, and 



106 ALEXENA; CH THE 

in five minutes more the enemj's rigj^ing 
was in flames. The scene was horrible 
beyond description ; the ])rigantine 
ceased firing, and t)ore away, as the 
galley ^\as expected to blow up. In 
a quarter of an hour, this actually hap- 
pened, and the explosion was beyond 
conception dreadful; some few had 
thrown themselves into the sea, and 
were picked up in a short time after 
by our noble crew — two of whom were 
sailors, one a monk, and these only 
survived." 

Don Miguel, Velasco, Celio, and 
Williams, were wounded severely ; 
Lord Mortimer, Antonio, Rourke, and 
Albert, slightly; Henriquez and PedriU 
lo, dangerously ; one seaman killed, 
and one mortally wounded, who died 
next day. Vasquoz, Selib, &c. es- 
caped unhurt, though they were in the 
middle of the fire ; and the ladies, who 
had been almost lifeless Mith fear 
during the action, were now busily 
engaged dressing the wounded. No- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 167 

thing could exceed the steadiness, 
courage, coohiess, and bravery, of 
every individual; and Williams swore 
they deserved fair weather, light 
breezes, and a smooth sea, until the 
High Admiral of all should waft them 
aloft ! 

On a consultation the foUowinir 
morning, it was deemed advisable to 
steer towards the coast of France, there 
procure a proper pilot, and then sail 
for old England, 

" ■■ That pale, that white-fac'd shore. 

Whose foot spurns back the ocean's roaring tides, 
And coops from other lands her islanders.** 

and there Don Miguel resolved 
to reside, as he could not but detest 
his native country. Injury had been 
heaped on injury : the king had savcd^ 
but to deliver him to the inquisition. 
This was what he believed ; but the 
fact was not so. However, the whole 
party conceived it unsafe to return 
to Spain, at Icaj^i. lor scn^e time; 
aud^ as both Sir Ednsond and Lord 



J68 alexena; or the 

Mortimer pressed Don JMiguel, Selib> 
Velasco, CeliOj &c. to accompany them 
to Hollywood castle ; they accepted the 
invitation. 

On the third day, the hrigantine 
anchored in a small creek on the 
French coast, in the vicinity of a sea- 
port town,, from which they procured 
a pilot and 'provisions Here M San- 
tanelle, Theodore, and Arabel, parted 
with Alexena a second time, but not 
without many tears and prayers for her 
prosperity. 

In a week the brigantine was once 
more at sea^ well manned, and with 
every thing that could render her pas- 
sengers comfortable. While they lay 
in the creek, the monk who had been 
picked up the night of the action, ex- 
plained Galafron's reasons for blowing 
up the castle, and every particular con- 
nected with that most horrible event. 
He had been present at the restora- 
tion of Don Miguel, and afterwards 
left Santa Marco with Galafron. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. l(y§ 

On their return to Madrid, the in- 
quisitor reported the success of his 
mission to the tribunal ; but was then 
almost petrified with horror, on hear- 
ing that he and Montano were brothers. 
This was a dreadful shocks as he had 
not only sat in judgment, and passed 
sentence, but afterwards witnessed his 
execution. Infuriated by a revenge the 
most diabolical, he resolved, at one 
blow, to destroy the innocent cause of 
his misfortune : and liavins: once con- 
ceived the terrible project, determin- 
ed to carry it, or perish in the attempt. 
Nothing could be more artful than the 
plans laid for its accomplishment ; he 
having, in an elaborate speech, de- 
scribed the cruel persecution of the 
Dominican abbess ; her avarice and 
immense wealth ; the disgrace which 
the publicity of her actions had brought 
on all religious institutions, and gave it 
as his opinion, she should be tried in 
Santa Marco, and if guilty, punished 
with death ; then dwelt on the amiable 

VOL. III. H 



170 ALETENA; OR THE 

manners of Don Miguel, the popularity 
of his character, and the noble qualities 
of his heart ; saying", *' He could scarce 
^ieve for the death of a brother who 
had caHsed so much misery." He then 
repeated the entire of our heroine's ad- 
ventures, not concealing the slightest 
circumstance, and exposed Montano's 
brutality in the most glaring colours ; this 
naturally led to observations on the 
construction of the subterranean ca- 
verns, their vast extent, and all their 
concomitant horrors; which he repre- 
sented as an acquisition that could not 
be too highly prized ; particularly, when 
its commanding situation, and vicinity 
to the sea, wero duly considered ; and 
affirmed, that it was his belief, Don 
Miguel would dispose of it for less than 
one-fourth of its value. 

The tribunal having at all times con- 
ceived Galafron a man of the deepest 
penetration, gladly embraced his advice, 
and a sum of money was accordingly 
ordered to be paid into his hands to com- 
pletethe "cliase, so with this treasure. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. ITl 

and the abbess his prisoner, he returned 
to Santa Marco. Every thing, in fact; 
succeeded beyond his most sanguine 
hopes ; the tribunal had been deluded 
by the idea, that he esteemed Don 
Miguel, and entertained an almost 
fatiierly affection for Alexena ; this was 
just what he wished, for he resolved 
to blow up the castle, and convert the 
mon^y to his own use. A forged deed 
of sale could easily be procured, as 
those who should be supposed to have 
executed it, were to be buried in the 
ruins ; not a soul was to escape, and the 
moment he head of the masquerade, 
his gloomy nature led him to fix on 
that nio-ht, as he would then have an 
opportunity of not only destroying Don 
Mi«'uel, our heroine and her husband, 
but their respective friends; besides, 
bemg conscious that so great a calamity 
must cause a degree of confusion, which 
would favour the escape of his vile 
associates, (who were men of the most 
infamous character,) and who could 

h2 



172 alexena; or, the 

easily retire to a remote part of France, 
if necessary; if not, boldly venture to 
iiursue their usual avocations. 

Thus determinedjGalafron arrived at 
Santa Marco, and after the abbess had 
been disposed of, this arch fiend made 
a proposal to Don Miguel, for the pur- 
chase of the castle, and would haye 
been rejoiced had the latter sold it, as 
he could then have a proper instrument 
prepared, and the moment it wassigned^ 
perpetrate the monstrous crime. A few 
of Don Miguel's friends were to have 
been witnesses, and those might be 
saved from the general massacre : 
however, when he found that the noble 
owner would not comply with any 
terms, he hastened to execute his dire- 
ful project. Having bade adieu, he 
hastened to St. Sebastian in disguise, 
and there procured a suflicient quantity 
of gunpowder for his purpose, and con- 
veyed it to the vaults, where it was dis- 
posed of in such a manner, as left not a 
doubt of its effects. A galley was hired to 
furnish certain means of safety for him- 



CASTLE OF SANTA JIARCO. 173 

«elf and his bravos, and the brigantine 
was seized, to prevent the possibility 
of any of Don Miguel's friends availing 
themselves of this means of escape. 

One of the wretched men who had 
been entrusted with this detestable 
plot, was, at an early period of his 
life, saved from an ignominious punish- 
ment, by the influence and interference 
of father Zelo ; and as that kind monk 
was among the proscribed, the grati- 
tude of the ruffian induced him to pro- 
tect this his former benefactor; but^ 
being sworn in the most solemn man- 
ner not to mention Galafron's plans to 
any human being, he, under the idea 
of keeping' his faith inviolate, contrived 
to delineate the most striking parts of 
the terrible design, and enclose them 
in a small box. This done, he has- 
tened to Zelo's apartment, who was 
then engaged in deep study, and there, 
by signs, explained the meaning of the 
pictures, and also gave him a mask, 
with a suitable disguise, desiring him 



174 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

to save any friend among the company 
whom he thought proper. The dis- 
tracted Zelo ahnost flew to the recep- 
tion rooms, where he made such good 
use of the few moments which Provi- 
dence had granted, that every individual 
of his friends escaped, except the in- 
former, who shared his master's fate, 
in the explosion of the galley. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCa. lib 



CHAP. VIL 

•* Their sinking hearts unusual horrors chill : 
And down their weary limbs thick dews distil ; 
No ray of light their dying hope redeems ! 
Pregnant with some new woe each moment teem*.'* 

Falconer. 

While the brlgantine was taking 
in provisions and water for her intended 
voyage, the wounds of Don Miguel 
and his friends rapidly amended^ and 
before they left the coast of France, were 
able to walk on deck, and partake of 
some trifling amusennents. On putting 
to sea again, it was determined they 
should land on the Spanish coast, and 
Don Vasquez, with Don Alonzo, were 
to hasten to Madrid, there sell theit 
estates and other property, then return, 
join them, and all sail for England 
together. The avarice, cruelty, and 
persecution of Philip, since the death 
of his queen, had become insupport- 
able ; and if Don Miguel returned 
iTithout Galafron, it was much to be 



176 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

feared^ ^^le king- would deliver hiiu to 
the inquisitors, who would demand 
their brother ; and he was well assured, 
no account that could be given of the 
late fatal catastrophe would be attend- 
ed to; on thecontrary, when the tribu- 
nal should find that boih he and his 
visitors had escaped, they would na- 
turally conclude, the castle had been 
destroyed by hiin after he had re- 
ceived its value. His late wandering" 
life and habits would stamp this sup- 
position indelibly vOn their minds, ad 
certain destruction was to be expected, 
not only by him, but by every other 
person who had witnessed the fatal 
event. These ideas on the subject, 
were suggested by Zelo, and met with 
the belief and approval of our travel- 
lers, who, immediately after, commis- 
sioned the two old gentlemen before 
mentioned, to return in disguise, dis- 
pose of their estates for whatever sum 
they would bring, and carry the money 
to Britain, where they might purchase 
others, without being tortured by the 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 177 

idea of losing- thenij and their lives, 
with every whim of either the king- or 
the priestliood 

111 less than three W^eks, both Don 
Vasquez and Alonzo returned, after 
succeeding- beyond their expectations; 
having disposed of the respective 
estates for the full value, and joined 
Don Miguel with the money, just at 
the moment their absence began to give 
the most serious alarm. All was now 
well, and when they had taken the 
precautions usually necessary on long' 
voyages, they sailed for England — 

'* This royal throne of kings, this sceptr'd isle^ 
This earth of majesty, this seat of Mars, 
This other Eden, demi- Paradise; 
This fortress, built by nature for herself. 
Against infection, and the hand of war;'' 

and where they hoped to spend the 
remainder of their days in tranquillity 
and connubial happiness. But fate had 
not yet ceased to persecute thcui ; they 
had to encounter many evils, and among 
which, a storm was not the least trvinsr^ 

H 5 



17S ALEXENA; OR THE 

However, they left the coast in high 
spirits, and with a fair wind. 

The cabin was scarce large enough 
fo accommodate the ladies; but they 
were satisfied to encounter every in- 
convenience rather than return to Spain, 
and the beloved society of their hus- 
bands yielded incalculable pleasures — 
joys far exceeding the pomp and cere- 
mony of a court levee, or the dazzling 
brilliancy of a ball-room. In that 
small vessel they were the happiest of 
women ; day succeeded day in inno- 
cent amusements ; the chess-board, 
cards^ and a few entertaining books, 
which Don Miguel had purchased in 
France, gave a pleasing variety ; the 
ladies sung enchantingly, and .were 
often accompanied by guitars ; while 
Lord Mortimer, who performed ex- 
tremely well on the fiutCj called forth 
celestial sounds, which, in a calm 
eveniiig, charmed the senses. 

They, at length, entered the British 
Channel, and at the declineof that day, 
tlie white rocks of Albion were faintly 
discernible in the distance. The 



CASTLE or SANTA MAR CO. ITS 

spirits of all were eleviited to an un- 
usual hcigiii, until the gathering clouds, 
and a few light squalls^ somewhat a- 
larined their pilot, who, being' an experi- 
enced seaman, ordered every necessary 
precaution to be taken, to prevent the 
threatening, misfortune. 

As it grew darker, the wind whistled 
through the shrouds, and the fears of 
the females were almost insupport- 
able, particularly when the storm be- 
came violent ; it was then the thun- 
dering voice of Williams rolled along 
the deck, animating the weary crew. 

" Reef top-sails," he cries — ''run the 
clue lines — square the yards — damn 
your lubberly eyes, no dreaming !*' 

Every individual was in motion ; but 
the squall having increased, the ship 
lay deep on her side, and alarmed Don 
Miguel, with all those on board, who 
were unacquainted with the terrors of 
an angry sea. 

Again, Williams, in a voice equal to 
a speaking trumpet, shouted, " Brail up 
the mizen — man the clue srarnets — b<^ 



ISO alexena; or the 

quick, quick !" — He was obeyed with 
promptitude ; yet in despite of their ex- 
ertionSj the mainsail was torn to pieces. 

" Come^ rnounsieripWot,'* he continu- 
ed, " hehn a weather." 

The prow^ veers, they brace tlie fore- 
sail, and the squall having passed to 
leeward, the fears of our friends began 
to subside; but their joy was of short 
duration, the tempest increased, and 
despair began to shew her gloomy face. 
Lord Mortimer pressed the pilot for 
his opinion, which he gave after 
some hesitation ; it v\as unfavourable ; 
— " There are no hopes of better 
wcatlier," he said, *' and the darkness 
is fast increasing." 

*' Lower topsails," vociferated Bill, 
" slack the bow-lines and halyards ; haul 
down the clue lines ; hold tight ; fuil 
the sails ; strike the top-gallant yards; 
send some travellers up the weather 
backstavs — right, right! — our rigging's 
clear, but the gale increases, and it 
ruins confoundedlv." 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. IS i 

A heavy shower now ahnost blintled 

tlie benumbed mariners, and the dark- 
ness became horrible; yet to have a 
moment's respite was impossible. Wil- 
liams rushed through the hissing- storm, 
from one end of the vessel to the other, 
applauding some and cursing others ; 
but this was not a time to reason with 
liim on the impropriety of swearing\ 

" Reef courses, my gallant hearts, 
there's no danger ; we don't value this 
puff o' wind a rope's end ; our High 
Admiral aloft will send light presently, 
and belike will keep a watchful eye to 
the helm, so cheer up !" 

Alexena ventured on deck several 
times, and exposed her delicate form to 
the rough kisses of the tempest. She^ 
Zoyrada, and Louisa, frequently encou- 
raged the men by their promises, and 
by the fortitude they displayed in this 
hour of peril; while Rourke, always as 
, fearless as he was useful, was ever to be 
found where the danger required his 
aid ; and having gained considerable 



J82 ALEXENA ; OE THE 

r 

knowledge of the different ropes^ sails, 
&c. was of infinite service. 

Albert, from the severity of liis late 
wound, was not able to do much, yet 
rendered all the assistance in bis pow- 
er ; but, the athletic figure of Don- 
Miguel excited the attention, and even 
attracted the admiration of the crew, 
who were zealous to imitate an ex- 
ample of such patient suffering ; he 
had also been wounded in the aetiorL 
with Galafron's galley, yet that did not 
prevent his doing treble the duty of 
any man on board ; for though he was 
drenched with rain., bruised severely, 
with his hands lacerated in many places, 
he did not utter the slightest murmur ; 
on the contrary, animated all present by 
his steady conduct. 

It was now twelve o'clock ; neither 
moon or stars were to be seen ; na- 
ture seemed convulsed ; a dangerous 
sea threatened to dash them on a 
leeward shore; the sails were reefed, 
but if they should again hoist them, 
the dreadful pressure of the wind might 



CASTLE OP SANTA MARGO. 183 

sink their trembling ship ; therefore, 
after deliberating, it was resolved, they 
should furl the courses, and reef the 
mizen. This was accordingly done, 
and gave some hopes, particularly, 
when Williams ordered the helm a-lee ; 
the prow then seemed to pursue the 
proper course, but the impetuous and 
angry surges, dashed in frightful rota- 
tion over the quivering deck, until it 
became necessary to throw the guns 
overboard, and this service was not 
effected without much toil and danger; 
however, it seemed to afford relief, and 
revived their drooping spirits, until they 
were overwhelmed with a greater cala- 
mity than any that had yet happened ; 
the crazy vessel having sprung a-leak, 
their labours at the pumps became 
excessive; their hearts sunk with hor- 
rors, and, at length, repeated fatigues 
made them weary of life. 

When the dawn burst througli the 
eastern sky, it found the crew forlorn, 
without hope, and almost without feel- 
ing; the ladies were miserable beyond 



184 AtiEXENA ; oil TSie 

conception, being benumbed with cold ; 
their <j:arments drenched with the salt 
brine ; their husbands fainting- with 
fatigue ; no help nigh; a rocky shore, 
beaten by roaring breakers^ and sea 
birds screaming with discordant notes, 
eager to seize and glut tliemselves 
with prey. They wearied Williams 
with useless questions, to which he was 
at length obliged to give this answer; 
" That ail n)ust inevitably perish, un- 
less heaven sent some messenger to 
quell the insolence of the blustering 
winds, and smooth the surface of the 
deep." 

The ship soon struck upon a shelv- 
ing bankj and the only hope then left, 
was to cutaway the masts and rigging, 
and bind them with planks, oars^ &c. 
to each other, by which a raft might be 
formed, that would carry the wretched 
crew to the wished-for land. To effect 
this with more ease, the stern was turn- 
ed to westward, that every mast might 
fall towards the shore, when cut down. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 185 

and which all hands were then busily 
employed in effecting. 

About six o'clock, there was a consul- 
tation held, and it was the unanimous 
opinion, that the vessel would go to 
pieces in less than an hour, and if 
something was not attempted for their 
immediate relief, the females, at leasts 
could not escape a watery grave. 
They therefore were summoned on 
deck, and with the assistance of their 
respective lords, crawled to it. Oh ! 
had our readers then beheld them, what 
a contrast they would have seen ; pale, 
tired, trembling, almost convulsed vv'ith 
fears, they ciung to the shattered 
cordage, and gazed with horror on the 
threatening surge, wliich lashed the 
sides of the sinking wreck with resistless 
impetuosity. The frowning shore was 
within a few fathoms length, but it 
rudely threatened to dash those . to 
atoms, who should dare to invade its 
rugged beach. Don ]^iguel sat on the 
splintered boards, with his Zorayda in 
his arms, gazing sternly on the troubled 



186 alexena; or the 

flood ; and Lord Mortimer, with our 
heroine reclining on his bosom, whose 
cold lips he pressed, as often as he could 
do so unobserved. The remainder of 
the ladies were scattered o'er the crazy 
vessel, weeping and beseeching heaven 
to spare their husbands, and vainly call- 
ing on the weary sailors to save them ; 
many of whom had already sunk, never 
to rise again, in fruitless attempts ta 
reach the taunting land. 

While all yet remained undetermin^ 
ed, a swell, almost mountain high, 
swept Alexena into the roaring deep ; 
and this misfortune was announced by a 
wild scream from the remaining suffer- 
ers, who knew not the moment when it 
should be their fate to follow. But 
Lord Mortimer saw the peril of his 
lovely wife, and dashed into the briny 
tide, followed by Rourke and Williams ; 
and the latter, though the last, first se- 
cured our sinking heroine, who, in 
despite of wind, waves, and the rocky 
beach, he bore in triumph to the shore. 

Don Miguel could not swim, and on 



OASTLE OF SANTA MAECO. 187 

seeing Alexena safe, he exclaimed, 
"Oh! now, of what value are all my en- 
dowments, when they cannot singly or 
united, save my wife." Then with ade- 
spairing look, which would have made 
fiends weep, cried, " My Zorayda, we 
shall perish, but let it be in each other's 
fond embrace." She sunk into his 
arms, and as he resigned himself to 
fate, besought heaven to soften the 
pangs of death, not for him, but for the 
dear partner of his heart. 'Oh ! exqui- 
site misery !" he cried, '*is it possible, 
that so many lonely and beloved women 
shall perish? is there no hope, no refuge 
left?" 

The wreck still held together, but 
every moment became more feeble, and 
each succeeding minute, some of the 
dying crew fell from, the masts into the 
groaning billows, and there slept in 
eternal silence. 

When Lord Mortimer and Rourke 
reached the shore, they were quue ex- 
hausted, and it was not without the 



188 alexena; or the 

greatest difficulty, they clambered up 
the cragg-y precipices ; but having at 
length gained the wished-for havev,, they 
hastened to relieve their companions 
in nnisery. His lordship first raided ihe 
form of his insensible wife, ano ciasped 
her to his bosom ; her hair wc , loose^ 
wet^ and dishevelled; her l^nhs* al- 
most stiff with cold, and ail apie; ranee 
of animation extinct ; but life had not 
fled, and a husband's love restored it. 

On regaining her" recolleciion, ima- 
gine her happiness, onbeholdliigZoray- 
da and Louisa leaning over her, who 
were almost equally benumbed with 
cold and fear. Willianis had rescued 
them from the remorseless deep, with 
the assistance of Lion, who had been 
his messenger four times to the wreck ; 
and by their united efforts, the raft, 
with every surviving individual on 
board, had been saved. 

'' What cheer, my lady?" said that 
brave fellow, addressing himself to 
Alexena, as he wiped away the big tear 
of joy that had forced its way to his 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAKCO. 180 

'* cabin lights/' as lie called them. — 
*' What cheer? — it was a rough gale^ 
do ye see; but as it is over, think of 
smooth seas ; the harbour of safety 
is found ; for, if I am not out in my 
reckoning, Hollywood castle is within 
half a leaijue," 

" Heaven be praised for its number- 
less mercies !" our heroine fervently 
replied, " and once more, Williams, 
receive my thanks, for a life so often 
saved ; I have not strength to utter 
what my heart dictates; but, believe 
me, I am grateful — very grateful." 

'' Bill could not hear this effusion of 
gratitude without a pleasing pain ; and, 
with a heart almost bursting with joy, 
he hastened to mingle with the drip- 
ping group, who were shivering on the 
strand. 

On his approacii, they surrounded 
him, and, in the warmest terms, return- 
ed thanks ; but Williams could not 
hear them Avith patience. " No more 
of your white-lined chamber talk," he 
cried, " or you will sink this crazy 



190 ALEXBNA ; OR THE 

brain of mine in the gulph of madness ; 
set your rigging- to rights^ and steer for 
the port of Hollywood, where we may 
refit and take in provisions, of which 
our bread-rooms are much in need." 

Rourke recognised the coast the 
moment he had heard the observa- 
tion of Williams, and as soon as he 
perceived his lord and lady were per- 
fectly safe, almost flew across the coun- 
try, and, notwithstanding his recent 
fatigue, returned in less than half an 
hour, accompanied by every domestic 
about the castle, with horses, litters, 
and refreshments ; and as soon as our 
shipwrecked travellers had partaken of 
the latter, the ladies were removed, 
with all possible haste, to the cheering' 
hearths of Hollywood, where they were 
attended with all the care and hospi- 
tality which their situation so much 
required. 

Mrs. Hastings, once more under that 
brother's roof, where she had for so 
many years presided as mistress, soon 
regained her wonted health, and by 



€A9TLE OP SANTA MARCO. 191 

her cordial and endearing kindnesses, 
restored the almost shattered frames of 
her female friends. 

Both Zorayda and Lucinda were ex- 
tremely delicate, and had not great 
care been taken, they could not have 
survived the late hardships; but our 
heroine, whose constitution was not 
altogether so weak, soon recovered^ 
and enlivened her doating Mortimer^, 
by her smiles, and her most affec- 
tionate uncle, Sir Edmond, who not 
only loved her with all the fondness of 
a parent, but at his decease, resolved 
to bequeath her the chief part of his 
property. 

Virginia, ever gay, soon forgot that 
iand in which she had suffered but 
too much unhappiness, and was re- 
joiced when Don Vasquez completed 
the purchase of an estate adjoining 
Caeile Dashville, the seat of her be- 
loved friend, Alexena, 

Clarissa, and her Selib, had apart- 
ments in Hollywood, until such time as 
they could procure a suitable residence. 



192 ALEXENA* OR THE 

and Don Miguel and his Zorayda 
resided with Lord Mortimer ; while 
Don Raphiel, ever eccentric, retired to 
a beautiful cottage, a quarter of a mile 
from his lordship's mansion, which he 
fitted up with infinite taste, and where 
he occasionally invited his friends to 
witness his happiness with Isabella, 
who always found him a kind and 
attentive husband. 

Velasco, now ii; England, forgot the 
prejudices which he had nourished, and 
wondered how he could have enter- 
tained them. His Louisa was the best 

of wives the most affectionate of 

mothers, and in her endearing society 
he spent the remainder of a long life^ 
in ease, comfort, and affluence. 

Antonio, the beloved brother of our 
heroine, resided on a neighbouring 
estate, where he was adored by his 
tenantry and dependants. He resem- 
bled his beautiful sister in all the good 
qualities which enrich the human heart, 
and none were more deservedly be- 
loved tlian he and his Eveline. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAIICO. 193 

Henri Bolerno, shortly after his re- 
turn, married Miss Dashfort, a fine 
blooming girl, who we have slightly 
noticed in our first pages, and with her 
he enjoyed a splendid fortune, to which 
she added not only an excellent dispo- 
sition, but many brilliant accomplish- 
ments ; so that he was not the least 
fortunate. 

Bernardo passed the remainder o£ 
his days in Hollywood, where he was 
both esteemed and respected, and lived 
many years to enjoy the society of his 
grateful friends, who conceived they 
could never sufficiently reward a person 
to whom they were so deeply indebted. 

Zelo still continued with Don Miguel 
as his confessor, and was looked up to 
by all as a father ; the old blessed him, 
and the young sought the wisdom of 
his counsels; none ever enjoyed more 
respect, more filial love, than this good 
man, this kind priest; and none more 
richly deserved it. 

Mrs. Hastings was, about this period^ 

VOL, III. I 



194 ALEXENA; OR THE 

turned of forty ; but a mtich prettier 
woman than most females of her age; 
and Mr. Jones having, for many years, 
expressed the warmest attachment. Sir 
Edmond assented to their union, as he 
wished to see this dear sister happy. 
Few men were more respectably con- 
nected than Mr. Jones; his livings were 
very handsome, with a disposition and 
manners unexceptionable. He had 
also passed the heyday of youth, and 
was, therefore, both likely to enjoy, as 
well as value, the society of such a 
woman as Mrs. Hastings, to whom he 
was soon after united. During the 
summer months, the parsonage was 
their residence ; in winter, the castle, 
where they were always welcomed by 
their generous and hospitable brother, 

Albert, in a few months after his 
return, was married to Bets}" ; but still 
continued in his lord's service, being 
promoted to the respectable situation 
of land steward. 

Tom inust not be forgotten ; he dicj 



CAS^'LE OF SANTA MARCO. 195 

Slot long- remain a bachelor ; for hav- 
ing written to Biddy's father, that his 
finances were such as must even meet 
the approbation of a 'squire, the pru- 
<3ent old man accompanied his rosy- 
cheeked dau'T'hter to Euiiland, where 
she soon after became Mrs. Rourke, to 
the mutual joy of all those interested. 
, Old Margaret was appointed house- 
keeper at Dashville, where she had 
reason to bless the hour in which our 
heroine was imprisoned in the castle of 
Santa Marco. 

Henriquez led Annette, a pretty 
French girl, an attendant of Zorayda's, 
to Hymen's altar, where Zelo bestowed 
the nuptial blessing, and immediately 
after the ceremony, Don Miguel made 
this worthy couple a present of five 
hundred crowns, with which they in- 
tended to purchase a farm, if heaven 
blessed them with a family ; if not, they 
resolved to pass the remainder of their 
lives under the same roof with their 
munificent benefactors. 

1 9 



196 ^LEXENA} OR THi; 



CHAP. VIII. 

" « ■ . . Sliould we be taking leave 
As long a term as yei we have to live. 
The lothness to depart would grow : Adieu ! 

Ctm. 

J3EFORE we conclude lliese pages, 
it may be satisfactory to explain several 
particulars connecterl with our story; 
we shallj therefore, request our readers 
to return with us to the castle of Santa 
Marco. 

It must have appeared rather extra- 
jordinary Low the good Zelo, who we 
fii*st inti'otUiced in the ruinous chapel 
near Siguenca, should have found his 
way to the cave of Carracci the robber, 
and as he is very little known, it may 
not be uninteresting to give a short 
.sketch of his life." — 

He was the second son of an eminent 
statesman^ and received his education 
in the principal university of Sala- 
manca, v.hcrc ho remained until he haid 



CASTLE OP SAXTA MARCO. 197 

attained his twenty-firist year. Being 
handsome in his person, elegaiit in his 
a<]drcss, and the only son of a minister 
liigh in power, he was much esteemed 
by the chief nobility of the city, and 
became a vast favonrile with the ladies, 
ainon": whom he had already selected 
one who he hoped to make his wife. Her 
fktiier, Don Pablo Bisalco, moved in 
the first circles, was extremely rich, bnt 
unfortunately, more ambitious. This 
was a family misfortune ; for Joseph, 
his brother, who enjoyed high digni- 
ties in the church, was still more aspir- 
ing ; and his vast possessions were not 
only insufficient to satisfy him, but 
made him anxious to amass more, 
so that in a little time he looked for- 
ward to the mitre of Grenada, which 
was then on the head of the most im- 
placable, the most cruel, and most 
powerfid priest in Spain. But these 
mighty obstacles were either unhappily 
overlooked, or only served to stimulate 
the ambitious prelate, and his still more 



198 AiEXENA ; OR T»E 

ambilioiis brollier. The consequence 
was, tliey, vvilh several other iTiisji;uided 
tlergy, entered into a conjbination and 
conspiracy to overthrow the arclibishop, 
by addncing' proof of acts vvhich would 
criminate him ; or, if this failed, ia 
consign him to the stiletto of an as- 
sassin. 

During the period of these traitorou& 
conferences, v^hIc]i were held in the 
iiouse of Don Pablo, Angelina, the 
Younffcst and most beautiful of his 
daughters, discovered the plot, and re- 
monstrated with her father on what 
was likely to be the consequence. She 
represented the greatness of the dan- 
ger, and of the crime — besought him to 
give up such a wild chimera — proved 
the folly, and the destruction that must 
. inevitably ensue, should their design 
transpire; but her every argument was 
useless, the misguided Pablo resolved to 
persevere ; and after extorting a most 
solemn oalh of secrecy from this his 
virtuous, beauteous daughter;j.dismissed 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 199 

her. Many weeks passed away with- 
out any particulur occurrence having 
intervened to disturb the general tran- 
quillity J during which time^ prepara- 
tions were made for Zelo's nuptials 
with the beloved of his heart ; his father 
having liighly approved of the connec- 
tion he was about to form, while Don 
Pablo conceived this intended marriage 
to be the most fortunate of events, as it 
would secure tlie interest of the prime 
minister. Thus influenced, the latter 
increased the joys of the lovers, by ap- 
pointing an early day forthe consum- 
mation of their union ; having deter- 
mined, immediately after, to disclose 
the entire plan, then ahnost ripe for 
execution, to Don Francisco, Zelo's 
father, and to be guided by his advice ; 
but inexorable fate had decreed far 
otiierwise ; for the night of the day 
preceding that fixed on for this mar- 
riage, the lovers, and every individual 
in Don PhoIo's mansion, \^ore alarmed 
by the inquisitorial troops, who had 



goo ALEXENA; on THE 

surrounded it, and thus rendered their 
escape impossible. On admission be- 
in^ denied, the doors were broken 
open, and all within thenv made pri- 
soners. Conveyances were already 
prepared, and at the dismal hour of 
midnight, Don Pablo and his lady, 
Angelina, with her two sisters, Mar- 
cella and Selina, their uncle Joseph, 
and several domestics, were obliged 
to set out for the inquisitorial dun- 
geons of Grenada, where they arrived 
after a most fatiguing journey, not being 
suffered to rest for more than an hour 
at a time on the road. 

The cause of this misfortune was> 
want of proper discretion on the part of 
the conspirators, who foolishly confided 
their secret to the keeping of a servant, 
and the hope of an immense reward 
induced him to betray them ; but he 
was disappointed, and fell a victim to 
his own treachery ; for on seeing his 
master chainf^d to a rock, in a noisome 
crell, he repented, and on his knee* 



CASTLE OF SA\TA MARCO. 201 

bc^'ared pardon for the irretriveable ruiri 
he had brought upon his house. The 
stretched Pablo could scarce believe 
the evidence of his senses, as he had 
always treated this domestic with par- 
ticular kindness, having brought him 
up in the family from his early youth ; 
but finding reproaches useless, he en- 
treated this miserable dupe of villany 
to inform him, what was the exteot of 
the information he had given. The 
now repentant Juan instantly gave a 
true detail, and his unfortunate master 
had the satisfaction to find many of his 
most inestimable friends had escaped 
unsuspected. This oast a transient 
gleam of comfort round his dark dun- 
geon, yet even this was momentary, for 
the former had scarce concluded, before 
several familiars rushed into the cell, 
and dragged him before the tribunal, 
who instantly ordered him to be im- 
paled, for daring to disclose secrets 
^hich he was bound to withhold, CY«n 

i5 



202 alexena; or the 

from liis confessor, williout havin<r Hrst 
obtained their liberty to disclose then>. 

Thus perished Juan, the most worth- 
less of traitors; he h.ad stung- the liand 
which fed him, and was deservedly 
crushed. 

He had been sent to induce his mas- 
ter to make further discovenes, whose 
information was tobe received as a ran- 
som for his forfeited life, and that of liis 
family; but unfortunately for himself^ 
he disregarded the cautions which had 
been previously given, and betrayed his 
diabolical employers. 

In his iiiformations, he stated, that 
one of Don Pablo's daug-hters was 
acquainted with the names, rank, and 
residences of all the conspirators, but 
>vhich of the ladies he could not tell; 
yet supposed Angelina to be the per- 
son, as she was deservedly her father^s 
fa^vourite. 

Of this deposition, the archbishop re- 
solved to avail himself, and tried every 
means by which he was likely to extort 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 20 



f» 



confession from her, the torture except- 
ed ; but on finding all his eftbrts un- 
successful, he ordered her and her family 
to he executed. 

On the dreadful night of the perform- 
ance of this heart-rending; tragedy, the 
miserable Pablo, his wife and daugiiters, 
with Joseph and Zelo, were conveyed 
into a subterranean hall, where a kind 
of low stage or platform was erected, 
on which a wheel and several narrow 
tables were already placed. In front 
there was a number of iron chairs, 
fiistcned to the stone floor, and in four 
of these. Donna Besalco, and her three 
lovely daughters were chained ; theii* 
feet and hands were confined in such a 
manner, as rendered it impossible to 
make the slightest motion with either, 
while a kind of steel clasps confined 
the shoulders, so that their heads alone 
were at liberty, and Zelo was held by 
two familiars at a distance, to be a 
witness to the succeeding scene of 
horrors. 



201: alexena; or the 

Perez, tlie archbishop, now appeareJ, 
and in a speech of considerable length, 
exhorted Pablo to discover his accom- 
plices, promising- in the most solemn 
manner to spare him and his family ; 
but the father in reply, with a solemnitjr 
most awful, denounced his curse on 
that child of his, who would even in 
torments betray their friends. " You 
would not relieve yourselves, my chil- 
dren," he said, " for the moment your 
executioners have drained the last 
particle of information, they will re- 
morselessly sentence you to a death of 
agony ; be you therefore steady, and 
die deserving of a father's last bless- 
ing." This fatal command shook the 
soul of Zelo; he knew Angelina would 
suffer ten thousand tortures, rather than 
disobey this dying injunction, and he 
then determined to perish also, for 
Avithout her, the world was a dreary 
blank, not worth enjoying;. 

When Perez found his exhortation 






CASTLB OF SANTA MARCO. ^Oj 

vain, he ordered Pablo and Joseph to 
be broken on the wheel, in the presence 
of their distracted family, aiid which 
was instantly done. This dreadful im- 
plement of torture came dowu seve« 
ral times on the limbs, back, and 
ribs of the wretched sufferers, while 
their shrieks pierced the hearts of all 
present, except the females, who fortu- 
nately were insensible, though the in- 
quisitors used every restorative, in order 
to inflict exquisite misery, but happily 
without effect, and both Pablo and 
Joseph passed into eternity, ere they 
awakened to behold their mutilated 
bodies, which were stretched on tables, 
covered with white linen, but whose 
heads were exhibited on spears in front 
of the platform. A bell at this moment 
rung a dead and heavy peal, which Perez 
no sooner heard, than he hastened 
from the execution chamber; but before 
he retired, ordered the heads of Donna 
Besalco, and her two eldest daughters^ 



200 "^ alexena; or the 

to be struck off, after they should re- 
ceive four blows from the wheel.* 

The moment this demon retired^ the 
executioners, with the consent of the 
inquisitors present, resolved, their vic- 
tims should suffer decapitation first, 
and be broken on the wheel afterwards. 
This merciful determination was scarce 
assented to, ere it was carried into effect. 
The first who fell, was the donna her- 
self, whose head was struck oW at a 
blow ; the next Marcdla, who eagerly 
stretched her snowy neck to receive the 
fatal stroke, and then, with a sigh, ex- 
pired. Selina saw her sister die, and 
"with a resignation, unequalled except 
by saints, submitted to the executioner, 
who gazed for an instant on her lovely 
trembling form, then in a low murmur 
said, " Lady, you are to be happy, and 
a moment's pain over, you enjoy ever- 
lasting peace/* He then removed the 

* This story is founded on facts, and those persons 
"were actually executed as herein described. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 207 

gauze which covered her neck, and as 
it dropped from herheaviui^ bor>omj she 
blushed deeply ; it was the last token 
of expiring modesty ; with it the sabre 
fell, and herspirit ascended into heaven. 
No orders had been "iven for the ex- 
ecution of Angelina, and the inquisitors 
were consulting, whether they should or 
should not order her to be treated as 
her sisters, when the archbishop enter- 
ed, and put an end to theirdeliberations, 
by commanding his prisoner to be 
stretched on the rack. Zelo now gave 
a wild crv of horror, and strun-ii^led to 
be free ; having heretofore been a be- 
numbed spectator of the wanton slaugh- 
ter; but sentence had not then been 
passed on Angelina. The familiars 
were too strong, and held fast, yet his 
emotion did not fail to attract the notice 
of the prelate, who recognised him as 
her lover, and, therefore, resolved to 
try how far it was possible to work on 
her feelino's. Havina: first commanded 
her to be unbound, Perez solemnly 



208 ale:ieka; or the 

promised to bestow the entire of her 
father's large possessions, together with 
the hand of Zelo, if she made a full 
confession ; and disclose, without re- 
serve, the names of those concerned in 
the plot. This she called on heaven to 
witness she would never do, and then 
her tormentor ordered the torture. In a 
short time she was fastened on the rack, 
and the signal being given, her shoul- 
ders were drawn from their sockets at 
4he first jirk, but her piteous shrieks 
having become unsuffcrable, one of the 
executioners, being much more merci- 
ful than her judge, drew a long knife 
from his bosom, and, unperceived by 
any person present, cut the ropes of the 
machine. Immediately after, the arch- 
bishop put the question a second time 
and on finding she was still proof 
against his tlireats, ordered the torture 
to be repeated . Again the horrid im- 
plement was applied, but failed in its 
action, and the executioner announc- 
ed it was uselessj with a pleasure 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 209 

AThich he never before had felt. En- 
raged at this supposed accident, and 
irritated by her patient suffering, the 
inhuman prelate wound the broken 
rope round his arm, and ere he strained 
it, demanded his victim's answer. 

" Oh, heaven ! in thy mercy, take me 
to thy peace^ and forgive this man \" 
was the fervent prayer of Angelina^ as 
she laid down her head on the scaffold ; 
this, and this only, was her reply ; but 
it was more than sufficient to irritata 
her brutal judge, who now jinked the 
cord with such violence, as inflicted the 
most excruciating pains. *' Oh! infer- 
nal monster! accursed, inhuman dogl" 
exclaimed Sanguini,* — " this to thy re- 
morseless heart ; and let it be a pass 
to thy kindred fiends!'* he said, and 
plunged his poisoned stiletto into the 
bosom of Perez, and laid him dead at 
his feet. 

An exclamation of horror and sur- 
prise now rung through the cavern ^ 

* One of the executioners. 



i^lO aLexena; or the 

but the executioner^ brandishing his 
bloody weapon, commanded silence, 
and, threatening", swore to immolate the 
first who should dare to move; tlien, 
lowerinii' his voice, he addressed Anire- 
lina — " Lovely and unfortunate lady, 
the moments are precious ; therefore, 
let me be quick. You are doomed to 
unheard of misery; one way only re- 
mains to save you, whicl) is, by releas- 
ing your spirit, before those demons 
in human form can wreck its beauteous 
habitation. Oh ! before you die, pro- 
mise, that when you reach Paradise, 
you will hold forth your hands, and 
beseech that Redeemer who suffered for 
us all, to save my soul." 

" My friend, I will, if I shall attain 
such immeasurable joys." 

" 'Tis enough; then, thus we defy 
the malice of our earthly, vain, inhu- 
man judges," he said, and stabbed 
her to the heart ; then himself, and 
expired on her lifeless form. Her eye 
was fixed on Zelo's, as she received the 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 211 

deadly blow, and it spoke unutterable 
love ; it recalled hiui from stupid in- 
aetion, to a sense of that misery which 
shortly after ended in madness. How 
long' he might have remained under 
the influence of that dreadful distem- 
per, he could not form an idea; but 
when reason resumed her throne, he 
was pardoned, and set at liberty. His 
peace of miud^ however, was irre- 
trievably ruined, and, in a state of 
pitiable despondency, he sought the 
mansion of his fathertj but — 

*' when sorrows come, they come not single spic$j 
But in battalions ;'' — 

For his parents had both died of a 
broken heart, leaving him a large for- 
tune, in case he should ever claim it; 
if not, it was to be distributed among 
the religious, to secure the repose of 
his soul. 

When Zelo found that a few months 
had been sufficient to overthrow his 
every hope of happiness in this world. 



212 ALEXENA; on THE 

he retired into an obscure monastery 

of Benedictine monks, where he re- 
solved to spend the remainder of his 

miserable existence ; but time and re- 
ligion softened his sorrows, and at an 
early period of his life, he was induced 
to become Don Miguel's tutor, which 
task he performed with infinite credit 
to himself, as well as to his pupih He 
was almost sixty before he took the 
cowl, which was many years after he 
had retired into the monastery. 

Immediately after the combat in the 
chapel, he hastened to acquaint Don 
Miguel, (who he had long known as 
Belzo Carracci,) with the particulars of 
that event, and to beg his interference; 
for the beauty of our heroine had inte- 
rested his every feeling, particularly, 
when he conceived she bore a striking 
likeness to his lost Angelina. Carracci 
promised his assistance, and used every 
exertion to liberate Lord Mortimer ; 
and had it not been for the threateninji: 

CI 

letters with which he terrified both the 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO, 213 

prior and abbess^ Alexeiia would have 
fallen a victim to the unprecedented 
cruelty of the latter. 

Father Zelo had been many months 
in Hollywood, before he was induced 
to relate this, the story of his life ; but 
the earnest request of Don Miguel 
prevailed, and one evening when he 
was surrounded by every individual 
who had accompanied him from Spain, 
(the servants and sailors excepted,) he 
gave this melancholy relation of his 
woes. 

The moment he had finished, Velasco 
fell on his knees, and besought his bless- 
ing, and called on Lady Mortimer to 
follow his example. — " Oh ! my sister," 
he cried, ''this is our uncle Don Diego, 
long since supposed to be numbered 
with the dead ; this is he who be- 
queathed to us his large possessions, 
and is the only brother of our regretted 
father." 

Zelo, now Don Diego, clasped each 
alternatively to his heart, while he said. 



214 ALEXEKA; OR THE 

/' My chiltlren, 1 did not conceive it pru- 
dent to disclose otir relationship sooner, 
as my story, added to your other griefs, 
would have been too much, and you 
are now only to think of it as a tale 
told for your amusement ; yet, alas! it 
is too true; however, I praise heaven, 
that I have the comfort of beholdins; 
my only surviving* relatives worthy of 
empires, and that my grey hairs shall 
sink into the grave in peace." 

Velasco now insisted on restoring his 
uncle's fortune, or the value, as it had 
been converted into monev ; but the 
kind old man, with a smile, said, ''My 
dear boy, what should I do with it? — 
No! no!— keep it, and may heaven add 
innumerable blessings. I shall live with 
you, ISIortimer, and Miguel, alterna- 
tively, and have no doubt, but I shall 
meet with as much attention, as if I had 
the wealth of kingdoms to bestow." 

It is impossible to express the 
felicity of all, on this unexpected re- 
coijnition, as neither Yelasco or our 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 215 

heroine had ever seen this beloved 
relative in the life-time of their parents, 
though tliey had often heard a few par- 
ticulars of his melancholy fate. 

When those happy friends had some- 
what recovered from the aijifatioii 
which this joyful event had excited, 
they spent the greater part of the night 
in the repetition of misfortunes past ; 
and in those long.winded stories it ap- 
peared, that Don Diego had procured 
the horrible robes in which the kind 
Williams had frightened Don Philip, 
the night he had entered Alexena's 
chamber, for the purpose of assassina.- 
liui; Louisa. 

The scull which dashed the bowl 
from our heroine's hand, in the dun- 
geons of Santa Marco, was thrown by 
Velasco, who was at that time de- 
ranged, and the voice which spoke 
from the cavern's roof, commanding 
her not to taste of the olio, was one 
of the ruffianly band of Aciisto, who 
Montano had placed there for the 
purpose of increasing her misery. 



21(5 alexena; ou tiiib 

The exclamation of, ' Heaven have 
mercy/ which Lord Mortimer had heard 
in the cemetery of the castle, when 
wandering through it with Don Miguel, 
and which seemed to issue from one of 
the coffins, was repeated by Mrs. Hast- 
inirs, who was at that time confined in a 
dungeon underneath it, and often ex- 
pressed her grief and misery in prayers, 
or sudden exclamations, such as that 
which his lordship had overheard. 

We should suppose it is unnecessary 
to say that the placards which were 
at different times fastened to the body 
of Hugo, were either procured by 
Don Selib or Williams; and that the 
groan overheard by the monk in one 
of the pillars in the chapel, was 
uttered by the former to terrify that 
villain. 

Henriquez was the guide whoaccom- 
j>anied the sham Monfrane, when Lord 
Mortimer was conducted through the 
Pyrenees, and who had beds and en- 
tertainment provided for his lordship. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 2lf 

Don Miguel, previous to his mar- 
riage, had the unfortunate Cerascci 
and Geraldine interred in one grave, 
over whom h€ raised a plain but hand- 
some tomb, with an inscription, de- 
scriptive of their love and misfortunes; 

Many of the banditti perished in the 
explosion of the castle ; but the greater 
number had, antecedent to that misfor- 
tunCj retired to their respective homes', 
situated in different provinces, and there 
settled comfortably, which they were 
enabled to do, by the munificent pro^ 
vision made for them by their generous 
chieftain. 

The traveller can yet recognise pail 
of the old moss-covered towers and 
buttresses of Santa Marco, once famous 
for the loves of Alexena and her Mor- 
timer, but r.ow the retreat of the woH" 
and the ov.1, who ni'^htlv shriek over 
the ruins, in concert with the sliades of 
Montano, and his partners in iniquity, 
Hugo and Torquo. 

VOL.111. R. 



SlS ALEXENA; OR TUB 

Dashville, the beautiful residence- 
of Lord Mortimer and his Alexena, is 
now the abode of love and domestic 
happiness, where the good and virtuous 
daily meet to witness each other's feli- 
city ; where Zelo blesses the childreiv 
of our heroine, and guides them steadi- 
ly through that narrow path, to the 
attainment of those treasures, " which 
neither moth nor rust can corrupt, nor 
thieves break through and steal.'* 

Our pen is now worn, and we 
an?:iously hope, not altogether without 
attaining the desired object, which was 
to shew, that though the wicked may 
sometimes prevail, and afflict the just^ 
their power is weak as it is worthless, 
and eventually ends in disgrace and 
punishmeiit ; and that the virtuous, 
though oppressed by the villany of 
designing men, shall, by patience and 
couraire, overcome misfortune. 

Now, if the youthful hand that has 
•written this tale, has, in this first at- 
tempt, rendered one reader pleasure^ 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 219 

by dispelling the gloom of half an 
hour's solitude, or ameliorating the 
pains of sickness, he shall not only 
conceive he has succeeded, but feel 
bimself amply rewarded. 



FINIS. 
