THE 



ANGLO-IRISH 



THE NINETEENTH CENTURY. 



VOL. I. 



LONOoir: 

PRINTED BY S. AND R. BENTLEY, 
Dorset Street, Fleet Sirtet. 



THE 



ANGLO-IRISH 



OF 



THE NINETEENTH CENTURY. 



A NOVEL. 



IN THREE VOLUMES. 



VOL. L 



LONDON: 

HENRY COLBURN, NEW BURLINGTON STREET. 

1828. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER I. 

The following appeared among the notices 
of ** Deaths'" in a London Magazine for 18 — . 

** At his mansion in Grosvenor-square, the 
Viscount Clangore, aged forty-six. His Lord- 
ship was only son of the late Viscount. Part- 
ly through his co-operation in Ireland with 
a highly-gifted fellow-countryman, now enno- 
bled, and almost at the head of the English 
Cabinet, his Lordship became at an early age 
a distinguished Irish politician. The states- 
man alluded to delivered to the Irish House 
of Commons, in his twenty-second year, his re- 
markable oration, supporting Ireland's claim to 
trade with India on free principles : Lord Clan- 
gore's maiden speech in the Irish House of 

VOL. I. B 



2060835 



2 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Lords, at little more than the same age, imme- 
diately and ably seconded him; and from this 
circumstance may be dated the political alli- 
ance between both, now dissolved only by the 
lamented demise of his Lordship. 

" When experience of the dangerous ten- 
dency of Irish sentiments in favour of the 
pernicious principles of the French Revolution, 
soon after convinced the youthful commoner 
that he had erred in enlisting himself in the 
ranks of those who were called popular ora- 
tors ; and when, in consequence, he appeared, 
in 1795, as a zealous supporter of Lord Cam- 
den''s Irish Government, his noble admirer, 
the subject of our obituary, did not long he- 
sitate to give proofs of a similar correction of 
opinion. 

*' Indeed, Lord Clangore was one of the few 
of his countrymen who, in the almost boyish 
dehut of the aspirant, discovered the promise 
of that ability and wisdom which have since 
wielded, with consummate power and address, 
the destinies of Europe ; and, although having 
the advantage in rank, and, by a few years, in 
age, of the object of his sagacious interest, 
his Lordship may be said to have even then 
deferred to the commanding intellect, that he 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 8 

foresaw needed only the countenance of the 
high and influential, to confer on all his Ma- 
jesty's subjects of Great Britain, as well as of 
Ireland, solid advantages and unrivalled glory. 

" Realizing his Lordship's views, the Honour- 
able Mr. Stewart quickly obtained a seat in the 
Irish Cabinet, and during the succession of dif- 
ficulties which the young Minister had to en- 
counter, from the Irish Rebellion of 1798, down 
to the felicitous moment when he effected the 
Legislative Union between his native country 
and Great Britain, he found no political friend 
more faithful, and few more valuable, than Lord 
Clangore. The firm course pursued by His 
Majesty's Vice-regal administration, in suppress- 
ing the ill-judged insurrection alluded to, is 
sufficiently well known; but it was his Lord- 
ship's fate, in conjunction with his distinguished 
protege, to have his motives on that occasion 
somewhat misrepresented. Of the cruelties 
which marked the times, both are charged with 
having being the instigators. But surely a mi- 
nister or his friends are not accountable for all 
the excesses that characterise civil warfare. Be- 
•ides, the minister was then, as will be recollected, 
very young ; and as well might he have hoped 
to still the tempest with his voice, as to have 
B 2 



4 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

assuaged the vengeance and violence of either 
party. 

" Of the share which his Lordship had in 
effecting the Irish Union, he might safely boast 
as the most important event of his public life. 
The soundness and excellence of his private 
as well as political character, are evinced in 
his unchangeable attachment, through good and 
ill, to the fortunes of his now illustrious survi- 
vor. After the transit of that eminent indivi- 
dual from the Irish to the United Parliament, 
and (in consequence of his able support of Mr. 
Pitt) after his nomination, in 1805, to the Bri- 
tish Cabinet, the Viscount Clangore shared with 
him all the ministerial fluctuations for which 
the two ensuing years were remarkable ; until, 
in 1807, on the retirement of the Grey and 
Grenville administration, his Lordship had the 
gratification to see him created Minister of 
War ; and finally, notwithstanding a renewed 
deprivation of office, to witness, upon the la- 
mented death of Mr. Perceval in 1812, the 
elevation of the object of his early patronage, 
and we may add, good augury, to the high 
office he at present fills with so much honour to 
himself, and triumph to these favoured islands. 

" In the difference, and consequent duel, be- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 5 

twcen the now great minister and Mr. Canning, 
still fresh in the public mind, it may be added, 
as an evidence of the personal friendship of 
the former towards his noble countryman, that, 
through the progress of that interesting event. 
Lord Clangore's judgment was not unconsult- 
ed. But perhaps, the strongest proof of this 
friendship is to be stated. Conjointly with a per- 
sonage almost equally illustrious, though in a 
different career, as also with a near relative of 
the late Viscount, residing in Ireland, the most 
successful minister England ever saw, has ac- 
cepted the guardianship of Lord Clangore's 
children, two sons and a daughter, now, by 
their father's death, left without the care of a 
parent ; their noble mother having died in 18 — , 
as a reference to our number for the month of 

in that year will show. 

" Although possessing heraldic claims as 
strong perhaps, if they were defined, as many 
Anglo-Irish families, the Viscount Clangore 
evinced, during his useful life, little anxiety 
for a proved and emblazoned pedigree of any 
great extent, willing to rest his ancestral pride 
chiefly upon the successful bravery, in Ireland, 
of a soldier of the Commonwealth, who, after 
the Restoration, had conBrmed to him the con- 



« THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

flscated Irish property won by his courage and 
talents from the crimes and turbulence of the 
natives, and from the admiration and gratitude 
of the Protector. Similar good services ren- 
dered by the immediate successor of this distin- 
guished individual to William III. during that 
monarch's campaigns against the mere Irish 
abettors of his infatuated father-in-law, enno- 
bled the family. The late Viscount's efficient 
support of His Majesty's Government, as well 
in England as in Ireland, enabled him to add 
to his patrimonial inheritance a considerable 
estate, purchased in this country ; and fame 
informs us, that his Lordship's advance in the 
peerage could only have been checked by the 
melancholy event which it is our painful duty 
to record." 



In a short time after the appearance of this 
obituary, measures were taken by the guardians 
of the late Viscount's children, to make an ar- 
rangement for their future career and happi- 
ness. The eldest son, in his nineteenth year, 
and the second, a boy of fourteen, had been 
summoned, immediately upon their father's 
death, which was unexpected, to the town house 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 7 

of a maternal relation, the one from Cambridge, 
the other from Westminster, to attend, after a 
proper season of retirement, a consultation of 
their legal parents. Their sister, about thir- 
teen, could not safely join them. Nursed by 
the lady of the third guardian named in Lord 
Clangore's will, she was residing, at the recom- 
mendation of a medical authority, on the coast 
of Devonshire ; and, especially upon such an 
occasion, it seemed injudicious to remove her to 
London. 

The husband of her present protectress was 
a second cousin of the noble testator, whom in 
early youth the Viscount had noticed, but who, 
within the last eventful ten years, had gradually 
slipped out of the list of his Lordship's intimate 
acquaintances : perhaps, having lived since the 
Irish Union in different countries, this circum" 
stance was as much the result of chance as of 
intention on the part of either. Lord Clangore 
never admitted that the fact of Mr. Knightly 
having voted in the Irish House of Commons 
against the measure, which thus separated them, 
changed his private feelings towards his old 
friend ; and although their personal intercourse 
soon ended, and few letters passed between the 
resident Irish squire and the absent Anglo- 



8 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Irish nobleman, Mr. Knightly, on his part, sel- 
dom missed any opportunity of promoting, in 
a neighbourly way, the Viscount's local Irish 
interests. 

Soon after the decease of Lady Clangore, her 
only daughter showed symptoms of the nation- 
al malady which had hurried herself out of the 
world, and was ordered to remove, under the 
care of an affectionate nurse, from a London 
atmosphere. The afflicted father, scarce able to 
snatch from official labour as much time as was 
necessary for considering the subject, looked 
round in vain, amongst the few English con- 
nexions he had made by his marriage, in the 
hope of selecting an individual at once compe- 
tent and willing to protect and comfort his 
child in the salutary exile to which she was 
doomed. In his dilemma he recollected that in 
the person of Knightly''s wife, whose domestic 
character, even at an early age, he had remark- 
ed, there appeared one eminently fitted (could 
she temporarily forego the superintendence ol 
her own family) to undertake the task ; and, 
deciding to make the trial, he wrote to his old 
acquaintance. Knightly answered the letter by 
a visit, for the first time in his life, to London, 
accompanied by his lady ; the next day, Ladj 



THE ANGLO-IRISH, § 

Augusta Blount proceeded to Devonshire under 
Mrs. Knightly's protection ; and the next, not- 
withstanding the persuasions of the grateful 
father to lengthen his stay in Grosvenor Square, 
Knightly himself bustled back to Ireland. 

Lord Clangore, somewhat piqued at the ab- 
ruptness of his Irish cousin, almost regretted 
that he had accepted such an obligation at 
Mr. Knightly's hands. He was grateful for 
the act, but not conciliated by the method of 
doing it. " ""Tis the thing, but 'tis not the 
manner of the thing," soliloquized his Lord- 
ship. And he proceeded to reflect, that either 
Knightly was much changed for the worse, 
since their parting in 1800, or that, remaining 
stationary as Lord Clangore had left him, the 
improved ideas of manner and character, which 
the Viscount had gradually acquired in Eng- 
lish society, now laid open to detection many 
disagreeable peculiarities of the thorough Irish 
squire. WilUng, however, to manifest a con- 
tinued sense of gratitude, he wrote, during the 
course of the ensuing year, while Lady Au- 
gusta still remained in Devonshire, several let- 
ters to Knightly, pressing him to re-visit Lon- 
don, and also to name in what way an influential 
friend could promote his welfare. But to some 
B 5 



10 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

of these letters Mr. Knightly returned hasty 
and brief refusals of all the honours intended for 
him, and others he left unanswered. 

Lord Clangore felt, not without reason, in- 
creased chagrin, and would have removed his 
daughter from Mrs. Knightly's care, if Lady 
Augusta's strong and quickly formed affection 
for her nurse had permitted the measure. 

But to his sons he failed not to criticise, as it 
justly seemed to merit, this (as he called it) 
mere Irish pride ; intemperately, and, perhaps, 
enviously cherished, and clownishly expressed. 
From their infancy, it had been his study to 
impress upon his children the necessity of em- 
bracing all that the superior country proposed 
for adoption ; and in the abrupt conduct of 
their Irish relative, appeared new and practical 
reasons why they should avoid imitating a se- 
condary standard of propriety. 

Fully agreeing with their parent, and, per- 
haps, even going beyond his views on the sub- 
ject, his two sons could feel little less than per- 
sonal indifference to Knightly, if not dislike of 
that gentleman. It was, therefore, with much 
surprise that they learned the name of the 
third guardian appointed, by Lord Clangore's 
will, to preside over their minority. Mental 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 11 

weakness, the accompaniment of sudden and 
increasing malady, alone seemed to account for 
the appointing to such a trust a person for 
whom they knew his Lordship to have enter- 
tained no respect, and, notwithstanding an 
early friendship, scarce any esteem'. To unite 
in common authority with a prime minister, 
and one of the first generals of his age, a rugged 
country-gentleman from the wilds of Ireland, 
also seemed very grotesque ; and in fact, the 
young Viscount and his brother, the Honour- 
able Gerald Blount, awaited in no favour- 
able anticipations the official meeting with their 
yet unseen cousin. 

Mr. Knightly, though speedily apprised of 
Lord Clangore's death, repaired on no mission 
of condolence to London. A formal intimation 
of the day appointed for the consultation of all 
the guardians seemed necessary to force him 
out of his beloved Ireland. Even when that 
was sent in time to allow of a leisurely journey, 
and some days to spare before the conference, 
his non-appearance, almost on the eve of the 
appointed morning, caused some annoyance, and 
created a very unfavourable impression. Just 
saving his distance, however, separate notes 
addressed to his brother-guardians, and to his 



1* THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

noble young kinsmen, late on the very last 
evening, when he could not, without glaring 
impropriety, have continued silent, announced 
liis arrival in town " at the Saracen's Head, 
Snowhill;" and farther, requested information 
as to the exact hour, next day, appointed for 
his appearance in St. James's Square ; for there, 
at the mansion of the minister, he was to pre- 
sent himself. His wards allowed his notes to 
remain unanswered ; and indeed his whole cor- 
respondence was recognized only by a line of 
studied official politeness from the Minister's 
private secretary, expressive of the pleasure 
with which he would be received, at nine o'clock 
the ensuing morning, when all parties concerned 
in the business in hand were expected to meet 
at breakfast. 

Nine o'clock the ensuing morning was strik- 
ing by the splendid timepiece over the man- 
tel of the Minister's library ; and he, the next- 
named guardian. General Sir Robert Flood, 
and the brothers. Lord Clangore and the 
Honourable Gerald Blount, stood listening for 
the breaking-up of the aristocratic silence of 
the Square abroad, by the expected rattle of 
Mr. Knightly 's carriage ; but no such sound 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 15 

met their ears. Ere the silvery strokes had com- 
pleted the prescribed number, the fine and 
bland face of the now ennobled statesman 
turned to the bronzed visage of his gallant 
countryman, and during the glance which they 
interchanged, a smile of mild contempt of the 
obscure person who could break such an ap- 
pointment, escaped the one, and a slight quick 
frown tlie other. The eyes of the young bro- 
thers also met ; Lord Clangore, from his su- 
perior years, exhibiting for the schoolboy's 
response the displeasure he took no pains to 
conceal. 

But, as has been said, this happened whilst 
the hour was striking, and, such are the chances 
of life, proved, by a second or two, an anticipa- 
tion : for, almost simultaneously with the ninth 
stroke of the timepiece, although no rattling 
wheels or clattering hoofs — (St. James's Square 
was not macadamized then) — had heralded his 
approach, a kind of postman's double-knock 
smote the hall-door, and presently a footman, 
magnificently liveried, ushered into the library, 
by the name of Knightly, a strong and square- 
built person, about the middle stature, having 
a broad-featured, horny face, and a dark small 



14 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

eye, wearing his coal-black hair smoothed down 
over his forehead, a brown surtout, although 
it was a warm April-day, half-buttoned over a 
bright blue coat, and smiling and carrying his 
hat protectingly in his hand. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 15 



CHAPTER II. 

Of the persons of this scene the schoolboy is 
my hero, and I shall therefore transcribe his 
impressions of it. 

Gerald, then, at the mere appearance of 
his third-named guardian, painfully felt the 
contrast between his unfashionable, though re- 
spectable dress and mien, and the tall figure of 
the Minister, clad in a silken and richly-flowered 
morning-gown, as, advancing a step, he grace- 
fully returned the loose, abrupt bow of Mr. 
Knightly. The frank military politeness of Sir 
Robert Flood, and the air of his straight person, 
neatly expressed in a blue undress frock, braid- 
ed and buttoned up to his chin, produced ano- 
ther contrast, as he and Knightly greeted each 
other, equally unfavourable to the Irish squire. 
In turn, the visitor was named to Lord Clan- 
gore, and Gerald noticed the bare civility of 
his brother's recognition. In some surprise, 
however, he remarked the final issue of their 
meeting. 



16 THE ANGLO IRISH. 

Knightly, after his second butting bow to the 
General, turned quickly, with outstretched hand, 
and some modification of his set smile, to his 
titled ward ; the young nobleman all but step- 
ped back, and not withdrawing his eyes from 
the other's face, as if to form a reason for not 
seeing his hand, just inclined his chin towards 
his breast, whereat Mr. Knightly checked him- 
self, looked askance, tried to imitate the polite 
nod, new-fashioned to him, with which he was 
received, — and, during the attempt, Gerald 
thought that a slight but bitter smile darted 
out of the corners of his mouth and of his half- 
closed lids. Could this uncouth gentleman feel, 
or rather affect to feel, any unbecoming senti- 
ment towards Gerald's brother ? But he was 
not able to conclude his mental question, when 
the subject of it suddenly wheeled round upon 
himself, and, not waiting for formal presentation 
to the schoolboy, or giving him time to stand 
on his guard, plunged on both his hands, and, 
with strong and overcharged language, ex- 
pressed his joy at seeing him. 

All proceeded to the breakfast parlour, Mr. 
Knightly still keeping firm hold of his new hat ; 
and, ere he would occupy the chair pointed out 
to him, he bethought himself of walking quickly 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. IT 

across the room, and depositing it on a side-table. 
As he returned to his chair, a servant, removing 
it to the hall, called from him a questioning 
glance ; and though, at length, he seated him- 
self quietly, and with somewhat of the self- 
possession of a gentleman, Gerald smiled to ob- 
serve the grave scrutiny with which he peered 
at (so Gerald thought) the flame lighted under 
a richly-embossed chocolate-pot. 

" Peter Bell," whispered Lord Clangore to 
his brother, who sat close by him ; "he carries 
all the out-of-doors character of Peter in his 
face ; and has he tied his ass to the railings.?" 

*' Caliban," answered Gerald, " the marks of 
his talons are on my hands.'''' 

" Observe him now, Gerald," as Mr. Knightly 
took a steady survey of the dishes round the 
table; " attend, and you may see 

* The longings of the Cannibal arise. 
Although he speaks not, in his wolfish eyes.' " 

And allowing for some poetical license, the 
quotation seemed not misapplied. After de- 
clining, but not till he caused his host to repeat 
its name, to be helped to Perigord-pie, Mr. 
Knightly demanded what was a round, en- 
crusted, disguised something, in the middle of 



18 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

the board. At the answer " smoked tongue," 
his countenance brightened, and he zealously 
put in his claim for some to the General, and at 
the same time plied Lord Clangore, who pre- 
sided over a pair of cold fowls. And over 
and over again he would be helped to both to- 
gether ; and between his pauses, having tea to 
his hand, cup after cup slaked his insatiate 
thirst — it was prodigious. Once he seemed to 
relax, and an attendant motioned to change 
his plate ; but the sudden way in which Mr. 
Knightly seized, and, with an earnest " beg 
your pardon," — detained it, smiling to himself 
all the time, startled and amused, at once, the 
two junior spectators. 

Catching Gerald's eye during his serious 
occupation, Mr. Knightly smiled more expres- 
sively than ever, and seemed to think there 
might exist some slight necessity for palliation. 
" Ay, my honourable young cousin," he said, 
" when you come to see us in Ireland, this is 
the way we '11 teach you to breakfast : first 
teaching you that a couple of hours' walk before 
hand is indispensable in the case: I have just 
been rambling over Primrose Hill as far as 
Highgate." 

" My brother thanks you, Sir," said Lord 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 19 

Clangore, after exchanging a glance with Gerald, 
'* and when he goes to see you in Ireland, will 
most gladly become your pupil." 

Gerald, not quite so fully possessed with a feel- 
ing of equality towards men of matured years 
as was his Lordship, feared this irony might 
prove too strong ; he comforted himself, how- 
ever, with the hope that it would not be under- 
stood ; and, indeed, the quiet " You are very 
good, my Lord," with which Mr. Knightly re- 
plied, set him at ease. 

" Over Primrose-hill, and on to Highgate !" 
said the Minister, smiling : " indeed, Mr. 
Knightly, you astound us poor cockneys." 

*' I fear so, my Lord ; but Irish mountaineers 
will follow their old habits." 

" No doubt," said Sir Robert. " Are they 
getting any quieter, Mr. Knightly .''" 

It was a quick turn of the conversation, yet 
Mr. Knightly's " No, indeed, General," showed 
that he accepted it quite in course. 

" Unhappy, misguided creatures," continued 
Sir Robert. 

" Unhappy, misguided creatures," assented 
Mr. Knightly, much in earnest. 

" And when will they grow quiet, Sir .?" 

" When, indeed. General .?" 



80 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

"What with White-boys and Right-boys, 
United-men, Shanavests, Caravats, Threshers, 
Carders, and now, Rockites, I believe, all I have 
heard or read of them since I left the country, 
shows that the old people of Ireland never can 
be peaceable so long as they remain what they 
are." 

" Plainly shows it. Sir Robert." 

" The mass of our half-countrymen are cer- 
tainly difficult to govern," said the Minister ; 
" I fear, they may be said to give His Majesty's 
Councils as much continued, though petty trou- 
ble, as any people who are, or have been, our 
declared enemies." 

" And I fear so, too, my Lord." 

"And 'tis a problem they should, Mr. Knight- 
ly ; — for whether we consider their long expe- 
rience of the Government and of the laws of 
England ; or their necessitous knowledge of 
their own level in the scale of nations ; or their 
constant opportunities to grow wiser, by obser- 
ving the course pursued by other people, and 
especially by their neighbours, towards happi- 
ness and prosperity ; in fact, in whatever way 
we balance the question, we are unable to forge 
it into any tangible solution capable of being 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 21 

comprehended according to the rules of cause 
and effect.'" 

Here may be detected instances of the rather 
infelicitous clash of imagery that occasionally 
marked his Lordship's language ; without depri- 
ving it, however, of the power of persuading or 
convincing, which it is well known to have pos- 
sessed, and in which few were his rivals. 

" One is sometimes thrown," said Mr. Knight- 
ly, " upon the unphilosophical supposition that 
would attribute to an ill-organized nature, their 
restlessness — to use no harder word, my Lord." 

" Their turbulence, their ferocit}'^, Sir," resum- 
ed Sir Robert Flood : *' their thirst of human 
life ; — and there. Sir, I have used your harder 
word, though you will not call it too hard, after 
all." 

" Not a bit too hard. Sir Robert." 

*' And in Heaven's name, Mr. Knightly, re- 
suming my former question, when are we to 
witness any abatement of excesses, which refuse 
peace, nay, even personal security, to such Eng- 
lish capitalists, or English gentlemen, or Irish 
gentlemen of English descent, as may think of 
settling in the country ?" 

" I suppose you to ask, General, if atrocities 



22 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

are becoming less frequent, and I answer, no. 
It was but a few nights before I began my 
journey to England, that, only three miles from 
my own house, an industrious Scotchman, who 
had recently taken a large farm, fell a victim, 
along with two of his servants, to the savage 
vengeance of Captain Rock's desperadoes." 
" And yet you hve in Ireland, Sir !" 
" Why, Sir Robert," smiling apologetically, 
" one must live where one can. Perhaps if I 
lived in your affluent and luxurious England, 
along with my half-dozen of raw- boned sons, 
and my seven or eight gadding daughters, I 
could not well manage my small means for liv- 
ing at all ; and so, as in the hope of advantage, 
the East-Indiaman braves the Cape, and the 
caravan the Desert, I must brave — no — not 
brave — that wouldn't do — ^but I must take my 
chance against Captain Rock." 

" It is, however, to be hoped," resumed the 
Minister, " that when the important measure 
of Union, as yet but nominally effected between 
the two countries, shall have fully come into 
operation, there will begin, in Ireland, a change 
of character, which must speedily repay us for 
the season of turmoil we now endure, and which 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 23 

will show itself as much the result of a well- 
squared dove-tailing with England, taking 
root during a necessary previous time, as the 
present sad state of things may be said to flow 
from a want of that close and kindly interweav- 
ing between the two people.** 

" If your Lordship means that Ireland will 
never be quiet, or prosperous, or worth living 
in, until English views, interests, industry — Eng- 
lish character, in fact — take place of the views, 
interests, and indolence, instead of industry — 
which confer its present character — then I agree 
with your Lordship," said the General. 

" In detail, Sir Robert, I meant that." 

" In a word, until the great majority of the 
population cease to be merely Irish, and be- 
come, like the only portion of it who are now 
respectable, intelhgent — ay, or civilized, — Eng- 
Hsh-Irish," continued Sir Robert. 

" Well, and my meaning allows of that con- 
struction too," assented the Minister. " Yes ; 
I like your word. Sir Robert ; it defines almost 
to a point what I might admit to have been 
my own previous opinion : yes, mi/ first cure 
for the evils of Ireland, certainly would be to 
make all her people English-Irish." 



24 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" And it would be my first cure too,"" ob- 
served Mr. Knightly, as if rather speaking to 
himself, than to those around him. 

" Begin then, my Lord, we pray you," said 
the young Viscount. 

" Or, my Lord," added Gerald, upon whom 
little of the conversation had been lost, " Wal- 
ter, here, or I, shall scarce live long enough to 
pay our Irish tenantry a visit ; don''t you think 
so, Walter ?" 

" Indeed I do." 

" But why, my good young friends .''" asked 
the Minister with a condescending smile. 

" Explain as well as you can, Gerald," said 
Lord Clangore. 

*' Thus then, my Lord ;" and in a little em- 
barassment the schoolboy addressed the Minis- 
ter — " until one can sleep soundly in one's bed 
in Ireland, one can hardly think of going there ; 
and Sir Robert, and Mr. Knightly, and even 
your Lordship, seem to say, that this must not 
be expected for a great many years." 

" Fairly argued, Gerald,"" laughed Sir Ro- 
bert. 

" My dear young Lord Clangore," resumed 
the Minister, assuming one of those full, manly 
expressions of face and manner which often 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 25 

distinguished him ; " it is due to your ripening 
years, to remind you that, as has already been 
noticed, his Majesty's Government have made 
the beginning you so properly wish for. The 
legislative Union of Great Britain and Ireland 
may, indeed, be said to be the first link of that 
great chain which, in intellect, civilization, hap- 
piness, and glory, and at the same time, in 
habits, pursuits, and morals, is destined to inter- 
fuse into one national current, the people of 
England and Ireland." 

" I thank your Lordship for your explana- 
tion," said Lord Clangore, " and I fully accept 
it; and yet it is grievous to think that our 
young logician here is still right, when he sup- 
poses that many, many years must elapse before 
an Irish nobleman or gentleman, or, as I admit 
the propriety of the epithet, an English- Irish 
one, can reckon upon residing comfortably and 
happily amongst his mere Irish dependants." 

" Before that, many, many years must pass 
away, indeed," remarked Knightly. 

*' Meantime," resumed Lord Clangore, 
" while the purely Irish of the present day, 
in dificrent ranks of society, utter the lan- 
guage of disaffection to England, or fright- 
fully outrage her laws, what shall we call 

VOL. I. C 



26 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

their conduct with reference to the expected 
change ?" 

" Call it, if your Lordship pleases, the 
yeasty workings, which denote a decomposing 
process in the moral elements of the people, 
and which, pursuant to the theory, must leave 
behind a settled and purer state of society," an- 
swered — not the Minister, nor the General, but 
Mr. Knightly, out of his turn and place. 

" And are we merely to look on at the fer- 
mentation ?■" continued Lord Clangore, glancing 
round to his more important friends. 

" I suppose so," again put in Knightly ; " fid- 
dling" with his spoon. 

" But can you not also suppose. Sir, a mo- 
ment, during which we could not merely look 
on ?" 

*' I had rather not, my Lord :" Knightly 
smiled and bowed. 

" Tut, my good young Lord," said the Ge- 
neral, rising ; " you only contemplate circum- 
stances as likely as any that could occur to fa- 
cilitate the change we all think desirable. And 
so, indeed, says our distinguished countryman, 
now immortalizing himself on the Peninsula. 
One of the chief causes of Ireland's turbulence 
is her self-flattering conviction, that, as yet, she 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 27 

has been but half conquered. Whenever she 
deserves it, then, he argues, conquer her to her 
heart's content, and she will be quieter. And I 
think it a fair syllogism ; and, for my own part, 
can imagine no state of things better calculated 
to let us remodel the old Celtic character — to 
make it, in fact, English-Irish — that 's still my 
word — than one offered by the salutary humili- 
ation, perhaps diminution, of a newly-conquered 
people !" 

" Faith ! and it might be as good a way as 
any. General," assented Mr. Knightly. 

" I agree," said Lord Clangore. 

" And I," said Gerald. 

All now arose, and as a hint for furthering the 
real business of the morning, the Minister show- 
ed the way back to his library. 

It often happens that, when men meet about 
some specific matter of importance, the acci- 
dental conversation which precedes its discus- 
sion, proves tenfold the extent of that which 
arranges it. And such was the case in the 
present instance. Little could be suggested for 
the future advantage of their wards by the 
three guardians, or by one of the wards, Lord 
Clangore, in behalf of his brother, or his sister, 
or himself, which all did not seem to have 
c 2 



28 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

previously, though tacitly, agreed in. Lady 
Augusta could not yet be removed from De- 
vonshire, nor invited to resume her literary and 
other studies, notwithstanding a manifest im- 
provement in her health, reported by Lord 
Clangore, who, since their common calamity, 
had been to visit her. The young Viscount 
would return to Cambridge, complete his terms, 
and at one and twenty inherit his considerable 
estates in England and Ireland : then, if state 
ambition swayed his mind, no young nobleman 
could have better prospects. And, almost upon 
the same plan, Gerald was to go back to West- 
minster, afterwards to the University, and 
against the time when he must be called upon 
to consider it, make up his mind in the choice 
of a profession, — the portion of patrimony 
lying in Ireland, to which his father's will en- 
titled him, not seeming to dispense with his own 
exertions in the world. At present, he could 
not say what profession he might ultimately 
select. 

During the conversation on these points Mr. 
Knightly scarce spoke a word, except when he 
assented. As the meeting was about to dis- 
solve, however, he asked, 

'' When Lord Clangore shall have attained 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 29 

his twenty-first year, I presume we may reckon 
upon seeing him amongst us in Ireland ?" 

" That requires consideration," said the 
Minister. 

" The late Lord Clangore often objected to 
any son of his residing in Ireland," said Sir 
Robert, " or even temporarily mixing in the 
anomalous crowd called Irish Society, at least 
till an advanced period of life." 

" Then you will be one of the true English- 
Irish, my Lord ,?" pursued Mr. Knightly, 
good-humouredly. 

" I will, Sir," answered his noble ward. 

** And so will I," echoed Gerald. 

" Like all of us who — to speak modestly — 
do not put Ireland to the blush," resumed Sir 
Robert Flood. 

" We shall regret your absence, even while 
■we admire the motive for it, my Lord ;" and Mr. 
Knightly was bowing himself out of the room. 

" Do you leave town soon, Sir .?" asked Sir 
Robert. 

" To-day, General, for Devonshire, in the 
three-o'-clock coach, that starts from Lad-lane ; 
and thence, with little delay, home to Captain 
Rock ;" and continuing his bows, Mr. Knightly 
withdrew. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER III. 

*' And, Gerald," said Lord Clangore, keep- 
ing up with his brother some confidential dis- 
course, upon the evening previous to their 
separation, the one for Cambridge, the other 
for Westminster — "make no friends and few 
acquaintances among the bo^^s fresh from our 
father's country you may meet at school ; 
guard yourself, at least, against the manners, 
temper, and even the brogue, for which -such 
of them as continue very national, and wish 
to be so, are remarkable." 

" Indeed, Walter, I know but one boy at 
Westminster x)f Irish connexion, that I 've 
any fancy to know ; Charles Flood, the Gene- 
ral's son : and he, I assure you, thinks so nearly 
with ourselves on this subject, that his ac- 
quaintance must be of use, rather than other- 
wise : he's very witty, and droll, and——"" 

** Have a care, Gerald, how you give him 
credit for that very kind of wit which you 



THE ANGLO IRISH. 31 

have yourself defined in so questionable a man- 
ner ; for, in fact, drollery is not wit, except, I 
suppose, in Ireland." 

" Charles is witty, though, Walter ; per- 
haps I need not have said droll : there 's no- 
thing broad about it ; nothing buffoonish or 
vulgar; but all so quiet and unawares, you 
would think, when you look at him lisping it 
out with his raised eye-brows and half-shut 
eyes ; and then, as I was going to say, though 
he makes us all laugh, whatever subject comes 
up, Charles is never so delightful as when he 
talks to us of the Irish people, men and 
women, and of the Irish places and things he 
was bred and born amongst." 

" ' Bred and born !' that 's as good an Irish- 
ism as I 've heard, Gerald." 

*' Well, may be so ; but one can easily for- 
get, you know." 

" And if you got it from young Flood — " 

" No, Walter, I bar that." 

" * Bar that !' over again !" 

" Well to be sure !" continued Gerald, in 
intended self-defence, while he really achieved 
a climax of Irish phraseology, garnishing it, 
too, with a very sweet bit of brogue. His 
brother raised up his hands and eyes in mock 



3% THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

horror, and when Gerald saw and acknow- 
ledged his stumble, both laughed heartily, 
and the subject changed. 

" I wish our poor Augusta had never fall- 
en into the care of her present protectress, 
Gerald." 

" So do I, for every reason ; and first, 
because she would not have been ill enough 
to require it." 

** And next, because of all ladies I have 
ever seen, Mrs. Knightly is the most Irish ; 
so peculiarly mannered, so strange and ante- 
diluvian, so talky, and, sometimes, so droll 
too, Gerald ; why, the very nationality of her 
tones will be injurious to our sister, if, indeed, 
they remain long enough together to allow of 
Augusta's unconscious imitation of them." 

" That will be bad, Walter ; particularly 
for a lady destined to move and excel in Eng- 
lish society.'" 

" Did you like Mrs. Knightly, during our 
short visit, Gerald ?" 

" I — I don't know ; I can't exactly say ; I 
never thought of the matter, then or since ; 
but I believe not. Can't Augusta have an- 
other companion in Devonshire ?" 

" The good Irish lady has, Irish as she is, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 33 

been very attentive and kind to her, and 
evidently won Augusta's affections; so that 
separating them, at present, or, indeed, until 
our sister perfectly regains her health — " 

" Oh, it wouldn't do. But write to Au- 
gusta on the matter." 

" So I intend." 

"And when I go down to Devonshire, next 
vacation, I 'II report to you, Walter." 

The brothers parted. Gerald arrived at 
Westminster while the boys were out of doors, 
and hastened to join such of them as had been 
his companions. He soon found them, forming, 
along with some others, a little crowd, which 
hovered on the steps of a solitary lad, who, at 
a glance, Gerald saw was a new comer. 

" Oh, Blount !" lisped young Charles Flood, 
after temperately shaking his hand, and while he 
pointed to the sad-looking stranger, and affected 
a strong Irish accent ; " Oh, Blount, did you 
ever in your life see a pay-cock }"" 

" A what !" laughed Gerald, and the crowd 
loudly echoed his anticipating glee. The object 
of their ridicule was within hearing. 

" Why, a pay-cock, man : — wait till I tell 
you ;" and Flood, mimicking the face of a 
person astonished, and a little embarrassed in a 
c 5 



34 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

new situation, began to stare about him as he 
drawled out — ' James ! James ! ' — (that 's the 
curious serving man that came here with us) — 
' Oh, James, James ! ' — * Eh-a, Masther Harry ?' 
* James, look at the pay-cock !' 

This sally, obviously caricaturing a scene all 
had recently witnessed during the last interview 
between the new comer and his Irish servant, 
produced a fresh burst of laughter, which, how- 
ever, was interrupted in a startling way. Flood 
had scarce uttered his last mouthful of brogue, 
when a sharp and rather large stone, whizzing 
through his crowd of admirers, struck him on 
the head, and, as he lay stunned on the ground, 
the dangerous person who had hurled it, darted, 
with flashing eyes and features swollen, and 
stained with recent tears, upon his prostrate tor- 
mentor, as he shouted out — " No! but, James ! 
James I where are you to look at the puppy !" 

" Tear away the Pat !" cried several voices, 
as they saw him attempt farther to annoy young 
Flood. He was soon secured by Gerald and 
others. 

'* There's his Irish treachery!" they conti- 
nued ; " a blow even without a word I'' 

" He has been with Captain Rock among the 
boss !" cried others. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. S5 

" Report him ! report him ! and we shall soon 
be rid of him !" 

Flood now started to his feet and said — "No! 
let no one here speak of tale-bearing, or I am 
his enemy. We can settle the matter in another 
way." 

" Ay, serve him out for it ! serve him out !" 
was now the cry. Flood walked up to his 
assaulter. 

" Williams, if that is your name ? — " 

" It is my name," angrily interrupted the 
captive. 

" Very well. Let him go, Blount ; my merry- 
men, let him go ; we shall have a quiet word 
together:" he was released. *' Wilhams, then, 
most princely and most Milesian Williams — 
though 'tis not a Milesian name, after all — smells 
of the leek, I think — but 'twill do as well — 
Taffy is as hot as Paddy any day — and when 
mixed, as in thy puissant person — " 

"Balderdash!" exclaimed Williams, "say it 
at once, if you're not afraid of the very sound 
of it." 

" Nay, gentle Pat— ap— Taffy— ap — Wil- 
Hams, courage and good humour may go to- 
gether." 

" You want to fight it out with me ?" 



36 THB ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Thou hast expressed it : lads, get him a 
friend and a bottle-holder among you ; Blount 
and Morton, you are for me ; come along.'^ 

" I want no friend here,''^ growled Williams ; 
" I can do it alone." 

"Friend, or no friend, there shall be fair 
play," said several ; and while the greater por- 
tion of the crowd hurried oflF to prepare a ring on 
the destined spot, a few ran to provide brandy, 
as an approved stimulant for the mettle of the 
combatants. But, by some unknown means, 
one of the authorities received notice of the in- 
tended battle, though not of the aggression that 
had led to it, and soon appearing on the ground, 
commanded peace, in the name of heavy pe- 
nalties and punishment. As the disappointed 
throng dispersed. Flood whispered in Williams's 
ear, ** To-morrow evening, then, and here." 

" Any evening, and any where," he was an- 
swered ; and, taking Gerald's arm. Flood turned 
away, as also did every other boy from the tur- 
bulent stranger, leaving him quite alone— cut, 
in fact. 

" Now there 's a drop of the true Hibernian 
blood for you, Gerald," said Flood, as they 
walked on. 

*' Shocking!" replied Gerald: " he shows no 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 37 

notion of resentment in a fair way, or even a 
manly way.'^ 

*' And yet he 's not one of the prime ones ei- 
ther; being no Roman-Catholic, in the first place, 
and having nothing to do with the good old 
stock in the second ; but, of course, he learned it 
amongst them." 

" He must forget what he has learned then, 
if he means to live here. Flood." 

" Let 's see how he '11 take the initiation 
to-night," answered Flood ; " that tries temper 
and sense." 

" Yes ; and he '11 have time to cool,'' agreed 
Gerald. 

The night came, and about the hour when 
the clock was striking twelve, Williams, awak- 
ing out of a sound sleep, in consequence of 
some sudden rough treatment, found himself 
lying on the floor, surrounded by a hideous 
row of figures in white drapery and with devi- 
lish faces, visible only by the phosphoric light 
smeared over them. A subdued howl, at the 
same time, assaulted his ears ; and, after a 
second's recollection, he thought he felt as 
if he had been soused in water. The na- 
tural terror that his first glance around him 
had brought to his heart, was corrected by this 



S8 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

latter observation. It seemed now clear that, 
instead of being haunted by evil spirits, he was 
suffering much ill-treatment at the hands of his 
school-fellows ; and never having heard of such 
proceedings, and construing into a particular 
personal outrage pranks that many a boy had 
experienced before him, the moody young Irish- 
man gave way to a paroxysm of fury, which 
spent itself in the wildest efforts at retaliation. 
But those efforts proved as vain as they were 
wild. In a few moments he found himself in 
utter darkness, far from his bed, in what direc- 
tion he could not tell, and receiving, at the 
hands of his unseen persecutors, a succession of 
ill-usage, their knowledge of the localities of 
the apartment enabling them to keep out of his 
reach, while the well-known sounds of — '* James, 
look at the pay-cock !" proved, if any proof were 
wanting, to whom he stood indebted ; until at 
last, after hours of misery, chilled, and drenched, 
he sunk on the boards, and became at once tamed 
and comforted in the deep sleep of exhaustion. 

*' He will make a story of it in the morn- 
ing," whispered Flood to Gerald, as they part- 
ed for the night ; — " his nature is enough for 
any thing." 

But in this instance only they wronged the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 39 

Hibernian. He took no steps to obtain satis- 
faction at the hands of the constituted authori- 
ties ; he even did not allude to the scene of 
the previous night in their presence. A con- 
firmed gloom of brow, and a sullen silence, alone 
showed the sense of wrong that brooded within. 
Through the whole day he sat or strayed about 
alone. The evening, and with it the hour for 
renewed battle, drew on, and he was the first 
on the ground. Against his repeated protest, 
friends were allotted to him, and he and Flood 
" set-to." Williams was the stronger and elder 
boy, and when his hits told, as at the com- 
mencement was the case, his adversary suffer- 
ed from them. But Flood had the advan- 
tage in *' the science" — " the real thing;'' be- 
sides being much cooler, and more on his 
guard ; and after a few rounds, gradually ha- 
rassed his man, until feebleness and insensibility 
began to appear. Williams then partook, for 
the first time, of the proffered stimulant, that 
Flood had not from the outset refused ; rallied, 
and did some wild work ; but after a contest of 
an hour, finally lay powerless. Many boys, 
interested by his spirit and bravery, took care 
of him ; and even his first offence seemed almost 
forgotten. 



40 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Will the Milesian be more rational now ?"" 
inquired the victor of his friend Gerald, as 
they returned from the ground. 

" We can watch him to-morrow," replied Ge- 
rald ; " and, Flood, if he promises fair, no need 
to cut the poor devil altogether, you know." 

" Certainly not on this account; but let us see." 

Flood had already shaken Williams's hand, 
but as he could scarce have been sensible of the 
overture, fresh advances towards good-fellow- 
ship were made the ensuing morning. But the 
beaten boy scowlingly drew back from his con- 
queror, muttering that it was not over yet ; and 
still he sat or sauntered moodily alone. In the 
course of the day he was observed to speak 
apart with a Jew-hawker, who came within 
view ; and, seemingly at his instance, the iti- 
nerant merchant retired, after a few hours re- 
appeared, and Williams purchased something of 
him. Gerald met him walking rapidly towards 
the more frequented part of the play-ground, 
his hands thrust into his pockets, and a mixed 
satisfaction and fierceness in his look. 

** Where 's Flood .'*" he asked, as they passed. 

Gerald answered. — "Follow me, then; you ""re 
his friend, and he may want you ; follow me." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 41 

Gerald did follow in his hasty steps, and they 
soon came up with Flood. 

** There, fellow !" cried the Irishman, fling- 
ing down one pistol, as he took out another ; 
" meet me like a gentleman at last, since I can't 
wait to learn your * stable-boy' knack of fight- 
ing — put him on his ground !" 

An assistant of the school seasonably inter- 
fered, the whole transaction was reported to 
the master, and next day Williams was ordered 
home to Ireland. 

" They never forgive," observed Flood to 
Gerald ; " they will never let you be friends 
with them." 

*' I have often been told that," replied Gerald, 
" and now I see it." 

" They must have fighting, Blount; 'tis meat, 
drink, and clothes to them — (indeed, sometimes 
they want it as a substitute for these matters) — 
if they can have it with an enemy, and with an 
Englishman above the world, all the better; but 
rather than go without it, they must have it 
from each other." 

The young friends, along with other boys of 
their age, rowed up the river the same evening, 
beyond Chelsea. By the way, the manful com- 



42 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

mand which Westminster boys of twelve or 
thirteen, exhibit over a four-oared, sometimes a 
six-oared boat, is quite delightful to witness. 
An equal number of professional watermen 
could not much surpass them; as, sitting strip- 
ped to their work, they pull with their little 
muscular arms, and bend their little bodies in 
masterly unison. 

" Hark !" cried Flood, as they passed 
Cheyne-walk, " I hear the sweet silvery sounds 
of home ;" a loud clatter from a group of 
Irish labourers just then broke on the ears of 
all. The men stood debating round the door 
of a public-house, seemingly half tipsy, and 
as if cordially, though so boisterously, ex- 
horting each other to step in again and become 
wholly so. The juvenile boatmen rested on 
their oars to observe them. 

" They are going to fight," said Gerald, who 
did not understand Irish vivacity : " they are 
going to fight. Flood, amongst each other, 
just as you said it, a few hours ago." 

" No, no," replied Flood, *' that 's to come : 
this is only the love-making that brings it on. 
Pull, lads, we shall be time enough on our re- 
turn from Battersea or the Red-house." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 43 

So well had he prophesied, that, just as the 
boat shot by the same spot, after about half an 
hour's absence, a discordant yelling and voci- 
feration issued from the public-house, and, in a 
few minutes, out rushed the dearest friends in 
the world, breaking each other's heads, some 
with the very utensils in which they had been 
pledging mutual love, and peace, and happi- 
ness ; some with portions of chairs, wrenched 
asunder for the occasion, and some with pokers. 
No brow amongst them was unstained with 
blood ; few were able to stand upright for more 
than a second at a time, ere they were felled to 
the earth ; and many lay motionless, perhaps 
dead, upon it. But I will not detail the scene. 
The only relief it shall receive at my hands is, 
by contrasting such a display of strange and fo- 
reign uproar, with the systematised quiet and 
indifference, not to say contempt, with which 
it was regarded by all classes of the people 
amongst whom it occurred, and who, evidently 
against their taste, were lookers on. 

" There 'tis for you now, Gerald," remarked 
Flood. 

*' Fickle, turbulent creatures ! " exclaimed 
Gerald. " No, I see it, plainly, they never can 



»** THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



be quiet ; you never can be at peace with them :" 
and in strengthened conviction, he recollected 
the theory of a total change of nationality, ori- 
ginated by his friend's father, and asserted to 
be an indispensable step towards the peace and 
happiness of his paternal country. 

Upon another evening, when he, Flood, and 
the rest of their little boat's^crew, had proceeded 
down the river as far as Bermondsey, and when, 
in search of some refreshments, they landed and 
explored that dirty and straggling ramification 
of the overgrown Babylon, a general riot and 
panic possessed its narrow warehouse, or shed- 
house lanes, the Irish population, which there 
preponderates, having just turned out in civil 
warfare. — The yells and imprecations of the 
half-mad people rang far and wide ; with gashed 
heads and shattered limbs the discomfited par- 
ties lay on the pavement ; constables interposed, 
and in a twinkling were routed and sorely mal- 
treated ; until at length, whenever a peace-mak- 
ing Englishman presented himself, or even a 
merely peaceable one, who had in no way in- 
terfered, the staves of the enfuriated rioters 
were dealt round in indiscriminate, and, it 
might seem, merely impulsive fury. The place 
appeared like a town just stormed and taken 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 45 

possession of by a band of pirates, before whose 
animal desperation the quiet inhabitants shrunk 
in dismay, or were flying in terror. But Gerald 
did not require this new fact to strengthen his. 
former conclusions. He was only more disgusted. 
Vacation came on, and, previous to his jour- 
ney to Devonshire, Gerald spent a few days 
with his friends in town ; one he devoted, still 
in the company of Flood and a few other 
boys, to an exploring ramble from the West 
End towards the city. Wallcing into Hol- 
born, the now familiar noise of Irish uproar 
once more reached them down one of the nar- 
row alleys that communicate with the very ca- 
pital of Irish London colonies — dear St. Giles's 
itself. Gerald would have declined farther no- 
tice of the disagreeable occurrence, but, yield- 
ing to the wishes of his young friends, he at 
length advanced, with them, to the outskirts of 
the fray. It is enough to observe, that it ge- 
nerally resembled those he had before witness- 
ed, with the addition of female combatants, 
scattered through the male ranks, or screaming 
and imprecating, four or five at a time, out of 
all the windows within view. Cautiously pass- 
ing the unruly mob, the young party turned 
down another street of the same colony, in 



46 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

which reigned comparative peace, but which 
presented other fruitful subjects for contem- 
plation. Here, in the very core of English 
cleanliness, order, and comfort, was a picture of 
all Gerald had ever heard about Irish nastiness 
and misery, as vivid as if he stood on Irish 
ground, or as if the wretched beings, by whose 
agency it was displayed, had never had an op- 
portunity of seeing or knowing better ; though 
they need but turn round their eyes, or at far- 
thest walk a few steps, to supply themselves with 
contrasts that ought to bring into their cheeks 
the blush of shame, and into their hearts the 
zeal of amendment. The door of almost every 
dingy house stood open, and women, and girls, 
untidily dressed, with unwashed faces, sat or 
grouped round the thresholds, gabbling loud, 
and doing nothing. Squalid and ragged chil- 
dren sprawled about the streets, which were 
puddly, though it was summer, and while every 
street that led into the vile district, was clean ; 
and cabbage-leaves, and cabbage- stalks, and a 
variety of other rubbish, offended the eye of 
even the least orderly observer. 

" See,'^ said Flood, " it is not the heroic 
tastes of our dear countrymen I so much mar- 
vel at, but they cannot even be taught to — " 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 47 

" They will never be taught any thing they 
should know as long as they are Irisli," inter- 
rupted Gerald. 

One of Gerald's companions was a young Eng- 
lish gentleman of that well-regulated turn of 
mind, dignity of manner, and openness of heart, 
which mark the best specimens of English charac- 
ter. Upon their boating psu-ties to Chelsea and 
Bermondsey he had witnessed scenes, already no- 
ticed, and while it was evident that his notions of 
propriety received, on these occasions, a disagree- 
ble shock, yet, with an amiable and delicate tact, 
he strove to conceal from Gerald any strong ex- 
pression of feeling that might tend to humiliate 
him. Now, however, as they all turned out of 
St, Giles's, he could not avoid saying — " Blount, 
I am sorry these people are your countrymen." 
'* Then your sorrow is unnecessary," replied 
Gerald, " for mi/ countrymen these people are 
not. You might, indeed, during his lifetime, 
have fixed them upon my father, though in 
spite of him ; but I was not even born amongst 
them : at all events, if I am to be called Irish, 
let it be with a word prefixed — English-Irish." 
" That is — ^" said his friend. 
" That is,"" continued Gerald, energetically, 
" even if Irish by birth — " 



48 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Or rather, by having been born in the 
country," put in Flood. 

*' Yes, Flood ; for, after all, people of Eng- 
lish blood, in the first instance, do not grow 
Irish, by being born in Ireland : but I mean, 
that, supposing such to be my case, I wish to be- 
come English, purely English, in all my habits 
and notions; and more, as your father says. 
Flood, I believe Ireland never can be in any 
respect what it ought to be, until all the people 
in it, or the greater number of them, at least, 
are made as English, as I hope, I am." 

" My excellent father is, no doubt, excellent 
authority," said Flood ; '' but his commander- 
in-chief must, according to the articles of war, 
be allowed to be better ; and it is well known, 
Blount, that the Great Captain, of course seeing 
things as you and I, and all of us do, rejects the 
name of Irishman, and desires to be considered 
a — (I believe his term is) — British subject." 

** Your father''s term would be better. Flood." 

" I wish this had been sooner understood by 
our countrymen, at least by any of them who 
ever escaped out of Ireland, good Gerald," said 
Flood to Gerald, a few days after, as, under the 
magnificent roof of Westminster Abbey, they 
resumed the question. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 49 

" And it was," answered Gerald ; " look 
here," leading him up to Goldsmith's monu- 
ment, ** here is a proof. It is well known that 
Goldsmith drew from his Irish recollections 
when he wrote the ' Deserted Village ;' what 
but a disinclination to link himself with Ire- 
land, could have hindered him from placing 
the village where he really found it ?" 

" It might have been too dirty a village, 
where he found it," said Flood ; "a little St- 
Giles's." 

" Well," resumed Gerald, smiling ; " even 
so you prove that in Goldsmith's judgment 
it was first necessary to make it English-Irish. 
But this is not the only way in which he has 
shown a prudent shyness of the country that 
happened to give him birth. He satirized it 
at every opportunity." 

" I remember," said Flood, 

" ' There's my countrvmaiij HigginSj och ! let him alone. 
For making a blunder, or picking a bone !' " 

" And the epistle you quote from," resumed 
Gerald, " was written to Lord Clare ; and as 
Goldsmith must have known, from his Lord- 
ship's previous sentiments, that he would enjoy 
a keen, though deserved taunt on mere Irish 

VOL. I. O 



50 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

peculiarities, we may conclude that he, too, 
was English-Irish." Had the reading, or the 
memory of the young theorist served him, he 
might have named more important instances of 
his assertion, as well before as at the time now 
chosen. Among others, the great Duke of Or- 
monde would have shown that, whether in his 
national policy, or in taking care of his personal 
interests, (and he excelled in the one as well as 
in the other,) to make Ireland English, and him- 
self, English-Irish, was, long before the era of 
Goldsmith or Lord Clare, the guiding wish of 
the most ancient nobleman of the English, or 
rather of the Anglo Norman Pale in the sister 
country. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 51 



CHAPTER IV. 

Gerald proceeded to visit Lady Augusta 
in Devonshire, travelling in a spruce-built 
buggy, driven by a servant. His sister occu- 
pied a pretty cottage, in one of the most beau- 
tiful situations outside a sea-coast village. At 
some distance the road commanded a view of 
the cottage ; and as it was a steep road, and he 
could not be very speedily driven down, he 
jumped out of the vehicle and ran before it, 
hoping to meet Lady Augusta on his way, or 
at least to see her on some one of the paths 
about the little residence. 

At a turn of the road, where on one side 
the fence was high and overshadowed by an 
elegant group of slight ash trees, the sound pf 
young female voices, in laughter and joyous 
hilarity, caught Gerald's ear. Climbing gently 
up the fence, and peeping through a cluster of 
bushes, he saw, seated in a garden-chair, em- 
D 2 



52 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

ployed at her needle, his sister's protectress 
and nurse, Mrs. Knightly ; before her, on the 
grass, and sitting face to face, were his sister 
herself, looking much better than he had ex- 
pected to meet her, and a little girl, some years 
her junior, with glowing blue eyes, flaxen hair, 
shaken wildly about her face, beautiful straight 
nose and cherry mouth, and cheeks so bril- 
liant with the colour of health and loveliness, 
that they might remind one of sun-light 
breaking in transparent suffusion through a 
garden screen of roses. A book, turned down 
on the grass, a guitar, and a little work-basket, 
lay near them ; but they seemed to have given 
study and work of every kind to the winds, if 
any could have blown strong enough for the 
purpose, on that delicious summer day ; and 
laughter, nay, shouts of laughter rang merrily 
through their rural retreat as the strange girl 
archly contested some point with her scarcely 
less vivacious companion. 

As Gerald peeped at this scene, his first feel- 
ing was sympathy with its unrestrained enjoy- 
ment, particularly on account of his sister, 
whose health and spirits seemed at last equal to 
so happy an assertion of existence. The sub- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 53 

dued, motherly smile of Mrs. Knightly always 
kept up, but increased every now and then by 
a glance at the two delighted girls, or by some 
ecstatic climax of their laughter, also pleased 
and interested him ; yet soon after he began 
to ask himself if such a display was charac- 
terised by the elegant decorum to which Lady 
Augusta ought to be habituated, and, indeed, 
(previous to her retreat to Devonshire,) of the 
constant impression of which upon her habits 
and manner she had given such full evidence. 
Then he was struck by what he felt to be the 
boisterous mirth of her little playmate; by a 
peculiar air about the child that, beautiful as 
she was, seemed, when put in comparison with 
the high-born children of her age, to whose so- 
ciety he had been accustomed, neither fashion- 
able nor proper ; and at length, some words 
and phrases addressed by her to Lady Augusta 
becoming distinctly audible through the laugh- 
ter of both, Gerald began to doubt if her rank 
and quality entitled her to be made, by Mrs. 
Knightly, the familiar companion of his sister. 

" Sing it, I tell you !"" — cried the blooming 
little stranger, holding up to Lady Augusta, in 
mock threat, two or three long stalks of grass 



S4t THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

she had just plucked at her side : and the tone 
in which she spoke, though musical, had a 
strange sound. 

" I can't, Rhoda!" replied her companion, 
clasping her hands playfully in appeal. 

" Sai/ it, then !" 

" Nay, that 's the difficulty, Rhoda ! I've no 
great demur to your air — 'tis pretty enough— 
but your words — oh, your words !" — in affected 
horror, and ending in another triumphant laugh. 

*' Sing it, or say it, or /'// kill you dead !** 
continued Rhoda, shaking aloft the formida- 
ble scourge in one hand, and twining the 
other through Lady Augusta's beautiful brown 
tresses. 

" The pure brogue," thought Gerald. 

" Come !" Rhoda went on, gently apply- 
ing the grass stalks to her playmate's neck, 
while both now clung to each other, and con- 
tinued their loud laugh — " Come, you proud 
English lady ! — say my words — my beautiful 
Irisli words — or — /'// be the death o' you ! what! 
they ugly ! they not musical !" 

" The little pigs say words hke them !" 
shouted Lady Augusta, struggling with her 
dictator. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 55 

" Take that, then ! and that, and that !" and 
Rhoda again used her scourge ; " that for your 
disobedience — and that for your bad speech !*" 

" Well, Rhoda — I will, I will learn them 
of you !" 

" Listen, then !" and Rhoda warbled to an 
air that Lady Augusta had called pretty, 
"her beautiful Irish words," during the pro- 
nunciation of which, although assisted by 
melody, the harsh sounds of several acghs, 
ocghs, and ucghs, sadly offended Gerald's ear. 

" Why don't you go on ?" resumed Rhoda, 
as Lady Augusta interrupted her with mock- 
ing laughter. 

" No — not for the world !" answered her 
pupil, putting out her hands in abhorrence. 

" You won't, won't you ?"" and again Rhoda 
offered to inflict chastisement ; again was re- 
sisted ; again ensued a struggle ; until clasped 
in each other's arms, they finally rolled down 
on the velvet grass. 

Gerald now felt displeased : it was evident, 
he concluded, that in the person of this little 
wild girl, Mrs. Knightly had introduced to the 
intimate acquaintance of his solitary sister, the 
child of some Irish peasant-servant, brought 



56 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

over by the good lady from the hills and 
bogs of her native country. With some cold- 
ness and reserve of manner he presented himself 
to Mrs. Knightly from his peeping-place, and 
passing her, after a low bow, gravely advanced 
to Lady Augusta. As his eye still dwelt on 
Rhoda, her dress corrected his first conclu- 
sion ; it might, however, have been bestowed 
on her; but when, as much in consequence 
of Mrs. Knightly's gentle exclamation of sur- 
prise and welcoming, as of his own approach, 
Lady Augusta started up to embrace her 
brother, the sudden change from hilarity to 
gravity and self-possession, and from that 
again to a provoking mixture of loftiness 
and naivete, of propriety and archness, which 
marked Rhoda's manner, more fully con- 
vinced him she was no clown's child, born or 
educated. 

" Gerald, Gerald !" said Augusta, after their 
embrace : " come here and know and fall in 
love with ray friend and companion, during 
many months — my wild Irish princess, who 
sings me wild Irish songs made to her beau- 
teous wild Irish ancestresses, ever so long ago, 
by bards with white beards, on their wire harps 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 57 

and things our good, kind, delightful little 

cousin, Rhoda Knightly." 

" Miss Knightly ]" stammered Gerald, bow- 
ing. 

" My daughter, Sir, Miss Knightly ;" and 
the mother, quietly evincing the impression, 
such as it was, which she had received from 
Gerald's reserve at his first appearance, rose, 
and held her daughter by the hand, at her 
side. 

" All the worse," thought Gerald—" the 
kind of assumed equality here will only as- 
sist the impression of disagreeable peculiari- 
ties, on my sister." 

But while in the very act of thinking those 
words, Rhoda returned his repeated bow in a 
way so distant, and, using Gerald's own men- 
tal definition, proper, as must have satisfied, so 
far as it v/ent, the most scrupulous brother. 
And, indeed, it went far to satisfy him, as 
might be seen by the expression of his face, 
changing from the blank of disapprobation to 
the glow of interest. Mrs. Knightly saw the 
change, and was quickly responsive to it ; her 
good-humour became fully restored, and in 
d5 



58 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

features, voice, and words, in all she said or did, 
there was visible a wish to make her young 
people happy. " The good lady is kind," so- 
liloquised Gerald, " and, perhaps, of a respect- 
able class in her own country ; but much is 
wanted for England. The daughter, too, 
seems not quite so strong a character as I had 
at first supposed : yet, see there — " 

Rhoda, escaped from the demureness half 
produced by, and half-affected at, the sudden 
appearance of a stranger, was relapsing into a 
vivacity Gerald thought un-English. Holding 
a grave side-face to him so long as she pre- 
tended to think he was regarding her, she 
voted his eyes off whenever she pleased, and 
then, with strange contortions of her beautiful 
features, continued playfully to threaten Au- 
gusta for her recent obstinacy, and do all in 
her power to keep up the loud mirth of that 
young lady. Again, however, something dig- 
nified or graceful appeared about her, which, 
recommended by her beauty, the young critic 
admired ; and yet again, its effect was marred 
by a return of something so arch, he nearly 
called it bold ; and thus did Gerald's notions 
of his new acquaintance fluctuate for some time. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 59 

A servant— a real Irish peasant girl — ap» 
proached from the cottage, with cream and 
strawberries. The broad though rosy face, 
wide- winged nose, and wide mouth, which, 
when she smiled, allowed the upper gum to be 
seen, reminded Gerald of visages he had be- 
held in St. Giles's; and indeed, laid claim to 
almost unadulterated Celtic descent. Her shy- 
ness too, her gait, and the crude fashion in 
which her gown had been cut, (obviously she 
had brought it from home with her,) struck 
him as characteristic of sad inferiority in the 
scale of her parallel class in England, as de- 
cisive, indeed, as v/as the difference between 
Mrs. Knightly and her daughter, and other old 
and young ladies of his acquaintance. 

" Get more cream, Biddy ; Lady Augusta 
likes it," said Mrs. Knightly, as the girl de- 
posited her dishes and plates on the grass. 

*' God bless her darling young ladyship, I 
sholl, mam," answered Biddy, with a drop- 
curtsey, so sudden and deep as to be rather 
startling ; and though the zealous smile that 
lighted in her large good eyes, and the phrase 
of respectful affection towards his sister, with 
which it was accompanied, were not quite lost 



60 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

upon Gerald, still the broad, sing-song brogue, 
the vile " shoU, mam," the very name, " Bid- 
dy,** and even the wordy acquiescence, when 
silence and obedience alone should have been 
her proper part, effectually disposed of the girl 
in his estimation. He became confirmed in 
all his former dislikes to pure Irish people, 
and the reflection that Augusta was surround- 
ed by indifferent specimens of native manner, 
pressed upon him. 

He turned an eye, prepared for renewed cri- 
ticism, on Rhoda ; but just at that moment, his 
heart found cause to oppose his calm opinions. 
The sunny-faced child was in the act of spread- 
ing over Augusta's knees, as she again sat on 
the grass, a little white handkerchief ; and then 
she bounded up, telling her " for her life" not 
to " stir a single bit," returned with the fruit 
and cream, adjusted it nicely on the handker- 
chief, put the dessert-spoon into her companion's 
hand, and commanding her not to " leave a 
single one," and holding up her lips for a kiss 
of promise, snatched her own little portion,— 
Mrs. Knightly and Gerald having been help- 
ed — and then confronted, as if to watch her, 
the object of her fond care and interest. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 61 

" How very, very well you are getting, dear 
Augusta," said Gerald, as, gazing on his sister, 
he enjoyed the look of her round cheeks, co- 
vered with natural though delicate blushes, and 
dimpling in smiles that proclaimed freedom from 
pain or lassitude, and the reign of high spirits 
and heart's ease. 

" Yes," laughed Rhoda, " the lady looks 
quite impudent with her good health, to-day." 

Gerald did not like the style of the comment. 

" Then, Gerald, thank our dear Mrs. Knight- 
ly, and our dear, dear wild Irish Rhoda," re- 
plied Augusta. 

" Thank the good Giver of health and of 
every blessing, my love," said Mrs. Knightly. 

** Ay, thank the good God, indeed," agreed 
Rhoda, in serious earnestness that once more 
pleased Gerald — " but," she added, changing 
both her manner and her style of speaking, so as 
to efface the favourable hit — " if you dare thank 
me, Augusta — I'll settle you for it, when I catch 
you by yourself." 

" The girl should have said Lady Augusta," 
thought Gerald. 

But Augusta showed by her laugh that she 
had not missed the formality. " And now. 



62 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Rhoda," she resumed, " sing those two curious 
lines you sing us every day when we have had 
this fruit ; 'tis such an Irish simile ! so poeti- 
cally Irish ! 

And without hesitation Rhoda hummed, in 
an affected drawling way, adding to her own 
little brogue, and carefully pronouncing, as the 
reader shall see it spelled, the last word of the 
couplet ; 

" Her cheeks are like roses, her mouth much the same. 
Like a dish of fresh strawberries, smothered in 

CRAME." 

"Vile," thought Gerald: and — "yes," he 
said aloud, with emphasis, and without a smile, 
though his was the only grave face — " yes, 
Augusta, in sentiment, words, and style, 'tis in- 
deed very Irish." 

" Oh, very ! very !" cried Rhoda, perhaps 
not insensible to the point of the remark, al- 
though, for that very reason she hummed the 
lines over again. " Come, now !" she went on, 
jumping up; " we want our asses! 'tis time for 
our asses ! where are they ?" 

" Lady Augusta says donkeys," observed Mrs. 
Knightly. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 68 

" Well, I know, mamma ; but isn't it all the 
same in Ireland ? ay, and in proud England, 
too ? Isn't an ass an ass any where ?" as she 
glided by Gerald. He thought she glanced at 
him ; he reddened and hated her ; but he might 
have mistaken ; and the doubt left him his self- 
command. 

'• Isn't it time for our ride, mamma — isn't it, 
isn't it ?" importuned Rhoda, running to her 
mother, and clinging round her. Mrs. Knightly, 
kissing her forehead, assented. Gerald felt no 
interest in the Irish mother kissing her forward 
Irish child. Rhoda continued, " Then you 
give the word, do you, do you ? For you know 
you must give it, mamma, or Augusta won't 
come for my leave, though I often tell her not 
to mind you — " she added, playfully glancing 
at Mrs. Knightly from under her long eye- 
lashes, and running away. 

" Dan ! Dan ! where is Dan to ride with 
us ?" still cried Rhoda. 

** Perhaps Mr. Blount will ride with his sis- 
ter to-day, Rhoda," said Mrs. Knightly. 

" Oh, very well, — don't stir, Augusta — don't 
stir a step !" stamping, and clenching her little 
hand ; " I'll run to the house, and tell Biddy to 



64 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

tell Dan to come with three asses — donkeys — 
instead of ttvo, to the gate at the road-side, a 
little way yonder." 

" And Mr. Blount may prefer to ride out 
with Lady Augusta, alone," resumed Mrs. 
Knightly, as her lively girl flew off. 

" Oh, very well," again said Rhoda, not 
stopping. 

" No, Rhoda, no !" cried Augusta, while 
Gerald remained silent — " order the three don- 
keys round to the gate ; I'll not ride at all with- 
out you ; Gerald won't ride without you." 

" Very well, very well !" and she disappeared, 
and in a few minutes returned, out of breath, 
her own hat and little habit put on, while she 
carried Augusta's upon her arm. With every 
contrivance that could save the invalid the least 
effort, Rhoda then insisted on " doing her up." 

" 'Tis ostentatious, troublesome attention, after 
all," thought Gerald ; thus allowing Rhoda to 
slip from the only hold she had before taken 
upon his interest, Dan quickly came to the 
gate near at hand with the donkeys, and the 
young equestrians trotted forward on the road 
towards the high grounds, at some distance. 

" How well you have learned to ride here, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 65 

Augusta," said Gerald, as, led by Rhoda, they 
pushed on as fast as the moderate-paced animals 
could or would allow them. Though a good 
horseman, Gerald's total want of acquaintance, 
previously, with the humours of a donkey's 
paces, made him feel sensible of some inferio- 
rity. 

" Yes," replied Augusta, " Rhoda taught 
me — but I am yet much inferior to my mistress: 
see, we must switch our steeds to keep up with 
her : how boldly she rides l"^ 

"Very boldly," answered Gerald, as, at the 
increased motion, slight as it was, of his donkey, 
he wavered somewhat in his stirrups. 

" Which way do we take .'*'" he enquired, as 
now all kept on abreast. 

" Up against that hill — and then that — and 
then down that and that," replied Rhoda, point- 
ing onward, " and 'twill be so pleasant ! Come, 
Neddy — " shaking her switch — " oh, why are 
you an ass, Neddy, and not a lady's hunter.?"" 

" Up and down such hills as those ! " cried 
Gerald, startled at the whole speech, for his 
sister's sake, as well as for its own sake — and 
his own sake, too — " Augusta, are you per- 
mitted to take such rides .?" 



0& THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Oh, yes — ever since a week or so after 
Rhoda came from Ireland." 

" Permitted !" echoed Rhoda ; " why, Master 
Blount, who 's to hinder us ? or what ? we Ve 
not afraid, are we ?" 

"No, Miss Knightly, I am sure i/ou're not 
afraid," said Gerald. 

" And are you ?'''* 

" Not by your side, certainly." 

** But you're not by my side, certainly, nor 
at Augusta's either — why you keep behind, Sir, 
when you ought to attend at our bridles, from 
one to another, and go on before us to see if the 
road is clear, and be ready to lead us over a 
stream, in a hollow, or over a heap, or things of 
that kind" — (Rhoda was thinking of by-roads 
in Ireland) — " goodness gracious ! — if Robert 
CRourke was now on your little beast's back ! 
—he's a littler boy than you. Master Blount, 
and younger by a year or two, but he'd think 
less of the tallest hunter his father has, than 
you think of that creeping go-by-the-ground — " 

" And where is this mighty Robert ?" asked 
Augusta. 

" Och ! in Ireland to be sure — dear, dear 
Ireland !" 

" I wish you were with him there," thought 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 67 

Gerald, as, at a hasty application of its rider's 
switch, his donkey swerved aside, and again 
discomposed him. 

*' Come on, Sir," continued Rhoda, putting 
her animal to the best of his sluggish mettle. 

" This wretch will not allow me — an Irish 
donlcey, I warrant," he continued, in a mutter. 

" No, Sir; but mightn't an English ass be in 
fault .'"' and Rhoda, laughing spitefully, and 
now leaving no room to doubt of her intentional 
satire, left Gerald to follow as he best could. 
" Ay," he soliloquised, when at length he had 
mastered his donkey ; " Augusta shall have 
other associates now that she gets better; the 
old lady's kindness and successful nursing must 
not, of course, be forgotten ; Walter and I, and 
Augusta, too, must, in every possible way, and 
in every prudent way, recompense her, but not 
in THIS way ; not by leaving a young lady to 
be inconvenienced by the manners of her and 
her daughter, more than she has been served 
by their attentions." 

The heights, after all, were explored, up and 
down. Rhoda still boldly led on, till at last the 
young trio turned towards home by a different 
road. 



08 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" I do like this place, for 'tis like Ireland ;" 
said Rhoda, looking around on their broken 
path. 

" Then I like it too," assented Augusta, 
" because you like it, and because it is like 
what you likci." 

*' I can like it, only because 'tis England," 
demurred Gerald ; it was clear they would not 
agree. 

" And I could almost hate it, if I had no 
other reason to like it," retorted Rhoda; *' Eng- 
land must be Irish, or look Irish at least, — the 
hills, and the fields, and the places ; the cows, 
the sheep, and the birds ; and the men, the 
women, and the children ; and smile and laugh. 
Irish, and talk to me, and do to me Irish, before 
I once love or like a sod or creature of it." 

" And I fear," rejoined Gerald, now laugh- 
ing at the energy of Rhoda's assertions, while 
their blind nationality confirmed him in his 
judgment of her character ; " I fear. Miss 
Knightly, that the people, at least, of Ireland, 
must undergo a similar, and I hope, more pro- 
bable change, ere / can be in love with them^ 

" Poor people I and what will they do now for 
any one to be in love with them .''" said Rhoda. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 69 

*' Mamma," resuming the subject, (which ob- 
viously rankled in her little female vanity, as 
much, perhaps, as in her national pride) — as all 
sat in the garden after dinner; " Mamma, which 
is, Ireland, or England, the handsomer country ?" 

" Handsome, is a very odd word, Rhoda.*** i 

" Now, mamma, you do know what I mean ; 
which has the best hills and rivers, roads and 
mountains, fields and houses?" 

*^ England the best, Rhoda." 

" Fye, Mamma ! Higher mountains, and 
finer rivers than Ireland ?" 

" No, Rhoda ; nor finer fields either ; but 
the hills and rivers, fields and roads, and all, 
are better in England, because they are turned 
to a better account ; and as to the houses, Rhor 
da, if you take in the houses of every rank, they 
are finer and better too." 

" INIamma, are the people better and finer ?" 
persisted Rhoda, not discomfited, though raor^ 
tified. 

. " How, better, my love ?" 

" Are they kinder, or more polite, or more 
friendly, or handsome, or agreeable ?" 

«« No, Rhoda." 

" Are they near as much ?" 



70 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" The English, I think, are not, generally 
speaking, a handsomer people ; as kind, and as 
friendly as the Irish they may be, amongst 
themselves ; but in their way of showing kind- 
ness and friendship, by the thousand little ways 
that it can be shown, the live-long day, they 
disappoint Irish notions and feelings; and, 
therefore, as I am Irish, I must call them our 
inferiors in those things, Rhoda.'" 

" The lady mistakes what true, unostenta- 
tious civility means," reflected Gerald. 

*' Mamma, do you like the English ?" 

" Perhaps, Rhoda, I have not seen sufficient 
of English society to answer you fairly." 

*' I 'm sure of that, madam," continued Ge- 
rald to himself. 

" But I may say that the lower orders here 
in the country, at least, are more abrupt, more 
uncommunicative, and perhaps more selfish than 
those of their class I've been used to in Ireland ; 
and as to the few circles of English ladies I 
have had the honour to mix in, they are perfect 
ladies indeed ; that is, perfectly at their ease ; 
but, somehow, they do not leave me quite so.'' 

" How can you expect it, good lady ?" Ge- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 71 

raid went on to himself: — " to feel at ease, one 
must be used to one's company." 

" Perhaps I might, in a little time, become 
more at home with them," resumed Mrs. 
Knightly. 

" Too late for that," pursued Gerald. 

" I give a strange turn to our conversation 
by saying that the beggars of England — the 
few of them who now and then take courage to 
address you on a private road — I do not like at 
aU." 

" A strange turn indeed," thought Gerald. 

*' Give me a halfpenny, if you please, ma'am 
— do, if you please, ma'am — if you please, 
ma'am, do — a halfpenny, if you please, ma'am 
— is the usual extent of an English beggar's ap- 
peal: how inferior," continued Mrs. Knightly, 
smiling, and assuming the broadest brogue she 
had ever heard in her country ; " how inferior. 
Lady Augusta, my love, to the downright ora- 
tory of the Irish mendicant : ' Give us a penny, 
only a little penny, your honour's ladyship, and 
God's blessing on your kith and kin ; give us, 
and may you have a long life, a happy death, 
and a favourable judgment !' " 



T2 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

While Augusta and Rhoda laughed heartily 
at this sally, intentionally made for the amuse- 
ment of the former, Gerald felt his tastes more 
inconvenienced than ever, and said to himself, 
** Ay, and this is a sample of the drollery that 
Walter spoke to me of, and which, with sharper 
eyes than mine, he noticed before." 

" Jump up, Rhoda, and dance us a jig on 
that plot, Augusta's favourite one, the Kerry 
jig, and she will thrum it to you," continued 
Mrs. Knightly, placing a guitar in Augusta's 
hands. 

Up jumped Rhoda, and to the rapid time 
given by her friend, performed a dance so un- 
measuredly wild and peculiar, although so viva- 
cious and expressive, that Gerald, in the sur- 
prise and misgivings it created in him, lost all 
sensitiveness to its merits, if indeed it possessed 
any. The ease and exhilaration with which the 
beautiful Irish child performed it was lost on 
him, too, in doubts of the seemliness of her va- 
garies. A little Indian, he thought (though 
here his knowledge of exactly what kind of 
thing an Indian dance is, failed him), might 
have accomplished movements as eccentric, and 
indeed as interesting. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 73 

" How did you learn the tune, Augusta ?" 
he asked, after Rhoda, panting, and with flam- 
ing cheeks and eyes, and hair shaken into a mop, 
sat down. 

" Oh, Rhoda taught me, to be sure." 

** And Rhoda will teach you the jig, too," 
said her companion. 

" Yes, my love, in a little time," added Mrs. 
Knightly. 

" Not if I can help it," cogitated Gerald. 

In fact, for some days that he spent in their 
cottage, Gerald saw nothing but additional rea- 
sons why, in conjunction with his brother and 
his two most important guardians, he should 
take measures to put an end to the close ac- 
quaintance between Lady Augusta and her very 
Irish friends. Negligence of manner he de- 
fined to himself to be the most charitable name 
he could bestow on almost every thing they 
did; and Irishism and brogue ran, sufficiently 
strong to injure, through their language and 
accent. The only question he had to debate 
was, whether or not his sister would, without re- 
gret, or even with a little, that might not prove 
a check to her improving health, consent to a 

VOL. I. E 



74 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

speedy separation from persons who had ob- 
viously won her heart. 

Upon the evening previous to his departure 
from Devonshire, as he and Augusta walked 
out together, he proposed the matter indirectly. 

" Now that you are so much recruited, Au- 
gusta, you will take up your former studies 
again, of course, and join your governess and 
masters." 

** Oh yes, Gerald ; let my masters come as soon 
as possible ; — but pray tell my guardians, that 
since my meeting with Mrs. Knightly, I love 
her — though she is not a governess — and yet, she 
promises, offers, to do any thing for me, along 
with Rhoda. I love her above all the gover- 
nesses in the world, and would rather stay with 
her." 

" But Mrs. Knightly cannot return with you 
to London, Augusta." 

" And why need I return to London, 
Gerald?" 

" Because in London alone, dear Augusta, 
can you meet that society and companionship 
which is to perfect your mind and manners for 
joining the circles in which your birth entitles, 
indeed commands, you to move." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 76 

" Oh, no one in the world is like Mrs. 
Knightly ! so good, so kind, so gentle, so in- 
structive ! and no child in the world half so 
delightful as Rhoda!" 

" Augusta, Mrs. Knightly and Rhoda must 
soon go home to Ireland, you know." 

" Then I will go with them. Oh, dear 
Gerald, tell Walter, and tell our guardians, 
this — Mrs. Knightly and her dear, dear girl 
have snatched me from the grave, and — " she 
became so agitated that Gerald repented of his 
premature plan; and, after all, was compelled 
to avoid any determination, which might have 
the effect of distressing, if it did not deprive 
him of an only sister. 



E 2 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER V. 

" Ay, here," said Gerald, as, five summers 
after his visit to Devonshire, he sauntered back, 
upon a glowing August evening, by the beau- 
tiful St. Neot's road, to the Colleges of Cam- 
bridge, whence, some hours previously, he had 
issued forth to walk, — *' here are the pursuits 
and the recollections that at a fit age fill the 
minds of Englishmen with the elements of suc- 
cess in upholding their country's grandeur, or 
in impressing individually their own characters. 

" Here, by treading in the almost visible 
footsteps of wisdom and genius, they learn to 
be great themselves, and to leave behind, for 
successive generations, the added impulses of 
their own fame, that so, the national mind, ever 
gathering power to go on, may, in an immea- 
surable sweep of light, be shot into futurity. 

** Is it, indeed, mere fanciful language to say 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 77 

that around me, as I walk and ponder, the spirits 
of the Living-Dead speak to my spirit ? Though 
the corners of the intellectual earth be familiar 
with their names, have they not, among these 
leafy shades, and through the cloisters of yon 
superb group of academies, more than upon 
any other place on earth, breathed out their aU 
but palpable essence ? Can I stand at New- 
ton's casement, and not lift up my eyes, as if 
with him, in reverential daring towards the de^ 
serts of space ? Can I, by his side who sung of 
Heaven and Hell, sit under his time-worn tree, 
and not catch some echo of the imaginings that 
at one moment brought him angels' whispers 
from the bowers of Paradise, and, at another^ 
the thunders of God, rolled over the serene of 
Heaven, or launched after the rebellious, down 
the ' vast profound,' — the bellowing horror — 
the rattling of the wheels of Almighty war — 
the clash of the shields and spears — ' the tri- 
umph and the shouting ?' 

" In many situations, England, may thy cha^ 
racter be estimated ; amid thy thronged resorts 
of commerce, in thy senates, in the countless 
streets of thy empress-city, or amid the teeming 
perfection of thy fields. But here is the ground 



78 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

from which to obtain, in one look, a grand 
though shadowy picture of all that thou art ! — 
Here thy past and present blend into a mighty 
mass— a giant shape ! Here we recollect and 
distinguish the seedling minds that, transplanted 
one by one, from their academic nurseries into 
the broad gardens of the land, have yielded 
fruit and increase, ten times tenfold, until at 
last, through all varieties of its growth, intel- 
lect flourishes ! 

*' From one or other of these seventeen colleges 
went forth the greater number of the men who 
have digested the laws that give thee peace and 
security at home ; who exerted the wisdom that 
often saved thee from foreign enemies; who 
cultivated and spread around the science that, 
through every sinew of thy frame, now sends 
multiplied power ; who vindicated against scep- 
tics and scoffers the religious doctrines that 
comfort thee; who built up thy learned name 
into a tower of strength unto the world ; and 
who, mindful of the classic garlands that beau- 
tify the awful brows of Antiquity, wove for thy 
brows a chaplet of unequalled song ! 

** At my first glance to thee, ancient Pembroke, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 70 

i^ Oh, Domus antiqua et religiosa!'*) what 
names occur ! Ridley, Edmund Spencer, Wil- 
liam Pitt! The ^Fui Cuius — Vivit postfunera 
virtus,'' of thy second patron, old Gonville, is not 
more true of himself than of the succeeding 
minds it must have helped to form — of Jeremy 
Taylor, of Thurlow, and of him whose memory 
must fitly live to the last pulse-throb of civilized 
life — William Harvey ! Thy magnificent cha- 
pel, King's ! fresh as a work of yesterday, from 
the chisels of the fifteenth century, o'er-towers 
not the recollection of Waller, of Walpole, and 
of Camden : — Erasmus alone, of all her other 
boasts, suffices for thy Queen-sister : Latimer, 
John Milton, Porteus, and Paley, will keep 
thee in mind, venerable Christ's ! Thou, too, St. 
John's, dost speak to us of the glories of intel- 
lect in wonderful diversity : by the side of thy 
profound and subtle Burleigh, calculating his 
nation's strength to resist an Armada, we see 
' Rare Ben,' chuckling over the country epistle 
from his brother dramatist, that pleasingly 
renewed all they had seen * done at the Mer- 

* Queen Elizabeth's well-known exclamation at first 
seeing Pembroke College. 



80 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

maid ;' Philips indites to his Amaryllis frorii 
the same bower in which Stillingfeet laboriously 
plans his folios : at the next glance we see, side 
by side, Otway, weeping over his Monimia, and 
Lee busy in mechanical combinations : the ma 
thematician, Ludlam, then stands hand in hand 
with him, who in his ' Alma-Mater' did not 
forget thee; and between Hammond and Mason, 
and — let him not be omitted— poor Kirke White, 
appears the philosophic front of John Horn 
Tooke. And as for thee, aristocratic Trinity t 
can thy children, to the remotest generation, 
pace thy lofty hall, and not experience the high- 
est sentiments of reverence, love of wisdom, and 
ambition of fame ? Let them but look around, 
and who are they that watch them from thy 
walls, or speak to them in the silence of study ? 
— Bacon, Coke, Cowley, ' Glorious John,' Por- 
son, and, itself a starry galaxy — Isaac Newton ! 
" I have not enumerated all the names that 
ennoble thee, proud Cambridge ; and yet, are 
there not here enough ? what Englishman, call- 
ing them up as I do, must not feel proud that 
he is an Englishman ? — and can any man of any 
other country, pondering the same thoughts, 
fail to regret his claims to that title ? — most of 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 81 

all, can one connected with thy unfamed as well 
as unfortunate Island-sister, avoid feeling impa- 
tient of the accidental tie that thus half keeps 
him, England, from perfect identity with thee, 
and with the glories and the pride of thy name? 

" But may not such a man take advantage of 
his original claims to thee, his early education, 
almost nursing on thy bosom, his innate sym- 
pathy with every thing that is thine, and aban- 
doning, with indifference or disgust, though 
perhaps with some regret, a connexion which 
only embarrasses him, fix his foot proudly on 
English soil, and cry, " I also am an Eng- 
lishman !" 

Gerald, treading loftier as he ended his re- 
verie, gained his chambers, and soon after, 
those of a friend in Trinity, who, upon that 
day, entertained a dinner party. Among the 
guests were three or four Irishmen, egotistically 
vain of their country, and ostentatious of the 
display of a certain genteel swagger of manner, 
which characterised, though, I allow, in a 
stronger shape, some of their compatriots coeval 
with Fighting Fitzgerald, and which is, perhaps, 
not quite worn down amongst themselves at the 
present day : — ^it may, indeed, be almost always 
e5 



8% THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

detected, however highly it is polished, when 
English gentlemen and Irish gentlemen come 
closely together. 

My hero had not before observed it, and now, 
particularly in the continuance of his late mood, 
it seemed disagreeably apparent. Not even ap- 
proaching to unseemliness, properly speaking, 
this peculiarity was marked by perhaps a pac- 
ing gait, or an air of the head, or a rapidity or 
bluutness of assertion, or a quickness of tone 
(to say nothing of brogue), that Gerald knew 
not well how to criticise, or did not care to lose 
time in criticising, except by the one epithet — 
Irish. Even the national vivacity of his new 
acquaintances, their play of eye and counte- 
nance, their humour, sometimes their wit, had 
an engrossing, eager, exhibiting way with it, 
which, he thought, sprang from a resolve to 
appear important, where there was a chance of 
appearing the contrary. It was the brisk asser- 
tion of doubtful claims; uneasiness making itself 
easy ; in fact. Irishmen anticipating equality, if 
not more, with Englishmen. " Cannot these men 
sit quieter, and sometimes sip their wine, without 
interrupting their own good things, and talk a 
little less loud, and, in a word, do as others 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 88 

do ?'^ he asked himself : " Cannot they perceive, 
in the persons of their English associates, that a 
gentleman who has no fears concerning his own 
respectability, ceases to trouble his head about 
it : always assured, however, that his very com- 
posure on the subject gives the best evidence of 
his claims?" 

And some time after, he made another reflec- 
tion : — " If these men, who are not mere Irish 
either, for they are Protestants, and of English 
derivation — and hark ! how they blunder and 
squabble amongst themselves about the great 
bone of contention, Catholic Emancipation — but 
if they have learned all this at home, what, 
upon his own soil, must be the genuine Hiber- 
nian — papist, politician, and with an O to his 
name ?" 

As the night advanced, Gerald was strength- 
ened in his disinclination to be intimate with 
his Irish companions. First, it appeared, that, 
after volunteering some common national toasts, 
such as " Erin-go-bragh," or " Ireland, the 
right arm of England," &c. they began, during 
quick revolutions of the wine, to deprive them- 
selves, inch by inch, of almost all the ground 
for love of country which, it might well be sup- 



84 THE ANGLO-IRISH/ 

posed, had previously supplied their position. 
They called the peasantry of Ireland besotted 
in superstition, indolent, savage, and treache- 
rous ; their priests, illiterate, clownish, bigoted, 
officious, and an incubus on the mind of the 
country ; the middle ranks of the Catholics, 
who were starting into professional, or mercan- 
tile, or agricultural importance, they described 
as pert, or rude, or vain, or ill-mannered : they 
admitted that there was no living quietly or 
even safely in their beloved country ; and that, 
in fact, one had better live any where else on 
the face of the earth ; so that having thus de- 
nounced about three parts in four of the popu- 
lation of Ireland, and farther proved it to be 
the best place in the world to live out of, the 
previous reasons for their patriotism seemed 
rather debateable. " They would, if they knew 
how," Gerald continued to think, " assert them* 
selves what I am, English-Irish ; at all events, 
when even they admit such good causes for it, 
I can well afford to defend my principles." 

" The small hours," as the Hibernians called 
them, continued to strike on, and other things, 
more national, appeared in their conduct. One 
got so inconvenienced with wine, that his fellow- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 85 

countrymen were obliged, with much loud mer- 
riment, to bear him off, between them, to his 
chambers. Having returned to their host, and 
sat about an hour longer, no one at table, al- 
though they were not yet quite inebriated, talk- 
ed a tenth part so much as they. Their theme, 
too, was local Irish politics, little interesting to 
English gentlemen ; and " a difference of opi- 
nion," as defined by Sir Lucius, soon occurring, 
they quite monopolized the conversation, and 
at last two of them really quarrelled. With 
feelings of mixed indignation and shame, Ge- 
rald saw the chambers of his high-born, well- 
balanced English friend, become the arena for 
nonsensical discussion, and still more silly alter- 
cation, between a few abrupt, though high- 
blooded. Irishmen, too. None of the English 
portion — the majority — of the company thought 
it worth while to interfere ; and one of the dis- 
putants stalked away, muttering to his antago- 
nist threats of a reckoning in the morning. 

At length the whole party broke up, and Ge- 
rald was, against his will, compelled to walk to- 
wards Queen's, with the two Irishmen not yet 
disposed of; they and he were members of that 
college. ' 



86 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Upon the way they would call to inquire 
after the friend whom, some hours before, they 
had helped to remove from table and deposit in 
bed, and Gerald was strongly pressed to accom- 
pany them. He did so from a watchful curio- 
sity. They knocked loudly at the outer door 
of their friend's apartment ; sleepy groans an- 
swered them. They increased their noise, and 
at last awoke the disturbed snorer, who, 
without stirring, exhorted them— to go to the 
devil. 

The college had been undergoing some slight 
repairs; they procured large stones in the 
court, and, in one crash, stove in the pannel of 
the outer door, until the lock of the inner one 
appeared, with the key turned in the keyhole. 
One of them then displayed a phial of some of- 
fensive-smelling drug ; spilt it on a coil of 
tow ; introduced the tow thus saturated through 
the key-hole, applied a candle to it, and await- 
ed the result. From what did result, it would 
seem that the still half-tipsy sleeper had been 
provoked beyond the bounds of temper, or, in- 
deed, sanity, by the atrocious fumigation that 
soon reached him. He must have staggered, 
very carefully, out of bed, and with almost savage 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 87 

precaution arranged his measures of vengeance ; 
for those abroad did not catch the sound of his 
motions until, suddenly, the lock shot back, and 
through the partially-opened door came the 
snap and flash — fortunately but in the pan — of 
a pistol. " And this," said Gerald, as, much 
shocked and disgusted, he turned homeward, 
leaving his companions to settle their affairs as 
they could — *' this, I suppose, I am to regard 
as a model of Irish humour and hilarity." 

Before retiring to bed he sat down, late as 
it was, to revise the heads of a speech which he 
intended to deliver, the next evening, at the 
Union Debating Society, when the question pro- 
posed for debate was the policy of England to- 
wards Ireland. Some arguments in advocacy 
of Irish pretensions to a more liberal policy, 
which in a benevolent humour Gerald had pre- 
viously arranged, he now felt half inclined to 
leave out. But he reflected that, although he 
had just got good cause to be vexed with indi- 
viduals of the country, the principles previous- 
ly weighed remained unaltered ; and, checking 
his impatience with his better judgment, he laid 
down his emendating pen, and went to rest. 

Upon the following evening the debate was 



88 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

opened, to a thronged meeting, by Gerald's young 
host of the preceding night. The speaker's first 
step was to show, that in the legislation of this 
country for Ireland, particularly since the reign 
of Henry VIII. as well as in the conduct of the 
English Lords of the Pale, Lord-deputies, or 
Lord-lieutenants, almost down to the present 
day, the sister country had been rather coerced 
than invited, rather driven than led into a con- 
nexion. This stated, the speaker then endea- 
voured to prove that different measures might 
have better succeeded in leaving, at the present 
hour, that connexion in a more settled and hap- 
py, and, for the interests of both countries, ad- 
vantageous state. Conciliation would, he argued, 
from the nature of things, have proved better 
policy than coercion. It would also have formed 
a generous and noble policy. And, he con- 
cluded by endeavouring to convince his hearers 
that, apart either from strict political specula- 
tions, or the attention of Englishmen to their 
own sense of national interest and honour, Ire- 
land, from the outset, had deserved the treat- 
ment he would recommend. 

From the little Gerald knew, and the much 
he imagined of Irish self-opinion, he believed 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 89 

that few of his genuine countrymen would have 
felt greatly indebted to this vein of advocacy. 
The high English feeling which ran through it, 
seemed, even in the very effort at vindication, 
to acknowledge how little Ireland had ever yet 
done towards commanding the respect, and, 
through it, the considerate indulgence of Eng- 
land. Sincere as was the speaker, he seldom 
warmed in his subject, as if he doubted either 
its possible effect on his audience, or its want of 
materials to enable him to convince his hearers. 
He appeared aware that those who followed 
him rather condescended to do so, than believed 
themselves called on even to discuss such a ques- 
tion. His charges against English deputies and 
generals were timid, or made in the abstract; 
and when he strove to urge the claims of Ire- 
land, it was by appealing to the lofty minds and 
virtuous hearts of Englishmen, to assist him in 
discovering such claims ; thus arming national 
pride against national prejudice, sooner than run 
the risk of pleading the cause of Ireland upon 
merits of her own. 

" The honourable opener" sat down amid few 
plaudits, and was followed and replied to by an 
M. A., many years his elder, who, in a very 



WB THB ANGLO-IRISH. 

matured style of oratory, mixed with cutting 
satire, seemed, if the cheers of the assembly were 
evidence, completely to dispose of the subject. 

He denied that the firm measures adopted by 
this country to keep her footing in Ireland ever 
came under the name of coercion. They natu- 
rally sprang up in self-defence, from the conti- 
nued turbulence, breach of faith, and atrocities 
committed, century after century, upon the 
English settlers of the Pale, and afterwards 
upon the English settlers every where spread 
through Ireland. In this view, no policy but 
a strong and severe one could have emanated 
from British councils, unless Englishmen would 
consent to show themselves pusillanimous in the 
face of savage violence ; — no — not even for the 
sake of the honied epithets with which the ho- 
nourable mover was willing to disguise what 
must have been the real designation of the po- 
licy he proposed. As to the merits of Ireland, 
in this question — the point could scarce be ap- 
proached without a laugh. The answer given 
to the honourable opener"*s first proposition, con- 
tained an answer to that. If the strong policy 
of England had always been called forth by a 
succession of Irish misconduct, where were the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 91 

claims of Ireland to a different policy ? To this 
day, where were her claims? In loyalty, in ci- 
vilization, in learning, in arts, or manufactures, 
where were they ? — Must we turn to 1798, or 
even to Captain Rock, of 18 — , for an answer 
to the former part of the question ; to T. C. D. 
for an answer to the next part of it ; and to the 
linen looms of the colonial and Protestant North, 
the only looms in Ireland, for an answer to the 
last ? 

Though Gerald felt this speech, as it has been 
described, one indicative of oratorical power and 
facility in the speaker, he also felt that, consi* 
dered by itself, and applied to the subject in 
hand, it was deficient in depth, in information, 
in philosophy, and even in reflection. The ac- 
complished M. A. confessedly one of the best- 
prepared speakers on other occasions, had not, 
he thought, vouchsafed to muster, for the present 
one, much in addition to the general and some- 
times loose notions and facts with which, upon 
Irish questions. Englishmen are often content- 
ed. It showed, therefore, in detail, common- 
place invective, recollected from school-books, 
or from histories read in boyhood, or, since that 
time, unconsciously gleaned out of pamphlets, 



92 THB ANGLO-IRISH. 

newspaper " leaders," or occasional conversa* 
tions. And yet, although thus meagre in mat- 
ter, it struck him as delivered in a feeling of 
superiority to all objections, such as should 
legitimately mark only the infelt possession of 
extensive knowledge and lengthened deliberation. 
Perhaps, spite of himself, his Irish blood pre- 
ponderated over its English admixture, when, for 
a moment, he accused the speech of some haugh- 
ty indifference to a thorough intimacy with its 
subject, growing out of a too-English contempt 
for Ireland, and an over-readiness to believe in 
national infallibility. Yet he really objected 
more to the want of material it evinced, than to 
the principles it asserted : to its almost audaci- 
ous jumping upon conclusions, than to the con- 
clusions themselves — provided the speaker had 
entitled himself to make them. For, above all 
other considerations, Gerald was sufficiently 
English to feel a degree of personal pride when- 
ever England's character was properly upheld. 

He rose third in the debate, and almost with- 
out agreeing with the first speaker, or conflict- 
ing with the second, delivered an oration ex- 
pressive of his own long-cherished views on the 
question. We are prepared to expect that the 
policy Gerald at once recommended from Eng. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH, 9^ 

land towards Ireland was that which should, by 
all possible means, tend to make the people of 
Ireland " English-Irish." In this light, such 
policy ought to be free from every thing that, 
by irritating the Irish against the English, 
could keep up a feeling of national dislike, and 
consequently perpetuate national distinctions, 
and thereby check the progress of his plan. If 
a perfectly good understanding between the two 
people were first created, all the stations of su- 
periority which England holds would soon be- 
get a zeal of emulation among her neighbours ; 
assimilation would ensue, and with it, Ireland 
would lose her distinct character, and grow into 
what she ought to be — and what it is the inte- 
rest of both countries she should really become — 
one large, integral portion of England. So far, 
Gerald carried with him all his auditors. When 
however, he began to suggest in what instances 
his good-natured policy must show itself; when 
he asserted that it should dispense with penal 
restrictions or precautions, many murmurs in- 
terrupted him ; and no sooner had he uttered 
the words " Catholic Emancipation," than he 
was greeted with a chorus of groans. In vain 
did he explain that this part of his system went 
to tear up by the roots Irish Catholicism itself; 



94 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

that hitherto restrictions had provoked that 
religion into its present predominance in Ire- 
land ; while if left to its own chance, without 
the important stimulus of state-jealousy, it 
might now be even numerically insignificant. 
All that Gerald could say was of no avail to 
silence the disapprobation of his zealous though 
indeed not numerous opponents. 

After he had sat down, many inferior speeches 
were made, which tired him, as well with the ora- 
tors as with the subject. Amongst those, Ireland 
had her advocates in common with her accusers; 
but the shallowness of both, whether in eulogy 
or blame, defence, or vituperation, was equally 
obvious. Some spoke set essays, supplied 
mostly by a yearning imagination; the theme 
looked poetical, and they would try their 
flowery sentences on it: and some allowed to 
escape them a tirade of every-day bigotry, not 
extenuated even by the boyish faults of fancy ; 
they were going into the church, and would not 
miss such an occasion to show their shallow zeal. 
Altogether, the want of real information, or, as 
before observed, even thought, in the debate, 
surprised Gerald ; and, so far as he yet had an 
Irish feeling to be wrought upon, humiliated 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 95 

him. For, this want did not arise from any 
lack of ability to remedy it, in the debaters, 
but purely from a lack of interest, and the 
habit of not paying attention to Irish concerns. 
While he could smile, therefore, at the violent 
ignorance of an embryo church dignitary, he 
was more than ever ashamed of his paternal 
country, which did not command, among the 
more liberal of his associates, sufficient acquire- 
ment to put the fool down. Nor did he think 
himself at liberty to be angry with his friends 
on account of their habitual indifference on the 
point : " For," ruminated Gerald, " Ireland 
presents such a mass of confused and disagree- 
able matter to the eye of an inquirer, originally 
uninterested about her, that we may well ex- 
cuse the natural inclination to ease and pleasure 
with which he turns from the task of exploring 
and arranging the heap, to continue mental 
pursuits that have always brought him en- 
joyment." 



96 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER VI. 

The day upon which it is necessary that 
Gerald should again come before the reader, 
occurs nearly two years after the time of the 
last chapter, when he appears deeply interested 
in the perusal of a letter received from his 
brother. 

"MY DEAR GERALD, 

" Now, at least, in the possession of all the 
college honours and titles a gentleman of your 
rank need desire to attain, we cannot help feel- 
ing anxious for your arrival in town. You seem, 
yourself, quite aware that no more time should 
be lost in deciding upon your future course : 
and while none of your friends feel inclined in 
the least degree to bias your choice, it is only 
natural for all of them to wish the choice made. 
If you retain your predilection for the bar, pray 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 97 

let us soon have the pleasure of seeing you 
dining in Lincoln's Inn. Should your thoughts 
have, since we last spoke together, turned 
towards an official life, the path is open for you. 
Indeed, I can say as much, as well from my 
own little interest, resulting from my peer's 
seat, as from the assurances of our friends high 
in office. In either case, we trust you will 
speedily bring your talents — (amongst them 
your oratorical ones not forgotten) — to an ho- 
nourable trial, by going into the Lower House 
for one of the boroughs to which I am so anx- 
ious to nominate you. 

" By the end of the approaching recess, at 
all events, we hope to see you fairly started to- 
wards whatever goal your deliberations may 
propose as a fit object of accomplished ambition; 
and, as a preparatory step, your farewell to the 
academic shades of old Cambridge, and your 
appearance amongst us, are, I repeat, every day 
looked for. 

"Augusta, though I hope perfectly re-esta- 
blished in health, goes once more to Ireland this 
morning. She travels with the young and 
pretty Lady Cox, whom you met in town a few 
months ago, spending the first months after 

VOL. I. F 



98 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

marriage with her lively, though quite Irish fox- 
hunter, Sir Richard ; — (by the way, Gerald, you 
admitted that the almost childish bride was pret- 
ty.) But though Augusta only speaks of pass- 
ing some time with this happy pair in Dublin, 
and afterwards at their country-seat, I fear, in- 
deed I believe, she will not return to England 
without paying as long a visit, at least, to her 
old friends the Knightly s ; for, unfortunately, as 
I understand, the baronet's mansion and Mr. 
Knightly's great farm-house are not far asunder. 
I have not lately, any more than yourself, 
preached to Augusta on the head of her rooted 
predilections ; it is not part of our system to- 
wards an only and dearly-loved sister, afflicted 
as she has been, to wound her even misdirected 
feelings ; and then, she is too good and gentle 
to be scared with a parade of paternal autho- 
rity ; to say nothing of her being now almost 
her own mistress — for Augusta is nearly twenty. 
Let us hope, notwithstanding her long intimacy 
in an Irish circle, not even of the higher class, 
that her previous English education, the super- 
intendence of the English governess who, after 
your visit to Devonshire, accompanied her to 
Ireland, and her late introduction among fash- 
ionable people here, will not leave much, if any 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 99 

thing, to disquiet us on her account, or on our 
own. Indeed, have we not agreed, when you 
were last in town, that, excepting only a few 
slight peculiarities, our sister was all that a 
high-born and accomplished woman need be ? 

" Perhaps my real uneasiness on account 
of Augusta's present journey to Ireland, arises 
from the increasing disturbance and misery of 
that turbulent and most miserable country. 
For, by the latest information received in Lon- 
don, Captain Rock has just acquired, parti- 
cularly in the southern counties, a formidable 
colleague in his devastations. Famine and he 
now co-operate among the hills, and bogs, and 
deserts of Ireland ; while disease, plague, in fact, 
under the name of typhus fever, may be said 
to bring up their rear. Yet, here in England, it 
seems a plentiful and healthy season. What 
peculiar curse can have blasted the crops, and, 
above all, the potatoe crop, of green Erin ? 

*' My letters from my Irish agent, are ample 
evidence to me of the state of things I describe. 
No rents ; no lease-premiums; no renewal-pre- 
miums. In some instances, he in vain ejects the 
cotters and small farmers, who will not pay him 
a shilling ; for either the ground remains unlet, 
or Captain Rock shoots, burns, or drives away, 
F 2 



100 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

a new tenant. In other instances, illegal pos- 
session is kept, and, again under the patronage 
of the doughty chieftain, the law of the dear 
land becomes dead letter. So much to gratify 
your lurking interest about Irish affairs. I 
will add, that a renewed discussion of the Catho- 
lic Claims comes on after the recess ; and, so far 
as, with certain barriers still unremoved, success 
can be anticipated, the friends of the measure 
are sanguine. 

" Will you not think of qualifying yourself 
to take a part, if only by voting, in a question 
that I know you have considered ? Come to us 
then, prays. 

My dear Gerald, 

Your brother and friend, 
CLANGORE." 

*' Yes, indeed, I did think her pretty — very 
pretty," was the first reflection with which, 
strange as it may seem, Gerald laid down this 
epistle, nor did his thoughts engage him in 
other topics, till he had added — " Certainly 
the best specimen of an English-Irish lady, 
educated and living in Ireland, I have seen ; 
for all her tastes, or rather propensities, were 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 101 

English : what a pity she had not an English 
husband;"" and perhaps an impudent though 
faint piece of vanity, suggesting to hira that 
the young Lady Cox had seemed, during the 
short period of their acquaintance, to recipro- 
cate the good opinion he had evinced of her, 
formed the conclusion of Gerald's reveries on 
this point. 

** The law is a fine profession/' was his next 
mental soliloquy : ** to say nothing of its rank in 
old France, its Court influence, and its order of 
Knighthood, we have the names of Lyttleton, 
Coke, Mansfield, Thurlow, Erskine, to ennoble 
it at home. The only thing I cannot under- 
stand in it is, how a man shall state, for a 
guinea, as truth and fact, what he even sus- 
pects to be falsehood or subterfuge; or how, 
after pleading to-day the cause of oppressed 
innocence, or of outraged virtue, he can stand up 
to-morrow the infelt apologist of tyranny, vice, 
or profligacy. Allowing its full force to the 
term professional advocacy ; allowing him to 
be but the machine through which a bad or 
false client chooses to make certain assertions ; 
still he is a conscious machine ; still he knows 
such assertions to be founded in fallacy, or 



102 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

worse ; so that, after all, that is the very pro- 
blem I cannot solve. And it becomes more 
enigmatical, when we suppose this professional 
machine endowed with commanding professional 
talents, which must send strongly recommended 
to a jury-box the worst cause he may state — 
merely state; for, in this view, he is not only 
the speaking machine of a bad principle, but, 
to all intents and purposes, the aider and 
abettor of vice — the promoter of its possible 
success. Again : supposing, in any one in- 
stance, such success attained ; suppose the op- 
pressor of the widow or of the orphan trium- 
phant in his false though ingenious arguments, 
conveyed through the conscious and helping 
advocate ; in what self-applause, in what self- 
estimation, in what peace of heart and dignity 
of mind, can that advocate come home from 
the forensic arena and sit down among his 
family and friends? The kind of man I have 
before my imagination is possessed, naturally, 
of honour, of simple, unargumentative ho 
nour; — by what process of the most subtle 
the most professional casuistry, shall he quite 
convince himself that, partly by his agency, 
the widow's tears that moment do not flow 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 103 

and the orphan's cries do not that moment 
rise up before another tribunal ? These, 
however," added Gerald, " are not charges, 
but loose notions, merely: I will speak, the 
first opportunity, to some really high-minded 
man amongst them, who must have to con- 
sider my questions every day ; perhaps he can 
satisfy me." 

Meantime he felt no disinclination to consi- 
der the alternative of an official life, proposed 
by his brother. Lord Clangore. 

" A man can be eminently useful in the ser- 
vice of his country," he continued, " and Parlia- 
ment presents an opportunity for showing claims 
for getting on ; but I will go into office, and 
into the House, too, unrestricted by the political 
principles of my friends ;" — he rose and walked 
to his window, strong in the thought — " that is, 
if I go at all into either. We shall see ; I '11 
satisfy Walter, and be visible in town at once ; 
there, a few words can settle it, better than a 
year's debating here — come ! and now for the 
world at last !" 

Such of my readers as vividly recollect the 
almost agitating egotism in which they have first 
received or adopted plans for their great change 



104 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

from the theoretic bustle of youth to the real 
business of life, will understand Gerald's sensa- 
tions, as, step after step, round his chamber, he 
continued to pace himself through all the im- 
portant possibilities of manhood. His nerves 
seemed to knit stronger, his head grew more 
erect, his brows bent in anticipated abstrusive- 
ness ; events to come, in their elementary con- 
fusion at least, appeared to buzz and roll through 
his brain. Many situations of effort and re- 
sponsibility started up before his imagination, 
of which the whole accomplishment and dis- 
charge rested on his shoulders — and promptly 
and energetically, and with surprising success, 
did he see himself act in all. 

It is a delightful hour, as delightful in recol- 
lection as in experience, and that does not often 
happen, when the young, ingenuous, and gifted 
mind, just spreading its pinions for flight from 
the flowery verge of philosophy into the barren 
truths of things, thus waves them to and fro, 
in real strength, although in but fanciful achieve- 
ment ! 

In his abridged prospect of all he might be 
called on to do, Gerald did not forget the chal- 
lenging situation of Ireland ; but, after a few 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 105 

calmer thoughts in detail upon that subject, 
and a reference to the facts of his brother's let- 
ter, he could but say, " wretched country !" and 
turn from it, once more to plunge into his more 
general reveries. 

" Ay, wretched, wretched country !" Gerald 
resumed, as, upon his coming up to town from 
Cambridge, which speedily followed the receipt 
of Lord Clangore's letter, he saw, from the 
windows of his carriage, whilst whirled through 
the northern outskirts of the city, bill after 
bill, placard after placard, posted, or borne on 
polls, on men's shoulders, of which the large, 
inch-long capital letters of each proclaimed — 
" FAMINE IN IRELAND ; — " Public meeting." 

" The affluent and happy of affluent and hap- 
py England, Avill now subscribe a million and 
half;" he said ; " and yet, as soon as the 
scarce-felt donation has been bestowed, know as 
little of the causes, whatever they may be, 
which, in this appalling effect, call for an exer- 
cise of their mixed benevolence and pride — (yes, 
Rochefoucauld, thou art right in thy theory of 
mixed motives) — as they have done during nearly 
eight hundred years, of — to say the best of it, — 
disgusting connexion between the two Islands • 
F 5 



106 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

know ?" continued Gerald, with a sigh, made 
up, as was the philosophy he praised, of blend- 
ed sentiments — " ay ! or care, either." 

Proceeding along Oxford-street towards 
Grosvenor-square, some obstruction, caused by 
the crossing and entanglement of vehicles of 
every description, occurred, and, while he stood 
still, Gerald was able more attentively to re- 
gard some of the bills posted at either hand. 
Out of many, one particularly caught his eye. 
It was the play-bill of an actor, notorious for 
much besides great acting, and ran something 

in the following style ; — " Theatre Royal : 

Distressed Irish. Mr. — — — , in noticing his 
Benefit for Wednesday next, the 18th of — begs 
leave to announce, that it is his intention to 
evince his gratitude for the frequent and warm- 
hearted support experienced at the hands of an 
Irish public, by appropriating one-half of the 
receipts of that forthcoming benefit towards the 
relief of the present sufferers in Ireland." 

" Drive on. Sir I" cried Gerald, as soon as he 
had glanced over the sad stuff — " why do you 
stop ? — This is too bad ;" sinking back on his 
seat. And contempt for the impudent and, 
with all its stately-affected sentiment, the heart- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 107 

less flourish of the actor, mingled with some 
Irish feelings not yet perfectly subdued in his 
bosom. " What ! can the unhappy country 
be indeed fallen so low as, in the face of a Bri- 
tish people, to allow of this speculating charity ? 
— Drive on. Sir.** — The meeting between the 
brothers, a few moments afterwards, was kindly 
and brother-like. 

They began to speak, almost immediately, 
about Gerald's views and pursuits ; Gerald deci- 
ded, to the manifest gratification of Lord Clan- 
gore, in favour of an official life. Their dis- 
tinguished countryman, the Minister, stood in 
need of a private secretary ; had intimated to 
Lord Clangore a wish to confer the situation 
on his brother ; an interview the next morning 
might at once settle the matter : and under no 
other auspices did it seem likely that a young 
candidate for public honours, of the description 
aimed at by Gerald, could start with such hopes 
of success. 

" His Lordship does not forget the political 
alliance and personal friendship he engaged in, 
at an early period of life, with our father, Ge- 
rald :" continued Lord Clangore — " With re- 
gard to me, he has already shown his recollec- 



108 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

tion of it ; perhaps you will find him still more 
zealous on your behalf: besides, he respects 
your talents, and esteems your character.*" 

" I will study to make some return for the 
honour his Lordship does me, Walter ; but *" 

** And only ask yourself, what other political 
tutor living is, all circumstances considered, so 
happily qualified to commence and advance 
your political education ?'^ — resumed Lord Clan- 
gore, his vivacity, if nothing else, producing an 
interruption of Gerald's " but." 

" I quite agree, Walter." 

" Then, immediately after the approaching 
recess, you can, as I before told you, step into 
your seat in the House ; and so go on, practi- 
cally and theoretically, together.'" 

*' Still I have to thank all my friends, and 
you among the number. Let me add, however, 
that I bring certain opinions — at least on the 
subject of our paternal country — into whatever 
situation I may have the honour to fill." 

" Very well— of course you do."" 

*' Some, indeed, in which you, for instance, 
do not happen to agree with me." 

" To be sure : every man in entitled to his 
opinions in every situation ; that is, if they are 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 109 

not very much opposed to the duties he binds 
himself to perform." 

" Pray, now, allow me to understand you, 
Walter. My vote, if nothing else, must always 
go for the full rescinding of — " 

" The laws against Roman Catholics," again 
interrupted Lord Clangore :— " so it can." 

" Yes ; but as you vote the other way, I 
suppose my notions on this question may not 
be thought compatible with the discharge of — 
as you just now said — the duties of any office I 
may hereafter hold." 

"I see no incompatibility in the matter. 
The minister himself is on your side." 

" I did not forget he was ; yet I doubted if 
either by him or by the majority of his cabinet 
colleagues, it would be thought strict etiquette, 
openly to recruit forces for a division-night." 

" Neither they nor he see much in it, I be- 
lieve," said Lord Clangore, with a slight ex- 
pression of official closeness of meaning — Ge- 
rald paused a moment, and quickly asked — 

" Our distinguished friend is, of course, 
to the fullest extent, in earnest upon this 
question ?"" 

" Of course — to the fullest possible extent." 



110 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

** Do you express him or yourself, Walter, 
in that parenthetic * possible ?' '^ 

" Perhaps only my own strong opinions were 
indicated by it ; speak to the minister on this 
point to-morrow, Gerald ; that will be the 
better way.*' 

" I will. The doubts and fluctuations of 
* possibility,' " continued Gerald, " are not con- 
templated, I should think, where a pledge is 
^ven." 

*' Come, come, reserve your case of con- 
science till to-morrow, I say : — now you are 
otherwise to engage yourself; we do not dine 
at home; for many days you have been in- 
cluded, with me, in an invitation for a small 
friendly dinner-party to the Secretary for 

the ; where, I believe, along with 

Lord Harmer, the Bishop of , and others 

of our true English-Irish cast, we shall meet 
the clever young Scotchman who writes so 
variously and well ;— bustle ; the carriage alrea- 
dy draws up." 

The Secretary's lady being at a watering- 
place, Gerald, in about half an hour, formed 
one of a dinner-party exclusively made up of 
his own sex. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. Ill 

The brothers found their host in his draw- 
ing-room, which by the introduction of a pile 
of books, reviews, pamphlets and manuscripts, 
all lying round him, or at the table to which 
he sat, he seemed, in the thus outraged ab- 
cence of the gentler portion of his family, to 
have half transformed into an occasional library, 
or, it might be, office. When the servant 
threw open the door, he appeared writing, 
very rapidly, and at the same time conversing 
with several gentlemen who were seated near 
him, or standing at the windows of the apart- 
ment. 

The first of these persons that fixed Gerald's 
glance was easily recognizable as the church 
dignitary mentioned by Lord Clangore. The 
Bishop's face, stature and air were imposing; 
health spoke out on his cheek, and spirit, if 
not command, or an inclination to command, 
in his eye. Beside him sat Lord Harmer, a 
very gentlemanlike old man, and with features 
that in youth must have been handsome ; now, 
however, his stilled blue eye, and a disposition 
in his lower jaw to send his chin dropping on 
his breast, betokened perhaps as much feeble- 
ness as amiabiUty of character; but when he 



112 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

rose to return Gerald's bow, as the Secretary 
presented them to each other, the great suavity 
of his manner ensured full respect. 

The individual next named to the brothers, 
for both had previously been unacquainted 
with him, was Mr. Gore, from the county 

of in Ireland. Gerald thought he should 

have discovered the gentleman's country with- 
out a verbal notification of it. At a first view, 
there was about him a sufficient portion of 
the elegant display of features and manner to 
which, particularly at Cambridge, our hero 
had been accustomed, in the persons of his 
Hibernian fellow-students. He rose up to 
his full height, and that was commanding, 
gracefully assumed his best position ; and, all 
the while that his round ruddy face glowed 
with smiles, and his expressive mouth insinu- 
atingly curved up at one side, slid off* a bow 
so exploded although so easy, that nothing 
but his absence from court during the last 
five or six years could have well excused it ; 
and Gerald deemed, so much having been 
done, there was an end, for the present, to 
civilities; but Mr. Gore, again assuming his 
full height, and stepping to the brothers with 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 113 

something of the noble style which Watteau 
has so well imparted to his minuet-moving 
old gallants, possessed himself, I cannot say 
unceremoniously, for it was the very perfec- 
tion of polite ceremony, of a hand of each, and 
in rich, not vulgar, Irish, made a handsome 
speech. 

" My dear Lord Clangore — my dear Mr. 
Blount, how happy to have the honour of meet- 
ing you — knew your distinguished and amiable 
father well, before his political duties placed 
him — highly for the advantage of his country, 
though much to the regret of his early friends, 
here in England ; — have been so fortunate to 
be presented to your accomplished sister, at my 
particular friend's — Sir Richard Cox's house, in 
Dublin — and often heard her speak, in delight- 
ful vivacity, of the brothers Lady Augusta 
esteems so warmly : Mrs. Gore and the Misses 
Gore also had the honour — ^" 

Taking advantage of a little pause, one of 
many that Mr. Gore usually made during his 
soft, measured way of speaking, Gerald, who in 
common with his brother had not yet heard 
from Lady Augusta, since her last journey to 
Ireland, asked how his sister did, if indeed, 



114 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Mr. Gore meant a very recent meeting with her 
in Dublin ? 

Yes, — Mr. Gore meant a very recent meet- 
ing, indeed ; one of little more than two days 
old : it was his good fortune to meet Lady 
Augusta the very evening she arrived in Dub- 
lin, and she did indeed seem, after a little rest, 
quite refreshed, quite spirited and happy ; for, 
Mr. Gore continued, " he had himself got to 
London but this very morning; hurrying, in 
fact," and here his melodious voice sunk into a 
lower key, " to present himself, with the assis- 
tance of such kind friends as he could presume 
would do him a favour, to an official personage, 
concerning an official vacancy that had sudden- 
ly occurred at the other side of the water, and 
about which he would perhaps by and by snatch 
a disengaged moment to speak more to Lord 
Clangore.'* 

Bowing acquiescence to this intimation. Lord 
Clangore turned with a "Ha! Horseman town!" 
to a young nobleman about his own age, but, 
for his years, rather encumbered with flesh, 
who came from the recess of a window, slowly 
and somewhat pokingly, to accost him ; " I did 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 115 

not expect you would have so soon come over, 
this year." 

" Nor I," answered Lord Horsemantown, 
gravely. 

" How does Lord Vesey .''' 

" My father was well when I left him ;" still 
very seriously. 

" And how go on the crucibles and the al- 
kalis, and the grand elixir?" demanded Ge- 
rald, who was also intimate with his lordship. 

" I've got through no experiments, lately,*" 
he was answered ; the good-humoured satire of 
Gerald's question being either unnoticed, or, 
by the time the answer came, forgotten ; or 
perhaps it had never reached the young and 
noble chemist. 

'* By the way, Horsemantown, that business 
of my last letter to Augusta turned out a sad 
affair." 

" How do you mean ?'* 

'* Surely you cannot forget that, at her re- 
quest, you solemnly promised to receive in Ire- 
land, under cover for her, all the epistles I 
should write her from Cambridge ?" 

" No ; — I remember that." 



116 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" And, you know, you were to frank them 
and forward them, in course ?"" 

« Yes." 

" Did you strictly keep your covenant ?" 

" There ivas one letter, I believe," ruminated 
his lordship, aloud, as he bent his eyes in an 
effort upon the carpet: and he said no more. 

" Yes, and it lay on your table two months, 
/ believe," continued Gerald. 

" I don't know how it could have happened, 
then ; scarce a morning passed that I did not see 
it on the library table, and make up my mind 
to frank it ; Lord Vesey often heard me say 
so. I've been really much to blame, but cannot 
account for it ;"" and joining his hands with a 
little difficulty behind his back, he took two 
steps towards the window from which he had 
made his appearance, threw up his eyes and 
chin, and earnestly gazed out at the sky. 

" Account for it ! who expected that ?" asked 
a low middle-aged gentleman, habited, not 
smartly, in black, turning round from another 
window where he had been tete-a-tSte with a 
fine-looking, pale-cheeked, pale-browed person ; 
and, as he spoke, his sharp tones, and the set 
elevation of the muscle that raised his nostrils. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 117 

might betoken a man who, easily situated in 
life, is included in friendly dinner-parties for 
the privileged good things to which, without 
particular nicety to our sensitive feelings, he 
may choose to give utterance. Meantime his 
face, taken together, was not devoid of as much 
natural kindliness as its cynical habits allow- 
ed it to retain : and Gerald further perceived 
from his accent, and, indeed, from his uncere- 
monious, sometimes abrupt manner, that he was 
more purely English than the bland Mr. Gore, 
at least. 

" Let my good young friend alone. Gunning," 
said the Secretary, not looking up from the ruled 
paper which, occasionally glancing into books 
at either hand, he continued rapidly to cover 
with bold and dashing writing, that, to Gerald's 
sympathizing eye, bespoke original composition 
thrown off at the instant. There was ridicule 
in his tone, though, his friends would aver, good- 
nature in the motive for his words. Indeed, it 
was said that the Secretary thought kindly to- 
wards every human being ; only he had a bad 
way of showing it. And, " yes, bishop," he re- 
sumed in a breath ; " as you were saying, it is 
a great bore to write in one country, and print 



118 THE ANGL0-IRI8H. 

in another :" and still he pursued his seemingly 
necessary task of filling sheet after sheet. 

" So much so," answered the dignitary, " at 
least, after my experience of the fact, that I 
will never write again, unless, by some happy 
chance, my duties in Ireland allow, for a season, 
my attendance in London while the sheets go 
through the press." 

" Yet some of the folks, in Ireland, could 
sometimes spare your lordship," observed Mr. 
Gore, with his fine and insinuating smile. 

" Spare .'" cried the Secretary, while an ex- 
pression, elucidating his half-punnish application 
of the word, relaxed the sombre official cast of 
his not unclassic features : " Spare ! no — if those 
said ' some' had the bishop amongst them on 
a hill-side in the county of Tipperary — ask 
Daniel their man. But I believe acting on your 
experience of ' the trade/ — as the publishing 
and printing people call themselves — we owe 
your present appearance amongst us to an anx- 
iety to preside over your announced third edi- 
tion, Bishop." 

" I am, indeed, in London, duteously attend- 
ing the pleasure of these gentlemen, for that 
purpose." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 119 

" How stupid I was," whispered Gerald to 
Mr. Priestly, the pale, grand-looking person 
before noticed as having been in conversation 
with Mr. Gunning. 

" Was r interrupted Gunning, clese at hand. 
Gerald smiled, as bound to do, at the intended 
smartness, and proceeded — " how could I, after 
finishing only yesterday the perusal of his theo- 
logical work, forget the dignatorial title of its 
author ?" 

" And while you but overlook your sheets 
at your leisure," continued the Secretary, after 
the Bishop's last word, " here am I compelled 
to do a little seeming rudeness, some of you 
may say affectation, while, in half an hour 
snatched from the more serious business of the 
day, I try to keep my promise — forced from 
me indeed — to send Murray a sheet this even- 
ing, for his * ever-gaping-wide-mouthed-wad- 
dling' Quarterly." 

" Oh, friends who know your responsibilities 
will not, as you suppose, think one thing or the 
other," resumed the Bishop. 

" Besides," said Mr. Gore, " the Secretary 
writes so fast, and with such little demand on his 



120 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

attention, or loss to his friends, that, particularly 
when the public are to gain so much by it — " 

*'And the author he is reviewing;" inter- 
rupted Gunning, now sitting in the middle of 
the room, watchfully leaning on his stick. 

** No doubt, Sir," assented Mr. Gore, bowing 
and smiling: and Gunning and the Secretary 
sneered answering sneers, though their eyes had 
not met. 

** Yet I doubt if milady herself will agree," 
he went on. 

" Come, Gunning, no allusions," said the Se- 
cretary ; " I know you would give a pinch of 
snuff to ask — not pertinent questions ; — but you 
shall be left in the tortures of curiosity." 

" Well, I am not, at all events, an author 
in youi hands, Secretary ;" remarked Gunning. 

** Thank heaven for it, my good fellow." 

" How ! at escaping you ?" 

" No— 'tis a bad trade." 

" Have you always thought so .?" asked Gun- 
ning; and though no consciousness, not even 
a shade, came over the well disciplined face of 
the Secretary, Gerald felt, on his account, some 
pain at what he thought the rudeness of the 
question, inasmuch as, to his own honour, and 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 121 

that of the poor Nine, be it spoken — the secre- 
tary stood indebted to a clever local satire, 
in verse, for a first step towards his present 
considerable rank and importance in the official 
department of the first nation in the world. 

" Lady Morgan was much annoyed by the 
Quarterly review of her last book, however," 
said the matter-of-fact Lord Horsemantown, 
solemnly turning round after catching the latter 
part of this conversation. 

The door opening in good time, Mr. Stewart, 
Mr. Grady, and Mr. Pack, were announced. 

" That 's the very clev ^r Scotchman," said 
Lord Clangore to his brother, as a handsome 
young man, wearing clouds of black hair round 
his almost feminine features, walked across to 
the Secretary. 

*' And Mr. Grady is the editor of the even- 
ing paper, the quite a clever person, too; 

friendly, in his way, to our honourable Secre- 
tary." 

" Useful," emendated Gerald. i 

" You split words with me still, though you 
have left Alma-mater, at last," continued his 
brother, smiling as, with a show of being at 
home, and yet too many prefatory small bows, 

VOL. I. G 



122 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

the subject of their remarks glided after his 
friend Mr. Stewart. 

** I should add, Gerald, that the gentleman 
is, in one important sense, one of us ; English- 
Irish." 

" And the third gentleman, who stares so 
straight before him as he approaches his pro- 
foundly-respected host ?"" 

" A kind of little author, too," supplied the 
still over-hearing Mr. Gunning ; — *' comes from 
Connaught, they say ; and writes books about 
it , they say too ; — but I never believed that 
since the last time — and it was also the first 
time — I heard him speak ten words together." 

" Is not your strong opinion uncharitable, to 
say the least of it, at a first hearing ?" asked 
Mr. Priestly. 

'* I '11 die in it, though," persisted the cynic 
tranquilly. 

As soon as the three new guests had touched 
hands, Mr. Stewart sat close by the Secretary, 
quietly looking over, at the request of his friend, 
some sheets of his writing; and Mr. Grady 
and Mr. Pack took chairs at a little distance, 
both evidently wrapt up in the important per- 
son and present pursuits of one of their admit- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 123 

ted masters ; although the former continued to 
show his respect and interest in a less remark- 
able way than the latter. 

*' Will it do ?" asked the Secretary of Mr. 
Stewart : and having received, in a low, quick 
Scotch tone, what must have been a favourable 
answer, he set down his pen, and continued — 
** then away with it ! — Pack, do touch that 
bell ; — Grady, oblige me by enveloping all this 
paper ; — let 's see," pulling out his watch— 
'* ay — the time nicked to a minute ;" a servant 
appeared, handing a note — " tut, tut," the ho- 
nourable Secretary went on, as he read it, — 
'* copy, copy, copy ; here 'tis for them : pray 
use your own seal, Grady ; there ; does dinner 
wait ?" 

The servant answered that it was served. 

" Then — but no — let me see !" — and his ex- 
pressive eyes might have glanced, under their 
lids, at the admiring faces of Messrs. Grady and 
Pack — the young Caledonian managed things 
better than they — **yes — send some one down 
to Mr. Green's office, and say I wish to see 
him a moment." — The servant disappeared. 

** My friends will excuse me ; I demur as 
much as any one to what may appear the mix- 
g2 



124 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

ing up together of business and dinnering, or 
relaxing of any kind ; but we are compelled to 
some attention to things, for a few weeks, or so. 
— Oh, Green ;"" as the sleek official helper ap- 
peared — " I shall want you to — go down the Me- 
diterranean for me to-morrow ; so you will be 
in readiness/' — Mr. Green bowed and withdrew ; 
and at the intimation which speedily followed, 
all repaired to the dining-room. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 125 



CHAPTER VII. 

From such a group of, with few exceptions, 
English-Irish as Gerald now sat down amongst, 
he anticipated much conversation on Ireland 
and Irish affairs, in reference to English policy ; 
but he had, at least, to wait some time before 
his anticipations were gratified. Perhaps most 
of the company went with him in his mental 
choice of a subject for discussion, but, from 
a certain shyness of the very matter that en- 
grossed them, and even with which they were 
personally concerned, also shared his disincli- 
nation to bring it forward. 

•' I believe," he said to himself, " that 
amongst Irishmen living in England, or 
through England, the last admission comforta- 
ble to make to one another is the admission 
of their Irish derivation. And who can wonder 
if such is indeed the case ?" 

Meantime Gerald was not uninterested with 
the gradual developement of the characters 



126 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

of those around him, given in the turn of 
their opinions on other passing subjects ; nor 
did some of those opinions fail to engage him 
for their own sake. But he sat beside Mr. 
Gunning, who, from the moment he had ad- 
justed his napkin until the dessert appeared, 
never opened his lips, except to partake of 
almost every change and remove of viand that 
came on the table ; not indeed so much after 
the manner of a mere eater, as after that of an 
epicure, and one well skilled in kitchen myste- 
ries : so, from him Gerald hoped nothing : — 
Lord Clangore seemed engrossed by the elo- 
quent and pleasing Mr. Gore (for, notwith- 
standing some first prejudices, Gerald now 
thought him very pleasing) ; and perhaps one 
of the chief topics between them might be 
connected with the official vacancy before allud- 
ed to by that gentleman. 

Mr. Stewart talked quickly, and, owing to 
his habitually low tone and Scottish accent, 
almost unintelligibly, to the Secretary, across 
the Bishop of ■ ; Lord Harmer and Lord 
Horsemantown sat very quietly together ; 
the Bishop interchanged short syllables, still 
across his neighbours, with the interesting Mr. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 127 

Priestly; Mr. Grady and Mr. Pack enter- 
tained each other; and thus again Gerald 
was not only obliged to wait for the possible 
occurrence of the conversation he preferred, 
but his share in conversation of any kind. 

At length, after his second glass of cham- 
pagne, Mr. Gunning said to him — " How 
that young man cackles." 

The allusion was to Mr. Stewart, and, though 
severe, induced a smile, for it did a caricature 
sort of justice, at least, to its subject, 

" Now, that 's all about Scotland, and Scotch 
people," continued Mr. Gunning, who seemed 
getting into just good-humour enough to be 
ill-natured ; " for they never speak a word 
about any thing but each other, unless it may 
be — themselves." 

** I like their nationality," said Gerald. 

" I don't ; I don't like nationality of any 
kind ; least of all, theirs ; what has any body to 
do with it .'' how can it interest any body ?''"' 

" But, as an Englishman, you are yourself 
national." 

" Not a bit : no true Englishman is ; no 
true Englishman cares a fig for England, ex- 
cept so far as it is necessary to him." 



128 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" I hope your true Englishmen are not 
numerous." 

** I know they are : and one of the reasons 
why I prefer you, half-Irish gentlemen, is, that 
you never bore us about Ireland." 

" You are perhaps magnifying our necessity 
into a virtue.'^ 

" 'Tis politeness, at least — ^" 

Gerald bowed, on behalf of his English-Irish 
constituents — " even though you don't intend 
it," added Mr. Gunning. Could the bow have 
first been set down on the table in a tangible 
form, Gerald would now have put it in his 
pocket. 

*' We have few of the impulses of vanity to 
force Ireland upon the notice of our friends," 
he resumed. 

" No, indeed ; and therefore you very proper- 
ly let her alone. An old Spanish courtier who, 
a long time ago, wrote apophthegms, says that 
the unfortunate are always to be cut ; you are 
quite right." 

Before Gerald could perfectly separate the 
sincerity from the sneers of this sentence, Mr. 
Gunning, catching up a phrase that had just 
escaped Mr. Stewart, cried — " A good talker !— 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 129 

And who, may I ask, Mr. Secretary, are you 
so defining ?" 

" Sir Walter," answered the Secretary. 

*' I told you," muttered Gunning, aside, to 
Gerald : then he proceeded aloud ; indeed very 
loud ; " Good talkers ! I don't know a more 
silly cant of this canting day. Mention the 
name of minister, poet, painter, actor, or essay- 
ist, and the question is, not how does he tax 
us, or rhyme, or paint, or act, or twist a simple 
thread of common sense, but ' how does he 
talk ?' that's the important point." 

" But a great name is adorned, at least, by 
the possession of this pleasing quality," said 
Mr. Stewart. 

" Indeed, Sir ;'■■— Gerald thought that the 
cynic was gratified to engage Mr. Stewart upon 
a question, in the discussion of which he could, 
to the utmost verge of language, inconvenience 
that gentleman's nationalty; — " Pardon me, 
it is eclipsed by it. There's Coleridge has lost 
his poetical name altogether, by his fascinations 
in the new mode of egotism. The Count de 
Soligny, in his last letters on England, after 
giving but a cold account of the bard's pub- 
lished works, adds, — ' But I have heard hira 
G 5 



130 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

talk !' thereby grounding his admiration of 
Coleridge's genius on the man's wwpublished, 
talking essays." 

" I was indeed hurt myself to read , this 
morning, in a licentious periodical work, the ac- 
count of Coleridge's egotism, given by a cockney 
essayist," said the Bishop ; — " While 'explaining 
the different notes of the nightingale to his sis- 
ter,' Coleridge's ' chaunt' is, in a strong vein of 
affectation, much lauded." 

** Chaunt ! — Good !" resumed Mr. Gunning ; 
" ay, and Wordsworth's chaunt too ; and this 
is the same essayist who constantly exhibits old 
Northcote as such a talker ; adding not a word 
about his easel. Pray, Secretary, how does 
your courtly Sir Thomas talk ? very smoothly 
I know, and all that ; but how else ?" 
" Very sensibly." 

" He doesn't mean his answer," whispered 
Gunning to Gerald, and then continued : " Dr. 
Morris, during his visit at Abbotsford, thought 
little of the great Northern until he began, 
after dinner, to recite or talk some of his ' auld 
world stories ;' and then such a picture as we 
get of his style of recitation, and of his eyes, 
eyebrows, and all 1" 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 131 

"And the hero of the Shandrydan," said 
Gerald, " in afterwards instituting a comparison 
between * the Great Poet of Scotland, and the 
Great Poet of the lakes,' certainly says not a 
word about their works, but all about their 
* different styles of conversation.' " 

" To be sure : and Wordsworth's * sonorous- 
ness — ' chaunt, I suppose— drawl — I am sure, 
is quite as much admired as Coleridge's since 
has been. Then Hobhouse wrote a large vo- 
lume, partly of memoirs of the Italian rhyme- 
sters ; and there we find ingenuity on the stretch 
to ascertain Ugo Foscolo's method of talking. 
On the authority of * a lady' who enjoyed the 
advantage of Ortis's private society, he seems to 
be a rapid, ceaseless babbler, until we are check- 
ed by the grave historical account of his statue- 
like delivery of certain set speeches in Venice, 
when we are given to understand that he never 
loosed his two hands from the back of a chair, 
nor raised his voice beyond a monotonous rum- 
ble." 

" Who is Ugo Foscolo ?" asked Lord Horse- 
mantown. 

" Ask John Murray," answered the Secretary, 
sneering. 



132 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" And honest John will tell your Lordship 
that he knew him very well," added Gunning ; — 
" and perhaps he can also supply some notion 
of Ugo's diversified manner, when upon certain 
occasions he used, in the fervour of his talking, 
to toss himself about upon a chair or sofa, and 
strew the carpet with his locks of — ^not * sable* 
but brickdust, ' silvered.' 

" The Edinburgh was half right, some time 
ago — " began Mr. Stewart. 

" What ! do you ever think it right ?" in- 
terrupted Mr. Gunning. 

" Apropos to that, or to something like it, — 
I beg pardon a moment — Nixon, pen, ink, and 
paper,'' said the Secretary, of a sudden, — 
" Pray let me stand excused ; but there is one 
little matter I shall have no time but this even- 
ing to- do — just a scribble — and I stop no one, 
not even your discussion, Gunning, for you 
know I can write and talk together," and, as he 
had done speaking, the servant placed the pen, 
ink, and paper to his hand, and the Secretary 
immediately began his new task. 

" I was about to mention," resumed Mr. 
Stewart, " that though we seldom agree, I did 
think the Edinburgh warranted in censuring, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 133 

as scarcely polite, the very talent for which 
John Philpot Curran's Irish admirers highly 
praise him ; his engrossing habits of conver- 
sation at table, and his setting the table in a 
roar, and all that." 

" No doubt they were right, Sir,'' assented 
Mr. Gunning, in a view of his own ; ** and yet, 
I presume, the Scottish critic would be one of 
the first to bless the man who, in his own house, 
makes his Welsh guest, among others, listen to 
retails or anticipations of poems or novels, sold, 
or to be sold." 

" But poems and novels of which the repeti- 
tion can never tire," said Gerald. 

" In the reading, I grant you ; you will re- 
mark, Sir, that, we do not now speak of their 
extraordinary merit — indeed, not at all of them, 
but merely of their being so talked about." 

" Can't men think .?" observed Lord Horse- 
man town. 

" No, my Lord, because they talk. Talkers ! 
we are grown a nation of talkers. We usurp 
the women's ancient privilege, and they can 
only listen to it ; it is come to that with them. 
We leave it to the North American Indians 
to say * much talk, little do ;' and their Squaws 



134 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

are the only remaining branch of the gentler sex, 
whose taciturn husbands allow to female tongues 
the enjoyment of their prescriptive right." 

" There is an actor," said Mr. Grady, mys- 
teriously, " who for talking Greek, after dinner, 
gets more puflPed by the press than on account 
of his doings behind the lamps." 

" I propose a college of talkers," said the 
Secretary, not stopping his pen, at least ob- 
servably ; " nay, a London University, with 
preparatory schools. I propose an abolition of 
printed poems, and all kind of books, and the 
substitution of talking bodies " 

*' Of the first of which Coleridge shall be 
president," put in Gunning. 

" If you like ; but in them let the cha- 
racters of literary men, at least, be fixed, by 
good talking works, and afterwards dissemi- 
nated, by affiliated institutions, over the world." 

" It might be a good way, Secretary, to save 
ourselves the perplexity of our present mixed 
notion of only doubtful prose or rhyme, and 
good talking. We should then get a whole 
character before us." 

V *' Newton knew nothing about talking," ob- 
served Gerald. 

" He had no need," said Lord Horsemantown. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 135 

" I know of a Newton who does," observed 
the Secretary, in his dry way. 

" The very delightful painter ?" inquired 
Gerald. 

" Mr. Newton the painter," reviewed the Se- 
cretary. 

" And after all," continued Gunning, " even 
when we give one of these gentlemen his most 
wished-for title of ' good talker,' 'tis but a li- 
mited and qualified title. They cannot always, 
nor in every situation, talk well — nay, at all. 
Thus, Coleridge and Wordsworth are supreme 
in metaphysics ; the one in his metaphysics, the 
other after a sermon : give them Cobbett, and 
they stare : yet the turnip-farmer is choice on 
his own plot of ground ; to all intents and 
purposes, a first-rate talker. Ay, or place the 
dreamer of the Ancient Mariner, and the dream- 
er of the Excursion together, and, all to nothing, 
one becomes a listener, or both wax stupid. 
Foscolo told me he knew Coleridge when he 
first came to England ; I believe they lived 
some time in the same house, (at least Ugo said 
so,) but did not continue friends. I remem- 
ber him averring, in a torrent of stunning 
volubility, that the Highgate Hermit talked too 
much.'' 



136 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

*' Moore is a fascinating table or drawing- 
room man," said Gerald ; " but what could he 
do with Wordsworth's *chaunt?' or in his trip- 
ping gait, how keep pace with Coleridge's seven- 
leagued periods ?" 

*' Or what could they do with him ? No- 
thing,'' continued the cynic ; " if he dined or 
supped with either, he should hold his tongue, 
or, at least, be nobody ; and, if they returned 
the favour, they should comply with the terms, 
else were the fable of the fox and the stork read 
at school in vain. And, no doubt, in his old 
feudal towers, and no Coleridge or Wordsworth 
to contest with him, and within hearing of that 
devil of a piper, that he keeps as Byron kept 
his bear at college, and who, at a signal, blows 
you up such a convincing tempest of Highland 
music. Sir Walter was sovereign. Next morning, 
too, he could easily keep all the fascination to 
himself as he ambled through ' the rhymer's 
glen,' which is now his own farm ; and as for 
holding forth, within or without the walls of 
* fair Melrose,' mortal men must not here dis- 
pute his right. But suppose Wordsworth at 
his board , the evening Peter speaks of, or plod- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 137 

ding, pedlar.like, by his stirrup, next morn- 
ing, the exciseman and he could not keep up, 
five minutes, an equal conversation. They 
could not support, — strike each other out. Even 
let them oblige each other, (in the case of talk- 
ers an impossibility,) by reciting and chanting,al- 
ternately, equal portions of Highland legends and 
village metaphysics ; both would be uninterest- 
ing. Alternation without continuance of sub- 
ject, between two lecturers, no matter how chaunt- 
ing or sonorous, proposes in itself a tiresome si- 
tuation ; but the mere infelt humiliation of a 
* good talker' at being obliged to share his lau- 
rels with a brother, would certainly produce a 
languor in each of these great men, or in any 
other two, or twenty, that must individually de- 
prive them of their undisputed claims to ego- 
tism, when only astonishing such docile listeners 
as Dr. Morris." 

" Very well indeed. Gunning," said the Secre- 
tary ; " here, Stewart, look over that," handing 
a sheet of paper, at the first view of which Mr. 
Stewart smiled in evident satisfaction — *very 
well talked indeed,' — writing again, ' and with- 
out at all outraging in your own person the 



188 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

rules you lay down for others — now, no reply, 
till you criticise a few lines of doggrel for me, 
while Stewart does the same by some others — 
there," pushing over a slip of paper folded 
down — " and now. Bishop, and now Lord 
Harmer, and now Mr. Priestly, what are we 
indeed to say of Gunning's abuse of talkers ?" 

It will not be inferred that, during the time 
he was writing, the honourable Secretary had 
been inattentive to the guests he now addressed, 
or indeed to any others at his table, or that they 
had not occasionally joined in the past conver- 
sation, although for the purpose of getting to- 
gether, in preference, what fell from Mr. Gun- 
ning, he and they seem, according to our report, 
to have been silent, or silenced. 

During the answers and remarks produced by 
his present question. Gunning spoke aside to 
Gerald : 

" The lines are quite good, and quite like 
him — terrible satire, that spares nothing and 
nobody. Read them, before he despatches them 
to Ebonj/." 

" Is it lawful.?" asked Gerald. 

** Yes, yes ;" answered the Secretary himself, 
observing in a side-glance his hesitation ; " they 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 139 

are not worth a mystery," and as he quickly 
turned to continue speaking to the Bishop and 
Lord Harraer, Gerald read the following : — 

" POLITICAL ALPHABET ; OR THE YOUNG 
MEMBER'S ABC. 

" A, was an Althorp, as dull as a hog; 

B, was black Brougham, a surly cur dog ; 

C, was a Cochrane all stripp'd of his lace ; 

D, was a Douglas, who wanted a place ; 

E, was an Ebrington, dismal and dumb; 

F, was a Finley, a hogshead of scum ; 

G, was a Gordon's preposterous phiz ; 
H, was a Heron, a damnable quiz ; 

J, was Joe Jekyl, whose law is a jest ; 

K, was a Knox, in a sinecure nest ; 

L, was a Lambton, sour, saucy and sad; 

M, was Paul Methuen ! a dandy gone mad; 

Nj was big Nugent, who " Portugal" writ ; 

O, was an Ossulton, small as his wit ; 

P, was poor Preston, stark mad about oats ; 

Q, was a Quin, who with neither side votes ; 

R, was dark Romilly's hypocrite look ; 

S, was a Sefton, Lord, coachman, and cook ; 

T, was Tom Thompson, a Tinker from Hool; 

V, was a Vernon, an asphaltic* fool ; 

• One of Mr. V— — 's speeches was laughed at for a 
metaphor about the Asphaltic Lake. 



140 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

W, was a Wame, 'twixt a wasp and a wonn ; 
But X, Y, and Z, are not found in this fonn. 
Unless Moore, Martin, and Creevy be said 
(As the last of mankind) to be X, Y, and Zed." 

" Terrible, indeed,** whispered Gerald, " even 
upon his enemies.** 

"And yet none of them are his enemies, either, 
or in other words, he feels no more than simple 
constitutional enmity to any of them, except 
two out of the last three; and I should not 
wonder if the whole alphabet was got up merely 
to give a seemingly impartial opportunity for 
emitting the gathered venom expressed on X 
and Zed. 

" But now you conjecture twenty-three per- 
sons flayed alive without a motive.*' 

*' No — I*ve also conjectured the motive." 

** It amounts to no more than convenience.** 

" And is not that enough ?** 

" Well ; admitting your view, why are X 
and Zed to be especially put to death ?" 

" X, once stood in his way, and Zed now 
speaks against him whenever he comes up 
officially to the house." 

" But do you call it prudent thus to satirize 
so many considerable individuals who, one day 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 141 

or other, by some probable topsy-turvy freak 
in the cabinet, may get power, or become the 
supporters of the powerful ?" 
" He doesn't care." 

" How r 

** He would be in with them, and keep his 
place still." 

" How, again ?"" 

*' By supporting them, or all or any thing 
they might support to be sure, and by being 
ready to make out for Blackwood another al- 
phabet of any twenty-four of their opponents." 

" That 's talent, indeed." 

" Yes ; our friend, with all his good qua- 
lities, has a little of the cat in him j he is attached 
to place, not pcisons — but the Unes are very 
clever.'" 

" Very ; only, T still demur to the unsparing 
nature of the satire." 

" 'Tis his style. You have geen the little 
pasquinade he wrote on the actors in Dublin, 
long ago, when he was a Barrister walking the 
hall of your Four Courts there, and when his 
clients, at least, (though from their numbers we 
need not think much of their opinion) scarcely 
dreamt of his present success ?'"' 



142 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

** It has never come in my way." 

" That's unlucky, if you care to be convinced 
of his natural tendency to this kind of satire. 
Witness a quotation from it vpon a woman, 
one of the poor Dublin actresses, and, until his 
criticism, popular among the Dublin people- 
but first to show him in his best vein — 

* Williams comes, the rude and rough. 

With face most whimsically gruff; 
Aping the careless sons of ocean. 
He. scorns each light and easy motion ; 
His elbows to his sides he pins ; 
And dabbles with his hands like fins ; 
Would he express the greatest woe. 
He slaps his breast and points his toe ; 
Is merriment to be expressed ? 
He points his toe and slaps his breast.' " 

" Churchill never excelled that," said Gerald ; 
perhaps seldom equalled it." 

" Now you get him in the humour you are 
inclined not to patronize," said Gunning, and 
went on with his quotations. 

* ''But lo ! his wife, whose every feature 
Foretells the talent of the creature; 
Lively and vulgar, low and pert. 
She plays *au vif the pleasant flirt. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 148 

And hits, without the slightest aid 
From art, the saucy chambermaid; 
Oh might her merits ne'er presume 
To figure in a drawing-room !'' 

I believe I forget the remaining lines until 
he advises her, in accordance with her nature, 

to 

* Decline Bizarre and play Lamoree.' " 

** You get the man's mind there, I think." 

" And his heart too," added Gerald. 

« Pho ! heart ? what's that ?" 

" A mystery to you, I believe, Sir," replied 
Gerald, in his own mind, " as much as to him, 
if indeed your comments are to be taken for 
fact, when at the moment you share his cup, 
you can thus expose your seeming friend to a 
comparative stranger. But," Gerald continued, 
" such ought to be the kind of friendship sub- 
sisting between them ; it would be a pity were 
it of a different description. I suppose even 
the terms of it are mutually understood." 

" I guess," resumed Gunning, proceeding to 
give him certainty on the point, — " I guess 
by your eye that you take my remarks on the 
Secretary as unfriendly towards him ; but you 
mistake; I would serve him and he would serve 



144 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

me, as far as it conveniently lay in the way 
of either, though I show him up now and 
then, and though he knows I do ; he knows I 
am at it this moment : I caught his eye glan- 
cing after his ear while we discussed him ; 
besides he would show me up in the same way 
if you were by his side instead of sitting 
here." 

Gerald rather coldly concurred in the pro- 
bability. " Or he would take the same free- 
dom with yourself, if he knew as much of you 
as I do," half sneered Gunning in revenge for 
the slight change of face and manner his 
practised eye soon detected. " But do you 
surmise my reason for holding forth, just now, 
so vehemently against talkers ?"" 

*' You simply dislike them.** 

" Not always ; I had a more particular 
motive. There is your countryman, Mr. Gore, 
who, whatever may be the subjects he can 
handle, is, I am sure of it, in good estimation 
with himself as a graceful and pleasing talker ; 
and, just before I commenced my sermon, I 
saw his handsome red face waxing redder all 
over, and his mouth curving up, in the preface, 
to a volume of soft speeches. I stopped him 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 145 

by what I said, however, to say nothing of 
the good I did the young Scotchman. Mr. 
Gore all this time has had no hearer but your 
brother — a mercy to every one else. Now, 
though, I fear we shall get him all round, 
if the Secretary does not "pull up in the road 
he has just started on, and if he does not, 
I 'ra off." 

" Like Sir Peter, then, I shall leave my 
character in your hands," said Gerald, once 
more smiling. 

" We '11 take care of the little trust for you ; 
and, after all, I think the Secretary, along with 
all the rest of you that now (we are come to 
a pretty pass) sit in the Cabinet for us, and 
make law for us, and fight the French for us, 
— I hate Frenchmen more than Scotchmen — 
something like a credit to Ireland, or to that 
half, or quarter of it, or whatever portion it is, 
which will have us call it English-Irish." 

" Let us see,** thought Gerald. 



VOL. I. 



146 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

" My friend George is one of the best talkers 
I know,'' was the remark of the Secretary that 
produced the turn in the conversation, to which 
Mr. Gunning metaphorically alluded in the last 
chapter : " one of the best, though the most bor- 
ing : he talks sentences always, never phrases ; 
and there are his eulogy and criticism together. 
He is good for a solemn morning call on you, 
when from occupation, just before, you are 
prepared not to tire of his compositions ; but he 
is not good for the evening." 

*' You speak of our countryman ; what is he 
doing ?" asked the Bishop. 

"Why he has been writing a comedy (he 
called it so) for one of the theatres; *The 
Angel of the World' and its publisher having 
fallen together. And he dedicated it by per- 
mission to Canning.'' 

" Has any thing come of the compliment ?" 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 147 

" Yes," answered Gunning ; " a new version 
of the Apocalypse, by which the destruction of 
Popery, root and branch, in a very short time 
indeed, is demonstrated, by the Rev. George 
Croly." 

" That sounds strange, though not unpleas- 
ing. May I ask what you mean, Sir?" in- 
quired the Bishop. 

" Why, Bishop, Canning having forgotten 
the dedication, its writer published some matter 
of the kind I speak of, about the very time 
that his negligent patron made his most celebra- 
ted speech in favour of your great Hibernian 
question." 

" Both might have been better employed," re- 
sumed the Bishop, " and in furtherance of their 
different objects, too : though/ (pausing,) " their 
motives may be essentially the same, after all." 

" Your Lordship, I thought, knew that one of 
these gentlemen is not disposed to agree in ac- 
ceding to those people any increase of political 
power," observed Mr. Priestly. 

" I know it : yet, though two loyal gentlemen 
may widely differ on the question, I suppose, at 
least I strongly hope, they have in view a com- 
mon result, even while they differ." 
H 2 



148 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" I coincide with your Lordship," said Ge- 
rald, 

" I have not yet the honour to apprehend his 
Lordship's meaning," resumed Mr. Priestly. 

" Nor I," said Lord Harmer. 

" Nor I," echoed Mr. Grady, Mr. Gore, and 
Mr. Pack. 

'* I 'm off, as I told you," whispered Gunning 
to Gerald, as the Bishop, smiling a conscious- 
ness of the easy reconciling of his seeming pa- 
radox, was about to proceed : ** all this is going 
to be all about Ireland ; and though, I believe, I 
have myself to blame for giving the word, and 

ough I 'm not quite so tired of Ireland as 

am of Scotland, yet, not being Irish even 
half-way through, I can never stand it ;" and 
rising slowly on his stick, he soon left the room. 

**The loyal gentleman," continued the Bi- 
shop, " who disallows those claims, does so, 
because he thinks that an extension of power 
would strengthen the claimants in influence 
and numbers; and the loyal gentleman who 
advocates those claims, does so, because he 
thinks that the removal of restrictions of 
every kind would leave the claimants, parti- 
cularly in Ireland, more leisure and inclination 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 149 

to attend to the teaching and preaching of a 
pure doctrine, which eventually, in the oppor- 
tunities he would create, must supersede the pre- 
sent superstition : so that, while one refuses the 
boon, lest the petitioners should grow stronger, 
the other cedes it to make them even weaker 
than they are ; and hence their motives are, as I 
said, essentially the same." 

" Now I understand your Lordship," said 
Mr. Priestly. 

" And I have to thank your Lordship for 
stating my views so clearly," said Gerald. 

" We, in Ireland, my Lord," said Mr. Gore, 
" who hold the views first stated so well by 
your Lordship, have, indeed, the same good 
hopes of our loyal fellow-subjects in both 
countries. While they differ from us on the 
important question, we believe they do not 
mean to expose us, more than we are exposed, 
to the insidious encroachments of a religion 
deeply hostile to us ; to our religion and theirs ; 
to our political ascendency ; in fact, to all that 
we are so proud to hold by virtue of our Eng- 
lish descent, principles, and connexion." 

** The supporters of the measures, English or 
Irish, with whom I have spoken," said Lord 



150 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Clangore, " that is, with whom I could pro- 
perly speak in confidence, certainly have no 
such meaning ; and though I differ from them 
in the principle of their policy, so much justice 
may be done to their intentions." 

" The first point is this^ remarked Mr. 
Grady, composing a leader — *' what is the cause 
of the present unhappy state of Ireland ? why 
is she the only uncivilized portion of the three 
kingdoms ? After more than seven hundred years 
of identity with this country "^ 

*' Not identity, Grady ; that almost makes 
you speak a paradox," said the Secretary. 

« Connexion, Sir ?" 

« No." 

" Then, Sir, conjunction .?" 

*' Not even that, unless you mean our gram- 
matical anomaly, a disjunctive conjunction ; call 
it wrangling and squabbling." 

" I will. Sir ; and that is the very thing I 
would show, and at the same time question ; 
why should it have been to this day wrangling 
and squabbling?" 

" The Irish people have not been taught to 
think," said Lord Horsemantown ; " have not 
had mental objects to engage them, and thereby 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 151 

keep them quiet ; for a man whose mind is em- 
ployed on pursuits that tend to improve it, 
knows and cares Httle about politics, after com- 
ing to one simple conclusion — namely, honour 
and respect for King, Laws, and Government." 

" Scotland, that much later than seven hun- 
dred years ago was the declared and powerful 
enemy of England, is now her feal friend," said 
Mr. Stewart ; " indeed, both are but parts of 
one great kingdom." 

" And still, I ask, why has not Ireland fol- 
lowed her example ?" pursued Mr. Grady : 
" years have gone by, since, through the wis- 
dom of an English minister, and of our great 
countryman at present at the head of affairs, she 
gave up one of the chief, at least one of the 
most obvious landmarks of distinction between 
her and us — her Parliament." 

" Her absurd Parliament — her exquisitely 
Irish Parliament," resumed the Secretary : " it 
was a riotous, popular assembly, not a Parlia- 
ment : men went there to make speeches, not to 
dehberate ; to call each other ' out,' not to con- 
vince each other ; and their wives and daughters 
used to sit in the galleries to hear husband or 
father deliver orations that had been twenty 



152 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

imes read at home, and to encumber with their 
presence every thing like freedom or manliness 
of debate. Burke was a tolerably good speci- 
men to an English House of Commons of the 
elaborate, rhetorical fuss, the unbusiness-like 
declamation, the sputtering and roaring, that, 
even in the persons of its most boasted orators, 
sunk the character of the Irish House of Com- 
mons." 

" Yes, Sir," argued Mr. Grady ; " I have 
spoken with many of the old reporters who vi- 
sited the gallery, here, in his latter days, and 
they assure me he was the greatest bore the 
House ever heard. He used to roar, Sir, as you 
say, walking up and down by the table, like a 
wild beast, until two-thirds of the members went 
away, and the press along with them: I assure you. 
Sir, it came to that ; they wouldn't ' take him.' " 

" I 'm sorry for it, Sir," said Gerald, " for 
however inconvenient might have been the de- 
livery of Mr. Burke's opinions, they read well ; 
and only that the gentlemen you mention might 
have felt too much annoyed, I should regret the 
loss of any of his speeches." 

*' Returning to Mr. Grady's queries," conti- 
nued the Secretary, *' suppose we say that the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 153 

undeniable inclination of the old Celtic blood of 
old Ireland to kicking up a row, may account 
for even the present want of civilization and 
happiness in that country, which he so truly 
recognizes ? It is said, generally, of the Celts 
and Normans, that while the one race always 
weakened, and kept themselves ignorant and 
savage, by domestic quarrellings, the other race, 
united in arms, in arts, in interests, and in di- 
versified improvement, every where found them 
an easy conquest. But the mere conquering 
them could not change the grand passion of 
their nature, or their old habits. Thus, 
though universally deprived of their inde- 
pendence, they still kept up the old game ; 
still squabbled upon the most trivial occa- 
sion, or upon no occasion, with their masters, 
or with one another ; still left themselves no 
time for the mental pursuits, scientific or other- 
wise, so well suggested as a nostrum for 
them by my excellent friend, Lord Horseman- 
town ; until, to this very day, we find them what 
they have ever been in Ireland — and what 
they are." 

" For whatever good conduct, industry, mora- 
lity, intellect, or rank, we possess in Ireland, we 
H 5 



154 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

are assuredly indebted to this great country," 
said Mr. Gore. 

" Absentee landlords, they aver, make one 
chief cause of their wretchedness and turbu- 
lence," remarked Mr. Stewart, as usual speaking 
very rapidly in his throat : " but that 's stufiF ; 
no man who considers the subject, scientifically, 
can entertain it for a moment. I don't say that 
resident landlords are an absolute evil to any 
country; but I do say, that in the present ano- 
malous position of Ireland, the absence of her 
landlords might, if properly taken advantage of, 
prove a good, instead of a curse ; indeed it is 
idle to debate the matter ; it has been proved 

by M'CuUoch." 

" Some say that Sir Walter Raleigh is to be 

blamed in a great degree for the evils of Ireland 

since about the time of Elizabeth," resumed the 

Secretary. 

" How so?" asked Lord Horsemantown, 

rather interested. 

" Because they assert that the potatoe is the 

root from which its evils spring," he went on, 

in a sneer that Lord Horsemantown did not see. 
" Come,"" said the Bishop, " I have listened 

to many opinions, as to the cause of those evils ; 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 155 

but surely no man of ordinary observation, 
living in Ireland, can mistake the true one^ — her 
teachers." 

" Her teachers, indeed !" echoed Lord Har- 
mer, turning from a quiet tete-a-tete with Lord 
Clangore. 

" The bane of the wretched land," agreed 
Mr. Priestly, with an earnestness that indicated 
long and settled conviction, and of which he had 
shown few other instances during the evening. 

" Perhaps, in a more general phrase, we should 
say the superstition she bows to," continued the 
Bishop ; " only, that at the hands of these men it 
is ministered in every form most calculated to 
besot the human intellect, deprive its blind vota- 
ries of all self-estimation, perpetuate mere animal 
passions, and generate all the impulses to re- 
venge, treachery, and bloodshed, of which day 
after day we are doomed to witness the results 
Dangerous as is the mere profession of Popery 
in its best shape, I do not think it could work 
as it does work in Ireland but for the mode in 
which it is put forward by her priests; and 
therefore I particularly select them, when I 
would advance, in a word, the cause of the pre- 
sent state of that wretched Island." 



156 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Then, my Lord, having the real cause be- 
fore us, let it be removed,'' said Mr. Priestly. 

" You can't remove Mem," answered the 
Secretary. 

" Remove the poor people from them," said 
the Bishop. 

" And go to the work boldly," resumed Mr. 
Priestly. " With good intentions on this sub- 
ject, we have as yet only stopped short at half 
measures, disguising our motives in school 
education, and when charged with a wish to 
insinuate (rather than inculcate) the truth, equi- 
vocating like cowards, as if we feared either 
that our cause would not bear the light, or that 
we shrunk from a contest with its enemies. Let 
us march into the field more like courageous 
soldiers ; let us say to the people of Ireland, 
in plain language, ' We wish to change your 
religious belief, because we know it keeps you 
poor, ignorant, miserable, and most of all, be- 
cause it is a blasphemy ;' and let us at the same 
time say to their priests, * You hear our purpose 
proclaimed, meet us in the field, and oppose us 
and conquer us if you can. Show these, your 
most unhappy flock, good reasons for the faith 
that is in them, if indeed you have imparted 



THE ANGLO-IRISH 157 

one clear notion^ however erroneous, upon the 
doctrine of salvation ; refute the reasons we 
give for a better faith ; do this, and we will leave 
in your hands the minds, the morals, the hap- 
piness, here and to come, of the land." 

" Thus should we proceed, indeed,*' said 
Lord Harmer. 

*' I would approve such a course," said Lord 
Horseraantown, seemingly becoming possessed 
of a new and pleasing idea. 

" I know Ireland well," said Mr, Gore, " and 
will go so far as to declare, that, in my opinion, 
it requires but a few years' perseverance in the 
plan proposed, to rescue the great majority of 
the Irish people from their present thraldom." 

" Ten years only," agreed the Bishop. 

" There is nothing in the good work but the 
trouble of teaching," resumed Mr. Priestly. 
" "We are not, generally speaking, faced with 
the difficulty of pulling down an old edifice in 
order to erect a new one ; for, in truth and fact, 
the people know nothing at all of religion of 
any kind." 

" To what, then, do they give the name ?" in- 
quired Gerald : " what are they taught by their 
]mests ?" 



158 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Mummeries, Sir," answered Mr. Priestly. 

" Forms that are mummeries," added the 
Bishop : " they are taught to go to mass^ of 
which they do not understand a word ; to use 
holy-water ; to mumble prayers to the Virgin, 
as they tell their beads ; to wear charms against 
sickness, sorrow, and fairy blasts ; to kneel down 
before rude pictures and images ; to think that 
the priest's wrath can warp their limbs, blight 
their crops, and destroy their cattle : these are 
the chief if not the only matters of a spiritual 
kind with which the poor Irishman is made ac- 
quainted ; and, as my worthy friend observes, 
none of them contain any prepossessions against 
the real doctrines of religion." 

" Could Scotland have been what she now 
is, if her mind and energies had been kept 
down by superstition like this .?" inquired Mr. 
Stewart. 

" Certainly not," said Gerald ; " but, my 
Lord, the priests of Ireland must, along with 
their other dangerous qualities, be as ignorant 
as their poor flock, to inculcate such supersti- 
tion r 

" The greater part of them is ; that is, almost 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 169 

all those who, coming into orders from the 
plough or the mechanics' workshop, have late- 
ly been educated at home ; they with as much 
new acquirement as enables them to read their 
breviary and mass-book, they may be class- 
ed in the intellectual scale, and even in scrip- 
ture knowledge, with their old brethren of the 
clod, whom they are sent back from some local 
seminary to teach : sometimes you find them ti- 
morous, clumsy, poor men, bold in nothing but 
disguised bigotry ; sometimes you can scarcely 
distinguish them from the hardy, bluff clown 
out of orders, or at best from the strong-bodied 
farmer's son who goes out to hunt, now and 
then, on a strong-bodied horse ; and their best 
specimen is to be seen in the town curate, or 
parish priest, who, wearing a better coat and 
professional boots, can wrangle over his tumbler 
of punch, about some abstruse, superfluous and 
(by him) but half conceived metaphysical de- 
finition of the attributes of Divine Essence. 
From none of them should we expect clear or 
serious views of what they ought to teach their 
people ; but such are the majority of the priests 
who, along with hatred to England, and every 



160 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

thing English, in either country, do teach their 
people the childish superstitions I have enume- 
rated." 

" I should like to hear your Lordship's ac- 
count of the minority ; of those, I presume, 
who have not been educated at home ?" 

" The few among the present body of Irish 
priests," continued the Bishop,"who have studied 
at Salamanca or at St. Omers, enjoy, of course, 
a more liberal round of acquirement than their 
indigenous successors ever pretend to ; they 
also have, perhaps. Scriptural learning, and 
(witness O'Leary) are generally adroit dispu- 
tants: but they are never found among the 
country people, in country parishes; and if 
they occasionally convey to their town flocks an 
arbitrary interpretation of a Scripture text, the 
great mass of the people catch no sound of it ; 
while the cold and profitless observations of 
those poor creatures are, by their most enlight- 
ened guides, never prohibited. They enjoin 
them, then, since they tolerate them. And are 
these educated priests, themselves, believers 
in the superstitions they enjoin ? I think not : 
their state of intellect seems to make the ques- 
tion unnatural. If they are not, what is to be 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. I6l 

said of their countenancing, with a view to their 
own pecuniary profit and priestly influence, 
abominations that they know to be insulting to 
God, and death to the soul of his creature ? 
Here we have Jesuitism, calculating, evading, 
cruel Jesuitism, doing, in their persons, the 
work of almost brute ignorance in the persons 
of their locally-educated brethren. As for hos- 
tility to all that makes the happiness and glory 
of England, and, through connexion with her, 
which ought to make the happiness and glory 
of Ireland, if home-instruction gives that^ in 
abundance, to the young priesthood, we have 
little difficulty in determining to what extent 
it must have been imbibed, in continental col- 
leges, by the old." 

" Only that I have resolved," said Gerald, 
" never, in the present condition of Ireland, to 
pay her a visit, I should certainly like to fall 
in with an Irish priest." 

" You can do so without your alternative," 
said Lord Clangore, " and this very evening, 
too : you know we look in at the Spanish Am- 
bassador's, and I have been advised, by our hos- 
tess elect, that, amongst other motives, she gives 
her party to-night, in order to get subscriptions, 



162 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

to be solicited by herself, or at least by his ap- 
pearance before us, for a very poor young Irish 
priest, though one of the smart, town ones first 
described by his Lordship, towards repairing 
the miserable chapel he has been sent to pre- 
side over, here, in one of our London Irish 
colonies.*' 

" I attend her Ladyship then." 

'* But why not visit us ?" inquired Mr. Gore, 
very insinuatingly, and with a personal compli- 
ment meant. 

" Never, Sir," replied Gerald, " until Ire- 
land, by more closely resembling England, be- 
comes more my country ; never until from that 
resemblance I can calculate her happiness and 
respectability, and feel pride in owning myself 
half her son. But until then, England is my 
country ; Ireland cannot now be called so : she 
presents, in religion, in mind, in manner — I 
mean" — (checking himself, and bowing, as he 
saw Mr. Gore grow disturbed,) — " I mean, of 
course, with reference to the mass of her purely 
Irish population — nothing in common with me, 
or with what I admire, respect, and hope to 
attain. No ; she is not my country ; nor yours, 



THB ANGLO-IRISH. 163 

Sir ; nor, my Lord, yours ; nor the country of 
any one of us.'' 

*' Ah, my excellent young friend," said Mr. 
Gore, with a sigh, " how well do we, who live 
in her bosom, surrounded by all that is hostile 
or strange to us, — how well do we feel the truth 
of your remark, and how willingly, how eagerly 
would I adopt your plan of avoidance, if most 
dear, and (allow a father's egotism) most amia- 
ble, deserving, and, alas, without me, helpless 
objects of domestic solicitude, did not command, 
absolutely command, my residence in the unfor- 
tunate country. But pray, my dear Mr. Blount, 
do not deprive us of all hope of the pleasure of 
seeing you. Even in Ireland, few in number as 
we may be, compared with the native popula- 
tion, we compose, beyond doubt, a highly re 
spectable and enlightened community : standing 
by each other, our circles are select, and, quite 
as far as the resemblance can ever approach, 
would remind you of the superior country. I 
have the honour of knowing many, many distin - 
guished friends who would make you at home ; 
and, I trust, I need not add, that amongst the 
immediate members of my own family, you 



164 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

would experience nothing inattentive — or, from 
three young ladies, not reckoned either unac- 
complished or unattractive, (excuse the father 
again. Sir,) nothing disagreeable." 

" The three most beautiful creatures in Dub- 
lin, Sir," whispered Mr. Grady, " particularly 
the youngest." 

" Well, Sir," answered Gerald, returning, 
without affectation, some of the soft smiles Avith 
which Mr. Gore regarded him, and perhaps not 
before he had involuntarily conjured up (Ge- 
rald was only one-and-twenty) the pretty pic- 
ture of a young gentleman, just like himself, 
domesticated among " the three most beautiful 
creatures in Dublin," and sung to, and talked 
to, all day long — " Well, Sir, whenever I do 
visit Ireland (and perhaps your partial vindica- 
tion of it has removed some of my prejudices), 
I shall not forget the kindness and politeness 
with which you are now pleased to express 
yourself." 

" ]My dear Sir !" was Mr. Gore's answer, as, 
half rising, he took Gerald's hand across the 
table. In fact, Mr. Gore liked the Secretary's 
claret, and by this time he had evinced his liking. 

" No rash promises, Blount," said the Secre- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 165 

tary, at this bit of a scene, though he had not 
heard the conversation ; *' See the lady first." 

Mr. Gore laughed heartily. 

" She must not be mere Irish," observed the 
Bishop, also smiling. 

" No, my Lord ; I disclaim every thing or 
every body that is not English-Irish, at least ; 
and till Ireland is so, I am forced to disclaim her." 

*' Poor Ireland !" said the Secretary, strange- 
ly reminding Gerald of a former sneer of little 
Rhoda Knightly. 

" Ireland must be made so, or remain for 
another thousand years contemned by the world, 
Mr. Blount," continued the Bishop. 

" First, then, make her English in Religion," 
said Mr. Priestly. 

« Yes, that first of all." 

" First of allj" agreed Lord Harmer. 

" How .?" inquired the Secretary. 

" Preach to her openly," said Mr. Priestly. 

<* The landed interest will support you. Sir," 
said Lord Harmer. 

" They will, and they ought," added Lords 
Horsemantown and Clangore. 

" Write down Popery ; get the press on the 
right side," exhorted Mr. Grady. 



166 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Write it down in every way," said Mr. 
Pack, uttering almost the first loud sentence he 
had that night ventured, and now looking sur- 
prised, if not agitated, at the sound of his own 
voice ; " write it down in tracts and magazines, 
as well as in the daily and weekly papers ; and 
don't you think, Sir, that even works of imagi- 
nation, that little tales, embodying with the 
doctrines sought to be inculcated their fine 
local superstitions and legends, might, if distri- 
buted among the peasantry, have a good effect ?" 

" I quite agree with Mr. Pack," answered 
the Secretary, seriously nodding his head twice 
or thrice, as his deep grey eyes fastened on the 
speaker. 

" Lock up their mass-houses if you can," ad- 
vised Mr. Gore ; " when they were locked up 
before, we had more peace and influence in the 
country." 

" Too late for that. Sir," remarked Gerald; 
" but I agree that a change of religion is indis- 
pensable." 

" Then begin we, in the name of all that can 
prompt us, or give us success," resumed Mr. 
Priestly : " with the promise of support from 
such quarters as now promise it, I, though not 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 167 

professionally called to the task, have no fears in 
personally undertaking it. If the poor people 
we shall convince be shielded by the high and 
wealthy, from the vengeance, or worse, from the 
consequences of the neglect they must expect at 
the hands of their old friends, and if, perhaps, 
even a little assurance of protection accompany 

or precede the first inculcation of doctrine "" 

" It shall," interrupted Lord Harmer. 
" Then to the battle let us go," said Mr. 
Priestly. 

*' Yes ; but provide — make — other opportuni- 
ties for success," said Gerald ; " make, in fact, 
the one so eloquently propounded by his Lord- 
ship awhile ago ; emancipate them first, that 
their angry passions being laid asleep, and the 
great rallying point of their demagogues re- 
moved, they may have leisure to listen to you, 
and you a natural reason for convincing them." 
" We would emancipate them," replied Mr. 
Priestly, " fully, gloriously emancipate them ; 
but, I believe, rejecting the means you pro- 
pose." 

" Indeed," cried Gerald, surprised, for he 
thought the gentleman had before tacitly agreed 
in his policy ; " and, indeed, my Lord," he re- 



168 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

peated, when, to his continued surprise, the 
Bishop added ; " no — the wilfully blind and ob- 
stinate bigot, who, out of the chimera of his su- 
perstition, shapes hostility to us, and to all con- 
nected with us, him we can never admit to po- 
litical power."" 

" Who drinks coffee ?" asked the Secretary, 
as the servant appeared. 

All arose. 

** I am not convinced, however," ruminated 
Gerald, though the Bishop's firmness had stunned 
him. 

** What think you, Sir ?" he resumed, as he 
and Mr. Stewart met in their progress to the 
drawing-room. 

" In fact, Sir," answered Mr. Stewart, his 
utterance, whether naturally or affectedly, in- 
creasing in quickness, until, indeed, as Mr. 
Gunning had remarked, he seemed to cackle; and 
at the same time he held himself very straight, 
and kept chucking his head very high ; " in 
fact. Sir, make your people a moral, industrious, 
calculating people. I don't pretend to know 
how it is to be done, Sir ; since Popery is in the 
way, I should certainly get rid of it, by all pos- 
sible means ; but I don't pretend to know Ire- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 169 

land much farther; only just make her people 
a moral, and an industrious, and a calculating 
people, Sir." 

" Coxcomb!'* muttered Gerald, turning away. 
— " Mr. Secretary, pray favour me with your 
real opinion of all that has been said this even- 
ing." 

" All stuff and nonsense," answered the Se- 
cretary, in a close, confidential, and abrupt 
whisper; — " What do you think.? By virtue of 
certain old black-letter enactments, these Catho- 
lics are, this moment, eligible to political power, 
without ceasing to be Catholics : but such is the 
legal ignorance on both sides, that neither Ca- 
tholic nor Protestant sees or admits the fact. 
Come — a cup of coffee." 

In about an hour afterwards Gerald was 
making his bow to the lady of the Spanish Am- 
bassador. Her Ladyship's rooms were full, 
mostly of foreigners ; but the fashionable crowd 
numbered amongst it many English persons of 
both sexes, of rank and title, official as well as 
patrimonial, and Catholic as well as Protestant. 
With a little pressing, if not ostentatious zeal, 
she availed herself of every polite opportunity 
to get subscriptions ^^pour le pauvrejeune pritre 

VOL. I. I 



170 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Irlandois^'' and was not long in addressing her- 
self to Gerald. He liberally subscribed her 
list, and inquired after the reverend mendicant. 
The lady led him into a back drawing-room, 
and introduced him at once to " Monsieur PAbbe 
GCBurnr 

Mr. O'Burn sat on a small sofa in almost de- 
voted attention to the discourse of another Ro- 
man Catholic clergyman, an old French priest, 
of a venerable, imposing air, and possessing the 
suavity of the ancien regime. And this was a 
bad situation for Mr. O'Burn. His vulgar, 
(yet not vulgar-featured) face, his uneasy figure, 
his restless hands and legs, his ill-worn new 
clothes, every thing about him contrasted with 
the staid, complacent, self-possession of his com- 
panion. On being introduced, he started up, 
bowed six times very strangely, mumbled, laid 
one hand on a corner of the sofa, and between 
the finger and thumb of the other kept coiling 
the comer of the lapel of his coat. Nothing 
could well be more certain than that he felt 
himself painfully out of place in that house on 
that awful night. Indeed his fidgets made him 
pale ; and his legs seemed ashamed of their new 
acquaintances, the black silk stockings, they 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 171 

did so shift, and shy, and behave themselves in 
such a manner. 

As soon as some quiet was restored, and 
Gerald had taken a place at his side, they began 
to speak about Ireland. But this Gerald did 
not exactly want, so much as what it would 
lead to. Collegiate pursuits in Ireland turned 
up. The man proved to be really uneducated, 
although, with poor smiles that petitioned for 
indulgence and good opinion, he quoted Latin 
every second sentence. Polite literature was 
glanced at ; he was dumb. Some slight ge- 
neral views of the country were taken ; he 
was an ass. 

Gerald prepared to leave him, when, with' 
many curious circumbendibusses, what shall we 
suppose the poor young man proposed ? An 
invitation " to eat a leg of mutton with him 
next Sunday." Gerald, wishing he could swoon, 
politely (and, in pity, his politeness was more 
kindly than stiff,) pleaded a prior engagement. 
" Well, Sir, but the next;" another engagement. 
" Well, then, but sure the next ;" another ; " the 
next" was called up from the womb of time ; 
and, in short, to save Mr. O'Bum the trouble 
of going through what remained of the year's 
I 2 



172 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

calendar, Gerald at last seemed to assent. In 
a few days he sent, of course, a formal though 
still not unkind apology ; a quick answer came, 
that, with all its offences against common usage 
and common sense, only proved that the writer 
had not understood the politeness with which 
he was treated. It breathed very Irish wrath, 
suppressed into the utmost possible Christian 
charity, and a sickly sense of having been ill 
treated, mixed up with a bad effort at eccle- 
siastical grandeur, which was exceedingly risi- 
ble. " I must have stood very low in your 
opinion. Sir, when — you absolutely refuse to dine 
with me," it said ; " but believe me, Sir, you 
are not warranted by any previous conduct of 
mine in — violating every rule of good-breeding 
towards me. But I forgive you, dear Sir ; 
for although my family motto is," (here follow- 
ed some Latin Gerald could not make out,) 
" I assure you I don't keep ill will to any one 
in my mind many minutes. However, a respect 
I have for myself as a clergyman and as a 
gentleman, obliges me to say (liowever reluc- 
tantly) that you never again shall be annoyed 
by an invitation from me. However, God 
bless you, my dear Sir, and although I don't 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 173 

mean to see you again, I hope time will change 
the opinions you too hastily formed of 

Your humble servant." 

" Why, yes," said Gerald, holding the curi- 
ous epistle in his hand, " if, under all his 
boorish blundering about his *leg of mutton,' 
and under all his mental and social deficiencies, 
this poor fellow really hides a bigot's heart ; 
and if, indeed, he be a proper specimen of his 
fellow-labourers in the Irish vineyard — misera- 
ble — most miserable is your religious lot, O 
peasantry of Ireland !" 

Upon which point, as well as upon others, 
discussed in this chapter, Gerald was fated to 
receive more authentic information, within the 
limits of the Irish vineyard itself 



174 THE ANGLO IRISH. 



CHAPTER. IX. 

After breakfast next morning, Mr. Grore 
called upon Gerald's brother, and they went 
but to canvass for the appointment, in pursuit 
of which that gentleman had come to England. 

Gerald repaired to the house of the Minister. 
His reception proved flattering, if not kindly. 
Perhaps, had it not been felt that he had busi- 
ness in hand, his guardian would have shown 
less of the watchful dignity of manner which, 
in all official situations, trifling as well as im- 
portant, characterised him. 

Gerald returned thanks for the offer of ap- 
pointment made through Lord Clangore- The 
Minister felt assured that Gerald's talents and 
principles entitled him to expect attention from 
his friends, and that nothing but a knowledge 
of a httle of the theory and habits of busi- 
ness — a knowledge gradually acquirable — was 
wanting on his part to ensure satisfaction to 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 175 

his well-wishers, and success and honour to 
himself. Gerald bowed, and ventured to say 
that if by method and care such knowledge 
were to be had, he would not despair of soon 
possessing it. The Minister was still assured. 
A short pause occurred ; and then he was 
asked, when he thought of going into the 
House ? 

** A seat in the House is the nearest object 
of my ambition," replied Gerald : " and per- 
haps I may add, to your Lordship, that, as soon 
as I hold it, the great Irish question may 
be considered as having gained an additional 
friend." 

" All very well," the Minister said. 

" And, if I do not speak superfluously, my 
Lord, I should wish to mention two grounds 
upon which my opinions are formed." 

" By all means go on, Mr. Blount." 

** First, it appears to me, after some consi- 
deration, that the pressure hitherto used to 
keep down the religion of Ireland, to this day 
ensures it vigour and compactness; and I would 
remove the pressure, in order to approach it in 
a less resisting state, with a view towards its 
suppression by other means.** 



176 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

** Sound policy, generally speaking,*' assented 
the Minister. 

" Next, my Lord, I must own that I would 
emancipate the Roman Catholics of Ireland, in 
redemption, if for no other reason, of a pledge 
lately given them, as I think on the question ?" 

" A pledge, Mr. Blount ?" 

" During the negotiation of the National 
Union between the two countries, my impres- 
sion is, that, to secure their acquiescence in the 
measure, the English Government did pledge 
itself to grant full relief to the Irish Catholics." 

" We were, I believe, scarcely aware of the 
fact," said the Minister. 

" The words of the Act of Union declare, 
' That every one of the Lords and Commons of 
the Parliament of the United Kingdom, and 
every member of the United Kingdom, in the 
first and every succeeding Parliament, shall, 
until the Parliament of the United Kingdom 
otherwise provide^ take the oaths now provided 
to be taken." 

** Those are the words, indeed, Mr. Blount." 

" And it seems to me, my Lord, that they at 

least imply " Gerald paused, vexed at his 

own interpretation. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 177 

** Words may seem to imply many meanings," 
remarked the Minister, smiling. 

" To mean," rallied Gerald, " that after the 
Union, a change in ' the oaths to be taken,' by 
which change Roman Catholics might sit in 
Parliament, was then intended, or professed to 
be intended." 

" The clause may probably bear your con- 
struction, in part." 

" In proposing these Articles of Union to the 
House of Commons," continued Gerald, " Mr. 
Pitt said that, ' in the present state of things, 
and while Ireland remains a separate kingdom, 
no man can say that full concessions can be 
made to the Catholics.' And here I find the 
inference, my Lord, that, as soon as Ireland 
should become united to England, the full con- 
cessions could be made." 

" You might add," still smiled the Minister, 
" and as soon as ' the (then) present state of 
things should have changed;' for the sentence 
you quote contains the double proviso. Both 
events are said to be indispensable to the grant- 
ing ' full concessions.' " 

" The expression, ' present state of things,' 
struck me, my Lord, as only alluding to the 
i5 



178 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

then state of Ireland, considered as ' a separate 
kingdom.'"' 

" Others may read the sentence differently, 
Mr. Blount ; and suppose that Mr. Pitt alluded 
to ' a state of things' distinct from the question 
of Irish Union, which, as I before said, it was 
as necessary to see materially altered, before 
emancipation could be granted, as it was neces- 
sary to see Ireland united to England, before 
the same measure could be entertained." 

" My Lord, Mr. Pitt and his leading friends, 
as he writes himself to Lord Comwallis, 
finding, after the Union, insurmountable ob- 
stacles to the bringing forward measures of con- 
cession to the Catholic body, whilst in office, 
felt it impossible to continue in administra- 
tion under the inability to propose it with the 
circumstances necessary for carrying the measure 
with afi^ its advantages; and he and they 
tendered, for that reason, their memorable re- 
signation." 

" True, they did so," assented the Minister, 

" And presumptive proof appears here, my 
Lord, that he and they believed they had given 
the pledge I speak of." 



THE ANGLO-IRISI# 179 

" It was not thought, Mr. Blount, at least so 
far as we can ascertain, that a pledge of any 
kind was given." 

" Then, my Lord, hopes were held out.'' 

** Many are of your opinion." 

" Hopes," continued Gerald, spiritedly, *' by 
which the Irish people were deceived." 

'* Their own hopes may have deceived them." 

*' But may we not also say, my Lord, that 
they were deceived into those hopes ?" 

" No, no, Mr. Blount," again smiling kindly ; 
" we may not say so." 

" Well then, my Lord," and Gerald re- 
sponded the good humour of the Minister's 
handsome features ; " only this ; they were al- 
lowed to deceive themselves." 

" Perhaps that comes nearer to it." 

Gerald having previously risen, the Mi- 
nister now touched his hand, and bowed him 
out. 

** Yes," he soliloquized, as he walked down 
Pail-Mall, " I suppose, after all, such is the 
real state of the case. I wish, for their own 
sakes, as well as for facilitating the regeneration 
I propose in their favour, that my half-country- 



180 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

men would get rid, in a degree, of their 
habit of taking for granted every thing they 
hope may come to pass. Notwithstanding his 
coxcombry, Mr. Stewart meant them no harm 
last night, when he commanded me to make 
them *■ a calculating people.* Does their sim- 
plicity arise from ingenuous feelings, or from 
careless and rash habits of thinking? — from a 
freshness of heart that cannot conceive of others 
the simulation (old Bacon's lauded word) it is 
itself unconscious of, or from unformed cha- 
racter, and that ardour to obtain, which is a 
feature of mental indolence .? At all events, 
they don't seem to know the world."" 

" My dear friend ! my dear Mr. Blount ! 
my dear Gerald !" exclaimed Mr. Gore, coming 
up behind, and breaking through his reverie, as 
thus, by a handsome climax, he gained the top 
of perfect familiarity ; " A thousand thanks to 
your excellent brother! and, on his account, a 
thousand thanks to you, too ! wish me joy ! — 
My little affair is already settled, through Lord 
Clangore's friendship, and that of the Secretary, 
and now I have only to wish my London friends 
health and happiness, and return at once to my 
dear, dear home !" 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 181 

" I congratulate you, Mr. Gore, and am glad 
my brother could be useful to you." 

" Ah, my excellent young friend, I know 
how you feel ; I know the hearts of all your 
amiable family." They had now joined arms, 
and were walking on together: — ** Yes; this 
very day I must leave you, every thing re- 
quires it; business, prudence, the feelings of 
a fond father ; every thing ; — but, good God !" 
He stopped suddenly, and laid his hand on his 
breast, as if to check some disagreeable or pain- 
ful oppression of the blood, perhaps. 

" Are you ill ?" asked Gerald, in something 
of the dismay depicted on the face of his friend. 

*' No, thank you, no — not absolutely ill ; no 
physical sensations — I beg your pardon ; come 
on," with a heavy sigh. 

" But may I ask the cause of your agita- 
tion ?" 

" No matter ; I scarce wish to trouble you 
by mentioning it, and, only that I know your 
heart, I would not ; but, in fact, called on, as I 
am, by the united voices of duty and affection, 
to leave London to-day, I forgot, in the height 
of my spirits at the thought, that, owing to my 
hurried departure from Ireland, and not having 



182 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

calculated certain claims connected with my 
appointment, and just made upon me, I do not 
stand prepared to — in a word, I cannot possi- 
bly stir till I receive an answer to a letter I 
must write home this very instant." 

Understanding this, though he only inter- 
preted it literally, Gerald had before obliged 
his English-Irish countrymen, and with the 
best heart in the world (Mr. Gore said he 
knew it was,) he therefore hesitated. While at 
Cambridge, expected remittances used some- 
times to take along time in coming from Ireland 
to certain of his friends there, and Gerald, 
more than once appealed to, seldom refused to 
make up for their delay. But after their arri- 
val at Cambridge, at least after the day when, 
making every possible allowance, they ought to 
have arrived, he was surprised that, in the pro- 
portion in which he had anticipated them, they 
took a still longer time in coming to him. In 
fact, he was obliged, on one occasion, to tres- 
pass on his brother, (a thing, no matter how 
sincerely they esteemed each other, he felt dis- 
tressed at doing,) when at last convinced that 
they would not come to him at all. And as no 
Englishman or Scotchman of his acquaintance 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 183 

ever appeared thus skilled in spending more 
than they could aiFord, and forgetting to re- 
fund the borrowed surplus, or, as it might be, 
were ever compelled to trouble their friends 
in consequence of having been boldly sent out 
into the world without having the means of 
meeting its claims, Gerald concluded the prac- 
tice was purely Irish ; and for all these reasons, 
as I have said, he now hesitated, though only 
one-and-lwenty, to reply at once to Mr. Gore's 
statement. 

" But do not let me annoy you with my 
private affairs," continued Mr. Gore : " I shall 
only trouble you for house-room to scribble my 
letter. Lord Clangore's house being at hand, 
and my hotel so far off; without particular 
connexions in London, I must submit to my 
fate as I can, for a week at least ; though," 
heaving another sigh, "heaven only knows 
what may happen at home, in the meantime !" 

Gerald's hesitation vanished. Mr. Gore seem- 
ed to hint that some inconvenience, no matter 
what, might possibly arise, by his absence, to 
" the three most beautiful creatures in Dublin,*' 
and he was conquered at a blow. 

" My dear Sir," he said, " you must not, in 



184 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

this case, at least, regret the want of close con- 
nexions in London, if, indeed, you can allow 
me to have the pleasure of obhging you." 

" Excellent friend ! dear Mr. Blount !" as 
he seized Gerald's hand, " I did not dream of 
making such a request ; but, since you have so 
kindly expressed yourself, I — but again, I fear 
the amount of the necessary sum puts it out of 
the question ; for 1 am called on, since my ap- 
pointment, to expend, one way or other, and on 
account of the appointment alone, about three 
hundred and fifty pounds." 

It was, indeed, a sum much more considera- 
ble than Gerald had contemplated ; but he 
could not well draw back. He only ventured 
to inquire if three hundred and fifty pounds 
would quite enable Mr. Gore to undertake, 
without delay, his journey to Ireland ? 

" Quite : of course all my travelling expendi- 
ture has been calculated ; this unexpected de- 
mand could alone cause any inconvenience." 

Gerald stepped into a shop, and wrote a 
draft on his banker for the sum. 

" Thanks, my dear young friend ! — and be 
assured, that my punctuality in a remittance" — 
(Gerald winced at the word) — " shall be the first 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 185 

proof of my lively recollection of your kind- 
ness. God Almighty bless you, — farewell f" 

I shall not decidedly state, from my authen- 
tic sources of information, whether or not " the 
appointment"" really, and exclusively, made 
this sudden claim on the worthy Mr. Gore; 
whether or not part, at least, of Gerald's three 
hundred and fifty pounds contributed, in va- 
rious little ways, to a subsequent display, in 
Dublin, which, with his fascinating lady, and 
the three " most beautiful creatures," the spend- 
thrift and needy Irish gentleman would, for 
reasons of his own, have almost " coined his 
heart"" to keep up ; — it is sufficient for the pre- 
sent — (we may meet Mr. Gore again) — to inform 
my reader that — (how Gerald honoured, as his 
sole comfort, his first misgivings!) — the promised 
remittance, which was " to give the first proof," 
&c. took as long a time in travelling from the 
Pigeon-house to Holyhead, as any of its visio- 
nary predecessors, before alluded to, had done. I 
will be generous, and anticipate a little more. 
It never " came to hand." 

Gerald took his seat in the House. The night 
for the discussion of the Catholic Claims drew 
on, and he prepared the heads of his maiden 



186 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

speech. Upon the last division on the question, 
it had passed the Commons with a majority ; 
a small one, indeed, but still a majority ; and 
now he anticipated some increase of numbers. 
However, while the opponents of the measure 
did not relax in their ardour and unanimity, 
there was a difference of opinion among the 
usual friends of the Catholics, as to the fitness 
of the present time for renewed discussion. 
Upon some trifling point, too, naturally sepa- 
rated from the merits of the question, such as 
the duty of an advocate to receive, or not to 
receive, from the Catholic Committee in Dublin, 
instructions for a remote contingency, misun- 
derstanding had arisen, and personal feelings, 
not perhaps quite surmountable by the most 
dignified statesman or senator, were allowed to 
mingle with and to sway convictions long set- 
tled down, and zeal that could not be impeach- 
ed. But the leaders consented to bring the 
matter to a debate, and Gerald did not doubt, 
although apprized of what has been mentioned, 
that, when once in the field, their energy would 
appear manifest in all its former force, and that 
their friends would still rally round them, and 
ensure a majority. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH- 187 

The view of the House, as he entered it, upon 
the evening of the debate, was, however, omi- 
nous enough. It could hardly be called a full 
house ; and the careless or loud chatting of the 
members, during the disposal of some preced- 
ing routine business, so different from their 
serious silence or close whispering just before 
the opening of other debates, in the probable 
issue of which he had known them to have been 
absorbed, struck on Gerald's heart with in- 
creased foreboding. Looking more observantly 
around him, the Treasury benches seemed better 
filled than those of the Opposition, and this did 
not give him re assurance. 

The grey-headed veteran of the Roman Ca- 
tholics arose, and, notwithstanding the previous 
symptoms of indifference, commanded great at- 
tention. It was impossible for either lukewarm 
friend or determined foe to look on him, and 
listen to him, and refuse this tribute. No mat- 
ter what might be their inclinations to the 
cause, its faithful and life-long advocate stood 
before them. Sincerity, divine sincerity, the at- 
tribute that raises man nearest to his God, — sin- 
cerity, once flashed from the eagle-eye of youth, 
and still mildly beaming upon the snowy brows 



188 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

of age, could expect and obtain no less, even 
if alone with hatred. 

Recollecting the attributed differences just 
then existing between him and his Roman Ca- 
tholic clients, perhaps there might be observ- 
able some slight want of identity with them, 
not visible on former occasions ; some subdued 
independence of every consideration but the 
abstract greatness of his cause. But no other 
change could be detected. With a peculiar elo- 
quence, which gained from his own genius 
what it wanted of the academic severities of the 
old models, he still laboured to place, upon its 
broadest pediment, the question of human 
rights and freedom. Philosophy and imagina- 
tion, so seldom found together, lent their hands 
by turns, and with equal force and propriety, 
to speed his task. In the quiescence of age, 
in the experience of reason, poetical associations 
still had their influence upon him, and, through 
him, upon his hearers too. After arguing a 
position, until it gradually assumed all the fea- 
tures of truth, the religious reverence that its na- 
ture had called up, beguiled him, for instance, 
into some old cathedral, and the pealing of the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 189 

organ-hymn through the length of the fretted 
roof, added sensations of holy influence, to the 
effects of human reasoning. He sat down ; 
and, so soon as feeling could change into ad- 
miration, the cheer that greeted the veteran 
was the united voice of the House. 

And here ended the interest of the evening. 
To Gerald's surprise and mortification, neither 
the friends nor the enemies of the measure went 
to much trouble in supporting or opposing it. 
That the venerable Henry Grattan should be 
heard at length, seemed to have been fixed; 
but that a certain result should follow, as much 
in course as if he had not opened his lips, 
seemed also taken for granted on both sides. 
Shadows and skeletons of speeches were, indeed, 
put forward ; but, connected with them, the 
sole thing which challenged Gerald's attention, 
was the fact that some were, in part, delivered 
by former supporters of emancipation, who now, 
upon principles of temporary expediency, stated 
their intention not to vote for going into a com- 
mittee. His patron, the Minister, was foremost 
in the rank of expediency-men, and, of course, 
Grattan found himself in a minority. 



190 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Why, this is worse than our debates at 
Cambridge," said Gerald to himself, as he 
made his way out of the House. 

" What 's the matter now ?"" asked his friend 
Gunning, who, with his hands and chin leaning 
on his stick, had been sitting, introduced by a 
member, listening to Grattan's speech, under 
the gallery. 

" Walk out with me and you shall hear," 
answered Gerald, offering his arm. 

" Move slower, if we are to stay together," 
said Gunning, not relishing Gerald's bustling 
through the crowds in the lobby. " Stop a mo- 
ment," — it was only an excuse to take breath 
and balance himself — " there 's the little wooden 
pillar," touching it with his stick, " that was 
covered the other day with poor Perceval's 
blood." 

They gained the piazzas and — "Well ?" — con- 
tinued Gunning. Gerald stated all his surprise, 
his disappointment, and his mortification. I 
omitted to mention that, in the moderate tem- 
perature in which he found the House, he had 
magnanimously spurned the notion of throwing 
away upon it his " cram" speech. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 191 

" And is that all ?"" resumed Gunning ; — 
" why, how would you have it ? There has 
been more talk, to be sure, on former occasions ; 
but what good did that do ? — what good would 
it do now to you, or me, or any body ?" 

" It would advance the question." 

" Not a peg. Come ; you have left school, 
and ought to be growing into a practical man. 
It is very fine for a statesman of one-and-twenty 
to tell us that we should give up a certainty for 
a probability." 

" Pray tell me more particularly what you 
mean."" 

" As particularly as you like. Englishmen 
know that they enjoy their present independ- 
ence; their liberty to read, and think, and 
speak, without a book-censor, or an inquisitor ; 
to go to church or stay at home of a rainy 
Sunday ; to pass a shovel-hat in the street with- 
out being afraid of it, — these, and other com- 
forts, they know they possess, chiefly because 
Romanists have been and are kept down. And 
do you think that they will set Romanists up 
again, upon the remotest chance of losing any 
one of their pleasant privileges "^ — or, most sa- 



192 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

pient legislator, even upon the chance of taking 
the sting out of the Romanists by making them 
all good Church of England-men ?" 

" I thought, Mr. Gunning, that a little more 
of generosity of motive and view might have 
come to the consideration of this question,"" said 
Gerald, half forsaking what he thought his own 
exclusive grounds of advocacy. 

*' Why should it ? — Generosity ! what 's that ? 
— amongst men of sense, even of the best feeling, 
properly directed, it can and ought to mean no 
more than promoting others' interests without in- 
juring your own. In any other definition, it be- 
comes wild and unprincipled impulse, destructive 
to its possessor, and dangerous to the well-being 
of society. Here is a clear case of almost cer- 
tain injury to ourselves by obliging others, and 
therefore here can be no generosity, as you 
call it." 

** These are your true sentiments ?"*' 

" To be sure they are ; and the true senti- 
ments of the maj(jrity, I tell you, of true Eng- 
lishmen — I don't care a straw about the word 
Protestant — Englishmen will do. We are re- 
flecting people — selfish, if you will — and I do 
believe, that what in other countries is called 



THE ANGLO IRISH. 193 

amor patria is, amongst us, nothing but a huge 
conglomeration of love of ourselves ; but I am 
glad of it ; I like selfishness ; there's sense in it ; 
there 's the germ of universal good in it ; be- 
cause, where every man in a country takes care 
of himself, all the men of a country will pros- 
per, and, better than that, be independently 
prosperous. I'm selfish myself; I take care of 
myself ; and 'tis because I do take care of my- 
self that I would not give another single chance 
of injuring me to these Catholics : and, I say 
again, 'tis because millions of men are of my 
mind that, till minds and things change, they 
must stay as they are." 

" I am sorry, Mr. Gunning, since it happens 
to be partly a religious question, that some 
slight religious feelings, either drawn from my 
view, or from the charitable spirit of Christia- 
nity, do not seem to influence the heavy majo- 
rity you would claim on your side." 

" Religious fiddlestick ! Charitable politics 
indeed ! all very fine for school-dreams, but ri- 
diculous when forming any part of the calcula- 
tions of a man of the world. But stop ; since 
you Aflue brought in the Church, there's the 
most holy and apostolic bench, who, though not 

VOL. I. K 



194 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

exactly with mcj are against i/ou. And how do 
you hope to dispose of them ? Have you never 
chanced to suppose that one of thj first results 
of Catholic emancipation in Ire' ^nd would be a 
strong effort, at least, to overhaul the rent-rolls 
or tithe-rolls of the Establishment ? And — al- 
though I have nothing to do with them — are 
you vab'ant enough to hope that the anointed 
lords, and their family connexions, the other 
lords, who, taken together, form, and always 
must form, two thirds of the Upper House, will 
ever contemplate a measure leading, even by 
possibility, to church retrenchment ? This is 
all as old as the moon's horns to me, but you 
really seem to have to think of it, yet." 

" But, notwithstanding your thundering pro- 
phecies, we are making way," resumed Gerald. 

" How ? — ^your question has passed the Com- 
mons. 'Tis lost again. 'Twill pass again; 
and will be lost again. But let it always pass, 
and go up to the petticoat Lords, what will you 
have gained ? what way made .'' Members of 
the Cabinet now and then vote with you. The 
votes of the same number of the dumb men 
would count as much. When you make it a 
Cabinet question I '11 speak to you more on that 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 196 

point. But it passes the Commons now, and 
some Ministers vote for it, and this did not hap_ 
pen twenty years ago. Granted. Not an inch 
of way really made yet. The true obstacles 
remain as undiminished as ever. Is it possible 
that in these seeming lapses into liberality, as 
you call it, you, a senator and a philosopher, 
see much more than the well-calculated appear- 
ances permitted, nay, organized, for the purpose 
of keeping the wild Irish people from playing 
the devil, out and out ? — ' Evidences of the 
march of mind,' and so forth I know you call 
them. Stuff. If a certain finger but wagged, 
they would, few as they are, vanish like your 
poetical mist of the morning. Do tell your dear 
Irish connexions not to be making so many mis- 
takes. But no — ^no, don't. If the delusion be 
broken, they may kick up their heels, and that 
might annoy us just now ; though as Wellesley 
is going on so well in the Peninsula, perhaps we 
may soon not care whether you do or not." 

If what certain finger wagged.''" asked 
Gerald. 

" Oh dear, oh dear !" cried Mr. Gunning, 
half affecting, half feeling peevishness ; " what 
am I to do with him ? — Hark you, our States- 
K % 



196 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

man ;— first get a majority of one hundred, in- 
stead of four or fifteen, in the Commons, and 
I'll praise you; next get the bishops to give 
you a majority of one, and I'll praise you 
more; — and — (whisper) — then get a Royal as- 
sent, drawn from the coronation -oath and the 
conscience-keeper, and then — 

' Thy stone, oh Sisyphus ! stands still, 
Ixion rests upon his wheel. 
And' — the wild Irish ' dance' — 

*' Good night ! come and see me.'' 

'* Ay," ruminated Gerald, now left alone ; 
" there might indeed have been other changes, 
as my patron says, than the change of Irish 
orators to an English Parliament, contemplated 
and meant by Mr. Pitt, in that clause ; and if 
only half of what Gunning asserts, exists in 
fact, the people of Ireland have been indeed, 
and are, allowed to make great fools of them- 
selves. Wretched people ! — And, in the same 
view the Minister and I vote according to our 
fancies, without lett or hindrance ; — ^pshaw ! 
I'm tired already ; there is nothing to be done 
but to assimilate them ; though, how that itself 
is to be done, no one will let me think." 



THB AMGLO-IRISH. 197 



CHAPTER X. 

**Next Wednesday evening," read Gerald 
out of a Morning Paper, some weeks after, " the 
Countess of Kilbane gives her first evening 
party, this season." 

" And I am to go, and here was I thinking 
it a week farther off," he continued, addressing 
Lord Clangore. " And that very day, too, we 
dine with the Minister, I believe, Walter." 

" Yes ; but you will have full time for her 
ladyship." :| 

" You forget his lady's conversazione.'''' 

" No, even allowing for that." 
, " Do you go ?" 

** I rather think — no," answered Lord Clan- 
gore tiredly ; " to you it will be agreeable 
enough, even if Lady Kilbane, or her friend Lady 
Offally, asks you to take some of the heavy 
business of their Irish-improvement-society off 



198 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

their hands ; you can laugh, or accept the ho- 
nour, just as you like, and then otherwise 
amuse yourself ; but I 've been asked so often, 
'tis death ; and then, from my ' official im- 
portance,' as they say, I am a mark for being 
asked again." 

" What is the Society about .?" 

** Mercy, Gerald; don't put such a question!" 

" Will it do any good ?" 

"Ah, how can I tell.? Gro to Lady Kil- 
bane's, and ask there, and listen — you have only 
to listen — and then judge for yourself." 

" A countess in her own right, you say ?" 

** Yes —and married twice ; and now, at for- 
ty-five, the Countess of Kilbane is still eligible 
to matrimony ; try if she 's not ; for I do sus- 
pect your many questions about her Ladyship, 
as well as about her unincumbered tract of 
Irish hills and bogs, Gerald." 

" No, sister Ann ; I 've not courage enough 
for a female blue-beard; but I'll go and see 
her." 

At about half past nine o' clock, next Wed- 
nesday night, Gerald accordingly escaped from 
a conversazione that was waxing heavy to his 
apprehension, and soon found his carriage stopt 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 199 

half the street away from the blaze of light in 
front of Lady Kilbane's mansion. After enjoy- 
ing many minutes the usual noisy emulation 
between different coachmen before him ; their 
scolding and calling names, and sometimes 
their flagellating each other, mixed with the 
dictatorial orders and commands of officers and 
constables, or the shouting of the curious crowd 
round the door, as a panel or spoke gave way 
when its enthroned director would not ; Gerald 
at last gained the skirts of a fashionable throng, 
who, immediately in advance of him, were enter- 
ing the hall, or bustling up the stairs. Before he 
could make much way, a strange double-knock 
sounded at the door, now closed behind him ; 
and, as he turned in quick surprise, a servant 
admitted a strange-looking visitor. This was 
a little old man, low, fat, and waddling in his 
gait, with a healthy red and white but most vul- 
gar face, a vast bald head, and wearing, loosely 
buttoned about him, a kind of easy great-coat, 
misshaped and uncouth, and of a coarse mate- 
rial, such as, to Gerald's eye, seemed of fo- 
reign manufacture. 

" Is your lady in the place. Sir T^ — asked 
this person of a sneering servant, speaking in 



200 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

an Irish brogue, too broad even for the gross 
stage caricature, as he slowly took pf his na- 
tional wrap-rascal and handed it to be put by, 
now showing himself clad all in new black, and 
standing in a pair of hob-shoes, covered, as was 
the skirt of the great-coat, with the mire of the 
streets, through which he had tramped to the 
rendezvous of elegance and fashion. 

" Tell her Ladyship, then, that Misther Cor- 
nelius O'Hanlon is here below," he resumed, 
after the attendant had answered in his own 
way, and, half shrinking back, accepted, be- 
tween a finger and thumb, the precious article 
committed to his care — " but stop, my friend," 
still pursued Mr. O'Hanlon — "there's some- 
thing in the right-hand pocket of that snug 
coat I '11 be asking from you ; it isn't with 
these upon my feet I *d go up to her Lady- 
ship," smiling and pointing to his brogues, as 
they might be — "but as the streets were so bad 
for walking, I just drew them on to save the 
clane pair I put in the pocket : — give 'em, and 
I'll thank you ; I can just sit down here, in the 
corner of the hall, while the company is mo- 
ving up, and put them on the poor feet." 
' The scandalized attendant indignantly led 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 201 

him into a room off the hall ; and by the time 
that Gerald gained the middle of the stairs, 
Mr. O'Hanlon, holding with both hands by the 
bannisters, and his clean shoes creaking at 
every step, waddled to his side, and, Gerald 
drawing back, passed him. 

Looking through the door which allowed a 
view of the spot Lady Kilbane had chosen to 
receive her visitors, Gerald soon after saw him 
make his bow, and (but not until he had stood 
some time, evidently to her embarrassment, at 
the side of his hostess,) turn off with another 
singular-looking man, and retire to a corner. 
Mr. O'Hanlon's acquaintance showed, indeed, 
little of the peculiar vulgarity which fully in- 
vested himself; yet it was almost as startling to 
see, in such a situation, one or other of the gen- 
tlemen. His face was not, like Mr. D'Hanlon's, 
broad, round, and ruddy, and surmounted by 
a shining ball of bare skull; yet its swarthy 
paleness, its close deep expression, its large 
black watchful eyes, and the sleek black hair 
that ran straight across the forehead, within an 
inch of the brows, gave, no more than did Mr. 
CHanlon's, any notion of rank, or even of gen- 
tlemanly habits of mind or person. 
K 5 



202 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Defend me !" thought Gerald ; " amid the 
refinements of this assemblage and place ; amid 
Lady Kilbane's tasteful decorations, her flowers, 
her plants, her furniture, her music, her blazing 
lamps, and her little army of sumptuous atten- 
dants, how, or why, in the name of taste and 
probability, are those two persons found here ?" 

He caught, for an instant, the eye of his 
highly-rouged hostess, and, as he took a step 
towards her, Gerald's surprise did not abate in 
consequence of some words of (though they 
were not addressed to him) explanation upon 
the very puzzle that absorbed him. 

A serious, if not stately lady, of the middle 
age, leaning upon the arm of — Gerald knew — 
her husband, as serious, and claiming by his 
brow and air to be still more stately than she, 
were passing Lady Kilbane, after a salute, when 
the lady's glances fixed on Mr. O'Hanlon, now 
at a distance, and, in obvious wonder, she di- 
rected her husband's attention, by looking into 
his face, towards that individual. 

" Ask me could I have helped it, dear Lady 
OfTally," whispered Lady Kilbane, loud enough, 
however, to be heard by Gerald, " and 1 answer 
I never thought of the poor gentleman till this 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 20S 

very day, after the Education Meeting, where, 
you know, he said so much to the purpose in 
furtherance of our exertions; and then, you 
may remember, you left him chatting at the 
door with Mr. Loupe and me, and I was com- 
pelled to interrupt what he was advising, and 
defer it to another time, when, in the great 
simplicity of heart that so much characterizes 
him, he proposed to attend me, at my house, 
this evening ; and as Mr. Loupe was by, and is 
his friend, patron rather, and all of us willing 
to meet Mr. Loupe any where, and he so anx- 
ious too, to get O'Hanlon in wherever good 
may be done — in fact, I was compelled to say 
yes ; the trouble being, however," continued 
Lady Kilbane, with a smile, " to have him un- 
derstand that he was not to call * at tay-time.'" 

" Perhaps, indeed," said Lady OfFally, " good 
may be done by making Mr. O'Hanlon more 
known ; and, after all, his peculiarities are not 
his faults.'' 

" And having run such risks with his old 
friends," resumed Lady Kilbane, " he is enti- 
tled to our protection. Besides, a little atten- 
tion of this kind will make him what he is so 
anxious to become, for the sake of the new cause 



204 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

he engages in — more English than, without us, 
he could possibly be." 

Lord and Lady Offally passed on, and 
Gerald saw an opportunity to make his bow to 
Lady Kilbane, and, immediately after, he was 
obliged, without a word, to yield place to a 
group of new guests. Turning away, the sound 
of a stick, on the carpet, at measured intervals, 
caught his ear from behind ; and a glance round 
showed him his old acquaintance Mr. Gunning. 

" The trio of originals complete !" — said 
Gerald, " though his presence here is not so 
surprising." 

" I was off but that I saw you," said Gun- 
ning. 

" Tired so soon ?" 

** Yes — of the two men I 've just left yon- 
der.'' 

" What two r 

" One of them a countryman of yours." 

" I am not quite Irish, you know.'' 

" Well — that's the very thing he says ; half- 
Irish." 

" Tell me about him." 

" Mr. Cornelius O'Hanlon was, till about 
two years ago, a hedge-schoolmaster in the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 205 

kingdom of Kerry, teaching his ragged boys to 
bless themselves and * consther' Homer, and 
going to mass every Sunday, and to heaven, 
as his Milesian sires had gone before him. 

" But some echoes of some of the Bible-meet- 
ings got up by you half-Irish people, and, 
indeed, by us whole-English people, found their 
way to Mr. O'Hanlon, in the solitude of his 
thatched seminary ; and, either getting a call, 
or curious to try a new calling, he turned round 
upon his parish-priest, and became a stout 
biblical. Perhaps he had wit enough to anti- 
cipate that the novelty of his appearance in the 
field would, as much as any thing else, create an 
interest for him ; I mean his personal as well 
as any other appearance ; in fact, the real, living 
descendant of a hundred old popish Milesians, 
coming over in his frieze coat at sixty years of 
age, ynih his luscious brogue, and his rustic 
simplicity, as it were, a converted soul from the 
darkness of Popery to the light of Scripture- 
knowledge, might, even to Mr. Cornelius's 
innocent thoughts, be a very picturesque and 
effective matter." 

„ Has he since lived in London ?"" 

" Chiefly, I believe ; the resentment of his 



206 THE ANGLO-IRISH, 

former friends, in Ireland, and all that, not 
being a thing to be faced ; and it is marvellous 
in what places I have met him, telling his 
smooth Kerry stories about himself and his 
conversion, and the thirst he had left, before he 
quitted them, upon the souls of his bog-trotting 
countrymen, for the word of life,— and all such 
admirable matter." 

" Now, his friend, Mr. Loupe." 

*' Oh, I see you've heard of him, then. I 
can't well make that man out. But ask Lady 
Kilbane; perhaps she can. This is her fifth 
season in town, since the death of her second 
spouse; and as, whether from fear of her, or 
that she grows so vast, to say nothing else, few 
among her own set seem over anxious to give 
her a third chance (between you and me, the 
first two died of her) ; as this is whispered to be 
the case, her ladyship, now arrived at the se- 
rious days of life, becomes Godly, and is given 
to religious societies, religious meetings, and 
Mr. Loupe." 

" Where did she find him ?" 

" I don't know. Nobody knows where lie 
came from, or to what country or tribe he be- 
longs. Purely for the sake of poking him out, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 207 

I have myself been at the trouble of talking to 
Mr. Loupe ; but while the language he speaks 
is certainly not English, but rather a kind of 
foreign idiom translated into English words, 
and those words not every-day words either, 
but the strangest old-fashioned cant, picked out 
of the Old Testament, still I hesitate to call 
him German, Italian, Turk, or Hamburg Jew. 
My best surmise, however, is, that he has been 
an old clothes-man.'* 

" A Jewish convert ?"" 

" Don 't ask me, I tell you ; his own rigma- 
role account of himself is the puzzle. If you 
credit him, we have the honour of redeeming 
him, not from an aversion to pork, but from a 
professorship in the Vatican, I believe; and 
he farther talks of having been at the tops of a 
great many mountains in Asia, distributing, 
with permission of Popish Patriarchs, that 's 
the best of it, half-crown Bibles to Jews and 
Romanists he found there. And he has been, 
or is to be, in Ireland, too, assisting Mr. Priest- 
ly, who is here to-night, and Lord Harmer, 
and yourself, and the whole of you, in the 
reformation of that popish country. Go and 
speak to him ; he will delight you." 



208 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Mr. Gunning turned away, but Gerald did 
not follow his advice. He saw matter more 
attractive for conversation. Through the open 
door of a second room appeared his old ac- 
quaintance, Lady Cox, sitting upon a sofa, and 
listening gravely, and, he thought, stupidly, to 
a young dragoon officer, who, his complete dress 
of scarlet half hid in lace, and his spurs intrud- 
ed amongst flounces and slippers, sat, lounging 
sideways, the very prince of elegant puppies, as, 
with persevering smiles and ceaseless sentences, 
he lispingly addressed her. The young and 
pretty Lady Cox had changed in appearance 
since Gerald and she last met. Her fine form 
was more matured ; it displayed a womanly 
luxury of line ; but, Gerald thought, had an air 
of indifference to its own appearance, a neglect 
of display, that might be called half sad, half 
slovenly, and that the impression of the hand- 
some face to which it belonged farther illus- 
trated. While Lady Cox wore her splendid 
dress in almost the carelessness of dishabille, 
her slightly-pencilled black eye-brows — t,o the 
destruction of the perfect arch Gerald remem- 
bered them to have once described — without 
positive frowning almost touched her eyelids ; 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 209 

those lids half closed over the dark eyes, that 
used, when nearly rounded in natural expan- 
sion, to flash good humour and enjoyment on 
every side ; and her small, full lips, of which 
the former habit had been to remain apart, 
out-breathing the joyous spirit within, were 
now closed in a hard, discontented pout, the 
linder-one pressed into little wrinkles, and 
changed from ruby-red to a cold, bloodless 
colour. Her cheeks, indeed, were rounder than 
ever, assisted, perhaps, in this character, by 
the firm closing of her mouth. 

It was evident, as has been intimated, that 
she did not care one farthing about all the lan- 
guid efforts made by her military fop to interest 
her ; and yet Gerald felt an unnecessary impa- 
tience of the self-assumed ease with which he 
lisped on, so close at her ear. Who was he who 
could thus engage, indeed monopolize, so inter- 
esting a woman ? — " And what is that to you .''" 
asked Gerald's common sense of Gerald's non- 
sense. " Pho !"" answered would-be wisdom ; " I 
have known her and her husband ; and her hus- 
band is not now at her side, and this dandy is ; 
that 'sail.'' 

Lady Cox, turning lazily, caught his eye at 



210 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

the moment, and, as she half clapped her small 
gloved hands, a change came over her dull ex- 
pression of face and manner, that in a degree 
restored both to their old character. Gerald did 
not pause to analyse the nature of the interest 
with which he now rapidly stepped up to her. 
They met ; and Lady Cox would have " an 
Irish shake-hands from her old friend Gerald 
Blount." 

" Blount .P" lisped the young officer, at her 
side, " Gerald Blount r 

" Flood ! is it possible V and Gerald with 
some difficulty recognised his Westminster 
class-mate. They had not met since Gerald left 
school for College ; Flood, at the early age of 
sixteen, having entered into active service on 
the Peninsula. So here was what ought to be 
one of the proverbially delightful meetings be- 
tween old school-fellows, long separated, and 
again coming in contact with each other in man- 
hood, and in the world. Gerald, indeed, was 
almost springing to shake Flood's hand, when 
an extended little finger of that gallant person, 
covered with white shining kid, seemed to give 
the cue for moderate transports. There was no 
superciliousness in the action, no half-cutting ; — 



THE ANGLO IRISH. 211 

considering; the whole character of the man, ab- 
solutely no coldness even ; Gerald did not there- 
fore draw back, or draw up ; but, after a mo- 
ment's quick reasoning, advanced a little finger 
in return, and was only very much amused. 

Friendship of boyhood ! delicious is your re- 
collection said to be, but sad are your common 
fate and history. After all that has been be- 
lieved to the contrary, how seldom does your 
scented blossom bring forth ripe fruit ! I tread 
in imagination within the now deserted precincts 
of the old school-house, where to know was to 
attach and be attached, and a friend meets me 
in every young shiny face, and in the accents of 
every gabbling tongue ; I quit my dream, and, 
standing out in the world, I look round for 
those faces, and listen for those accents; and, 
alas ! I see them not — I hear them not ! Some 
of the old familiar features are changed into 
coldness or dislike ; a word, I may have 
penned or spoken, and forgotten — an articu- 
lated pufP of breath has made them enemies ; 
others are estranged from the mere maturity of 
different characters within us, that in the 
little miniature world of the school-house had 
not developed themselves, or had been unno- 



SIS THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

ticed, or mistaken ; — and others still vail to my 
glance, in the sad inferiority of social degrada- 
tion. Oh ! of the fading of many into the con- 
fusing shadows of the tomb, I speak not, think 
not ; but of the fortunes of those friends of 
childhood and of boyhood, whom in every other 
way I have lost, a tale might be told, exhibit- 
ing in epitome all the causes for regret, for 
moralizing, for tiredness of human life and ex- 
perience, for very dislike of human nature, and 
yet, more than all, for the revellings of human 
pity, to an extent, and in a diversity, that would 
startle, with truth and wonder, every heart ! — 
Ay, were I to show how, one by one, the smil- 
ing eyes of youthful friendship grew cold or 
abashed to mine, and how, scarcely with an ex- 
ception, they left me to form, in the unnerving 
scrutiny of observation, new preferences, new 
facilities for enjoying life, I must necessarily 
compile a journal of true romance, so absorbing, 
so wretched, and in some instances, so terrible, 
that the philosophy which would confine its 
study to man, need not require with it a se- 
cond volume, in order to grow perfect in know- 
ledge, in reflection, and in disgust ! 

*' My excellent fellow, how d' ye do ?" asked 



THE \NGLO-IRISH. 213 

Flood, in a shrill variation of tone from his or- 
dinary flippant lisp, as their little fingers touch- 
ed : — " and where have you been lost during the 
awful and tradesman-like lapse of, I take it, 
seven whole years since we parted at Westmin- 
ster ? I've caught, it strikes me, a confused 
notion of your recent visibility among human 
affairs, and, I rather believe, was to have in- 
quired you out, or some such thing; but, friend 
of my youth, and all that, to what purpose have 
you breathed, I still venture to ask, until the 
month before the last, or thereabout ?'' 

Gerald, good humouredly, gave an account 
of himself. " As to you. Flood," he continued, 
" I thought, but that I meet you here to-night, 
I should have been at no trouble to supply a 
general idea of your life, during the same period 
of seven years ; but I suppose you have only 
just been dispatched home from the Peninsula." 

" Ah, no! too flattering biographer; more than 
five years, as they told me, I was, indeed, now 
and then bored, along with many others, in march- 
ing and countermarching after the very tiresome 
French people, and sometimes put to the trouble 
of marching on before them, and sometimes of 
knocking them on the head, or of taking a knock 



214 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

from them" — this, to Gerald's observation, was 
indeed apparent ; for from beneath the fair and 
well-curled and well-oiled hair of the narrator 
issued a sabre cut, that obliquely traversed his 
round boyish cheek, proclaiming, amid the very 
consummation of coxcombry of character, some 
abiding portion of the cool, unostentatious bravery 
that, in the case of the young Irishman, Wil- 
liams, had distinguished him at school ; indeed, 
of his bravery, as well as of his other good quali- 
ties. Flood never was ostentatious; but, amusing 
to say, no human being took more pains to dis- 
play his own follies and nonsense ; — " and so 
wore away the dull time — but nay ; ungrateful 
and oblivious that I am ;— thus it did not. I've 
but mentioned the exceedingly tedious accidents 
of life ; its real business went on among the 
sunny cottages or curious old family castles of 
the fair south, where sun-burnt beauty, not 
less beauty for all that, tended the war-worn 
man, night and day, or with guitar and castanet 
made him dances in the noon-tide shade — vastly 
natural, fine women, the women of those coun- 
tries, Lady Cox ; — and black hair, black eyes, 
high foreheads, and httle, little red mouths, and 
the shape tending to the embonpoint^ quite their 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 215 

Standard of beauty, suffer me to assure you." 
This digression was delivered in a lisp of, to Ge- 
rald^s ear, confounded impudence, as the half 
closed eyes of Flood languidly glanced from one 
to another of the characteristics he enumerated, 
so obvious in the face and form of Lady Cox ; 
** And then, good Blount, all this apart, one does 
get such things, and, if one will be at the trou- 
ble, learn such things, in those abroad-places ; 
it is enormously agitating to bring matters to 
mind, as connected with dates and localities ; 
but, as it just now strikes me, it was at or 
about a village called Niza, while domesticated 
in the prettiest villa in Portugal, among the 
freshest-hearted creatures. Lady Cox, that I 
had the happiness to obtain my two dozen of 
undoubted Barcelonas ; in the citadel, or some 
such part, of Badajos, an old Frenchman, my 
prisoner on parole, after that excessively annoy- 
ing affair, gave me, out of pure gratitude, my 
peerless marasquina — and oil-of-lavender-black- 
ing receipt, which I would not exchange for a 
majority ; an ancient man, with a vastly long 
beard, Turkish I fancy, who attended our camp 
near Merida, let me have, after days of negoti- 
ations, for fifty pounds, my box of cigars, (in- 



S16 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

eluding my amber cigar-tube,) of which even 
the yet unexhausted portion is beyond double the 
money ; — my incomparable Poodle — (some aver 
the original chien Munito; he can do such 
things. Lady Cox — every thing but speak, — 
and sometimes he rather startles me with that 
too, as we sit alone together, I not minding 
him, over my meerchaum, and he at last losing 
patience, asking me to play with him,) — my 
Poodle, I say, I picked up on the road to Bur- 
gos ; this quiz-chain, true Asiatic twist and joint, 
and weighing above half a pound of gold, cost 
me a little trouble ; — at Talavera, if I do not 
atrociously err, I happened to see one of our 
fellows disposed to sabre a young officer of the 
very teazing enemy, who was already down, 
and, you know, the case required me to go to 
the trouble of taking the cut on my own sword ; 
but the uncommon inconvenience the young 
Frenchman put me to did him no good, for the 
bullet he had previously received was abun- 
dantly sufficient for him, without the favour 
intended by our rascal; in truth, I imagine he 
did not hold out above a few minutes after I 
spoke to him ; but the youth fancied I was so 
friendly that his very last words endowed me 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 217 

with this trophy. I value it on his account 
as well as its own," continued Flood, " for even 
during the very limited period of our mortal ac- 
quaintance I had a notion — though I do deeply 
sicken at what you philosophers, my Blount, 
call observation of character — I had, however, 
an excessively slight notion that I might have 
liked the lad, provided he could have arranged 
to stand up, take my arm, and limp with me to 
my quarters, and afterwards live, like a rational 
person, some time within the sphere of my ac- 
quaintance. Poor fellow !" he went on, forget- 
ting for an instant his affectation, much to Ge- 
rald's delight, though immediately after he re- 
sumed it — " poor fellow ! he pressed my hand 
too, in their violent French way ; and it occurs 
to me as possible that the absolutely last word 
he tried, and could not finish, was — ' mother !' 
but confound him, — that's all such vast non- 
sense." 

The self-compelling military dandy here took 
out a gold snuff-box, but with a " bah ! — only 
my engine-turned," put it up again and pro- 
duced a second, an antique, richly and curiously 
embossed, and adding *' ay — here is the true 

VOL. I. L 



218 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

high-dried !" exquisitely flattered his nasal appe- 
tite with a few grains held on the upturned 
thumb. 

" Ahj poor, vain human nature I" said Lady 
Cox in an " aside," that only Gerald heard, 
and that was uttered very gravely, and follow- 
ed by a little groan. He did not know what 
to make of the expression, or of the manner 
and cadence accompanying it ; but supposing 
the present moment unfelicitous for hinting at 
an explanation, turned again to his old school- 
fellow. 

" How do our mere countrymen get on in 
the field, Flood .?" 

" The question rather preposterously sup- 
poses one disposed to make observations," re- 
plied Flood, proceeding with his pinch ; " but 
against any such inexpressibly curious chimera, 
I 've a faint notion my voice has before been 
slightly heard. However, people you are 
amongst do talk of those things, and it does, 
in a most shadowed manner, occur to me that 
I may produce some remote resemblance of an 
answer to your serious and incommodious ques- 
tion, worthy Blount. Generally, then, you will 
comprehend that our mere and dear Irish con- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 219 

nexions do not get on at all ; that is, I incline 
to believe, using the term in the sense of ad- 
vancing themselves in the noncommissioned 
list, or in the particular estimation of discipli- 
narians ; but nothing inclining by it to aver 
that, in the field, with the bayonet, they do 
not get on considerably, one may suppose, to 
the inconvenience of the enemy, and, it may 
be added, in a monstrously ferocious way. My 
most esteemed parent, Sir Robert Flood, has 
had the honour of counting some regiments of 
them in his brigade ; and from him, and many 
other people, (if one could be bored by minute 
recollection of things,) as well, I may distantly 
venture to intimate, as by one's individual re- 
marks, (if, again, one could always be bound 
to recall the matters that one's eyes present 
to one's comprehension,) but by those several 
means, perhaps, it has reached me that the 
pure Hibernian fellows on the Peninsula may 
be said to be exceedingly good for close and 
hot work ; for instance — as I fancy I have 
just now indicated — the turning a wing with 
the steel ; or taking the forlorn-hope across a 
lake or river, in open boats, under a three- 
tiered battery of grape, into some kind of 
L 2 



220 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

breach or other, upon which no ordinarily- 
rational person would make attempt, even sup- 
posing the open-boat business remotely out 
of the question; and now it does occur, in' a 
less faint shape, that at the word ' prepare to 
charge !' they are in the preposterous habit of 
taking off and hiding under some bush or 
stone their shoes and gaiters, and then gal- 
lopping forward, rather than observing the al- 
lotted double quick time, with very extraor- 
dinary yells, to the column pointed out for 
their work" — and Flood went on, his sympa- 
thizing bravery once more nearly putting his 
affectation out—" I 've an idea, like that of a 
scattered dream, of some such event, that once, 
while on such a forlorn-hope as T in the second 
instance glanced at, they used to send up, from 
their little boats, the same atrocious descrip- 
tion of national war-whoop, for every shower of 
grape and shell that came from the old fortress, 
though with it, portions and members of them- 
selves flew rather numerously over the water, 
and boats sunk or turned up, and so forth, 
until by the time a landing happened to occur, 
one fellow out of twenty might have been in 
a convenient state to efi^ect it ; but to all this 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 221 

let it be added that the provost-serjeants, and 
the trees of Portugal and Spain were much 
inconvenienced by them, in consequence of 
their occasional abduction, upon, perhaps, a 
forced march, or sometimes during some- 
thing resembling a run, as from Burgos, of 
such hens and ducks, kids, lambs and little 
pigs, as were to be found in the track of a 
column." 

" In fact," said Gerald, " they are occasion- 
ally good auxiliaries in a field ; but an army 
exclusively composed of them " 

" Would, it occurs to me, be with consider- 
able facility outmanoeuvred, surrounded, cut 
off from supplies, or such things," interrupted 
Flood. 

" But not as easily beaten hand to hand ?" 
still questioned Gerald. 

" Possibly not — that is, if you are disposed 
somewhat explicitly to mean, good Blount, the 
very limited portion of success, in rather exten- 
sive affairs, which may be said to depend on 
mere fighting." 

" I 've heard you mention you had not lately 
returned from the Peninsula, Flood." 

" My good Blount, if I were to particularly 



222 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

tax my memory, I do suppose nearly two hu- 
man years have elapsed since my excellent fa- 
ther sent me, not to England, but to dear, dear 
Ireland, to be nursed, as he and my Irish old- 
maiden friends called it, out of the accidental 
results of a hurt I had had the honour to receive 
at Fm sure I will not now aver where." 

** I remember it, however," said Gerald, 
" and remember, too, that the newspaper list 
gave but few hopes to an old school-fellow of 
ever seeing you again, though it had missed me 
that we are indebted to Irish hands for almost 
completely restoring your visage to its original 
comeliness." 

" It was not this, my excellent fellow," touch- 
ing his cheek, " but rather one of the French 
rausket-balls, so remarkably smaller than ours, 
which caused the slight inconvenience we allude 
to : a few months, however, in Ireland,again made 
your ancient friend fit for the aspirations after 
the tented field, and so forth, that I can recol- 
lect we used so poetically to read of, now and 
then, at Westminster ; and my gracious parent 
received due intimation of the circumstance. 
But he was pleased to impose his commands for 
a still longer sojourn in the greenest isle in the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 223 

world ; and to render his sentence remotely to- 
lerable, your exile became appointed aid-du- 
camp to the deputy King of that emerald coun- 
try ; nay, and held his distinguished appoint- 
ment until within a very few days ago, under 
the successor of the vice-regal monarch it was 
his felicity first to serve. And oh ! curious- 
minded and man-and-thing-observing Blount ! 
why were you not in my place, to be inexpres- 
sibly the better for all I saw and heard, — but, 
for your inestimable sake be it regretted, cannot 
now accurately call up to improve you ? Some 
snatches of the agreeable dream I was, however, 
attempting for Lady Cox's attentive ear, before 
you condescended to join us." 

" Go on, go on," said Gerald. 

" School-mate, never distress one by asking 
in so impatient a way ; but I conjecture I had, 
when you came up, just been noticing to her 
Ladyship, the regal state and observances of 
my first Irish Sovereign. He was a big, a very 
big vice-king, addicted, out of patronage of his 
adopted people, to playing of rackets, and im- 
bibing the illicit distillation of their mountain 
corn. As one of his pun-gtnt Dublin judges 
said of his own situation, my monarch kept a 



224 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

racket-court — be it permitted to his Excel- 
lency's ex-servant to add, inside his castle, 
as well as out of it. The never-fading ho- 
nour has been mine to hold the deputy royal 
hat, coat, and vest, (and dram and bottle, 
too,) while, clad in Welsh flannel, his mus- 
cular arm struck out the bounding racket- 
ball. The unpretending individual who sits 
before you has listened twice, or, could he 
boast a memory, perhaps more than that, to 
the historical anecdote of the York whisker, its 
destruction and scattering to the winds of Hea- 
ven, by the fierce pistol-bullet of his illustrious 
chief. 

" Under this, my first master, we were all 
Orange.'' 

" Do, Flood," interrupted Gerald, " since 
you must have seen and heard so much about 
it, do tell me exactly what that word means^ in 
Ireland ?" 

** Incredibly monstrous question, fellow-stu- 
dent. Hope nothing from us, * exactly.' One 
cannot be an Irish party prism in your philo- 
sophic hands, to collect, so very precisely, the 
intellectual rays, that, in your paternal land, 
fascinate the eye with orange, blue, or green. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 225 

We were Orange, I aver, and I aver no more. 
Our court graciously received Orange addresses, 
congratulations, and duteous requests not to go 
away, and we vouchsafed affectionate answers. 
There was a statue of a man with a philibeg on 
horseback, in the middle of a Dublin street, and 
this was our Jaggernaut ; and neither the old 
man of the sea, nor the metal man that rowed 
a boat round the adamantine mountain, nor yet 
the metal horse on the top of that mountain, 
three personages to be met with, 1 fancy, in 
the pleasant volumes of the Arabian Nights' 
Entertainments, ever created a more absorbing 
interest. The question was, should the egg be 
broken for eating at top or bottom ? in other 
words, should this bare-legged man and his 
horse be dressed or not be dressed, with a score 
yards of ribbons, once or twice in the year ? 
Behold the grand question that agitated our 
Court. Your poor friend and orator has as- 
sisted at its discussion, and conveyed dispatches 
about it, often enough to entitle him slightly 
and modestly, to lay claim to the gratitude of 
his paternal country. 

" It does not strongly occur to me to deno- 
minate our colour under my next master. Per- 
L 5 



226 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

haps it might be speculatively called a dun- 
colour ; or, if we were Orange, we did not imme- 
diately care to blazon it forth ; or we had vastly 
more serious things to do. Our Court now 
became a proper, virtuous, well-behaved Court. 
We cultivated turnips in the lawn of our Vice- 
Regal Lodge in the Phoenix Park : and our 
Deputy-Queen and the young Princesses held 
sober drawing-rooms, or went forth arraytd in 
Dublin Liberty Tabinet, to rescue, by a sub- 
scription ball at the Rotunda, thousands of the 
vastly ingenious manufacturers of that excellent 
and glossy article, from immediate demise by 
hunger, and the dearth of Bible." 

*' Pray be less profane in your expressions, 
Captain Flood," said Lady Cox, severely. He 
flowed on without minding. 

*' There our sovereign and his consort sat on 
little thrones, and we of the household, the cor- 
poration, the law, and the prescription, formed 
around a goodly court. It was excessively en- 
tertaining. One could hardly see king and 
queen better performed at the more regular 
theatres ; and all the tabinet women of Dublin 
round about us ; all the lady-mayoresses for 
twenty years before, mostly keeping their titles, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 227 

because during office, James, John, or Tom, 
had been dubbed Sir John, Sir James, or Sir 
Tom ; and the sheriffs* wives, too, all calling 
each other ' my lady,' and the whole of this 
being Dublin aristocracy." 

" Come, Flood, now show us a few of the 
beauties of your Rotunda assembly,'' said Ge- 
rald. 

" Indeed !" resumed Flood, speaking to him- 
self; " can it be so possible?" quite re-assuming 
the languid lisp he had lately in a degree for- 
gotten. " Yes, though — -Blount, your pardon — 
Lady Cox, yours — to think of seeing her here I" 
and with his curious quizzing-glass, suspended 
from his half-pound Asiatic gold-chain, he was 
sliding off, when the catching of his spur in one 
of Lady Cox's negligently -disposed flounces, 
caused a moment's demur. With Gerald's as- 
sistance, however, — Flood scarcely noticing the 
disaster, but still looking off — the flounce was 
quickly restored to its liberty, and at last the 
gallant young dandy clanked to a card-table, 
and they saw him address and stand over the 
chair of a very charming young girl. 

" And now he is gone," said Lady Cox, " I 
don't know when I have been so much relieved. 



228 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

He 's a very tiresome, spoilt young man. I 
knew him in Dublin ; hut, although not Inde- 
pendent in point of personal happiness of any 
proper friendly attention, his levity, and I 
repeat what I've just charged him with — his 
irreligious turn, were not the things for me." 

" How !** cried Gerald, still quite at a loss 
to make out Lady Cox in her new character, 
" and could so much merit, in every way, 
stand in need of — '''' 

" Mr. Blount,"' interrupted her Ladyship 
more gravely than ever, while her e} es sought 
the floor, '* if, at a former period of our acquaint- 
ance I was child enough to interchange such silly 
allusions and conversations, allow me to inform 
you, that reflection and good example, assisted, 
perhaps, by the want of the personal happiness I 
have before alluded to, now warn me to adopt 
a diff*efent style of speaking, as well indeed, as 
of acting. I am, let me be thankful for it," 
her dark eyes half moistened, were here lifted 
up, — " I am in time, I hope, arrived at the 
settled conviction, that in this uncertain and 
contemptible Ufe we have only one anchor, one 
true source of enjoyment." 

" Then I have the honour to think with you. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 229 

Madam," said Gerald, getting out of his puz- 
zle a little ; yet why any portion of the conver- 
sation they might have held together, during 
the short period of their last and first meeting 
should thus be so particularly, and, he thought, 
penitentially adverted to, seemed to propose a 
new puzzle, though of a different kind. 

" And,"" continued the young, and, notwith- 
standing her protest, the still almost childish 
Lady Cox — " and Mr. Blount, the reason why, 
without either affectation or doubt, I tell you 
I can draw some interest from your conver- 
sation in general society, is, because from my 
observation of your character I think you 
well-founded in religious principles at least, 
and therefore, not likely to speak as irreve- 
rently as other young men do on religious sub- 
jects." 

" How suddenly sage the lady gets ! This 
is partly sullenness, on some domestic account ; 
partly affectation, in spite of her disclaim- 
er ; and partly caught from some Dublin 
Saint-Society," thought Gerald : but, when he 
spoke aloud, he made proper acknowledgments 
for the confidence placed in him, and the honour 
done him. 



230 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Both remained an instant silent. Then, act- 
ing upon the first partial cause ascribed by 
him for the lady's humour, he sudd.enly asked, 
looking round on every side, " Where 's Sir 
Richard ?" 

" Oh, Mr. Blount !" in almost sufficient ener- 
gy to attract twenty neighbouring eyes, " can 
you ask so cruel a question ?" 

"Cruel! I beg pardon for any mistake I 
may have made ; but let me also assure your 
Ladyship, I was unaware of any one circum- 
stance calculated to make my question disagree- 
able." 

" Then I forgive you for it ; but no more 
now ; Lady Offally, Lady Angelica Hunt, Miss 
Flint, Miss De Vere, my mamma, and all their 
coterie come this way : and do not go either ; 
what they come to talk about ought to interest 
you." 

" Is he dead ? or drinking claret, or whisky 
punch, day and night, in old Ireland ? or lying 
ill of typhus fever, or what ?'^ soliloquised 
Gerald. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 231 



CHAPTER XI. 

Op the group alluded to by Lady Cox, 
Gerald exchanged symptoms of recognition with 
Lord and Lady OfFally, with Mrs. Sparrow, 
mother to Lady Cox, and wife of an Irish 
Archdeacon, whom in softness of manner, of 
face, or person, and even of voice, she little 
resembled ; with Lords Horsemantown, and 
Harmer, and with the sombre, grand-looking 
Mr. Priestly ; and Lady OfFally made him known 
to the Lady Angelica Hunt, " her sister patro- 
ness," and to the Misses De Vere and Betsy 
Fhnt, the first " one of the Secretaries to the 
London Committee of the Parent Society ;" the 
other a Secretary also, to the most considerable 
of the very important Irish associations branch- 
ing from it. 

"Patronesses and Secretaries?" queried Ge- 
rald, as he got through his bows ; " Parent 
Society and Branching Associations? — oh, I 



232 THE ANGLO-IRISH, 

forgot; here we have the matter Clangore 
warned me of." 

" And now, Mr. Blount,*' said the seriously- 
dignified Lady OfFally, " we come to you across 
the room to make a request, and you cannot 
refuse us." 

"You won't,"" Mr. Blount, pleaded Miss Flint, 
with a fussy energy of features that had seen 
their spring-time, and that appeared cast in 
the very mould for business; " you won't, 
because we all know your sentiments on the 
subject of poor Ireland, and your disposition to 
do good of any kind, and your talents to do 
whatever you like; and when you hear how 
heavy our duties are becoming, and consider 
how much more fitted for certain parts of offi- 
cial affairs you gentlemen are, than we poor 
ladies, and the great deal more you have in 
your power, every way, — and then our loan- 
system, that cannot, according to the tiresome 
Act of Parliament, go on with security to our 
funds, unless a committee of gentlemen be 
ready to assist us in the recovering of sums 
from defaulters, and idle, cheating people, in 
every district in Ireland — think of that ; when 
you call all this to mind, I am sure, I say, you 
will afford us a hand and a heart together." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 233 

Gerald while bowing in double acknowledg- 
ment of the compliments contained in the first 
part of this address, and of general acquiescence 
in the claim made upon him, could scarce restrain 
a smile at the facility of speech it rather omi- 
nously imported in, he ventured to surmise, 
the person of some Irish town-goody, who, 
from her recent appointment as " Secretary" 
and correspondent with the " London com- 
mittee," drew the present pride and glory of her 
existence. 

" It is, indeed, impossible," said Lady An- 
gelica Hunt, in whose full, rich, and widely 
parted lips and beautiful long neck, Gerald 
recognized the original of the companion for 
the Chapeau-de-Paille, painted by an eminent 
artist, either at her ladyship's or her honour- 
able husband's instance, and since engraved 
and hung up in all the print-shops through 
town ; — " it is, indeed, impossible that ladies 
should engage in a work of any extent without 
being frequently and painfully aware of their 
own deficiency of strength to carry it on with 
the degree of vigour, perseverance and exactness 
which they so much desire to apply to it; and 
I may add, that, fully agreeing with me, the 
honourable Everard Hunt is, so far as his in- 



234 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

tentions can go, seriously disposed to co-operate 
in our views." 

*' The degree of precision and constant at- 
tention," subjoined Miss De Vere, whose Eng- 
lish sobriety of manner, simplicity and beauty, 
interested Gerald more even than the ardour of 
her Irish sister Secretary, *' which is required 
in those who have the chief management, would 
be a mere nothing to men of business." 

** Whose hearts are interested in the service 
of their God and the welfare of their fellow- 
creatures," sighed, or rather slightly groaned 
the pious Lady Cox ; her untidy charms and 
her sullenness still keeping up, in Gerald's 
mind, a provoking, and, though they should 
not have done so, a kind of unholy interest. 

*' Nothing effective can ensue if a committee 
of gentlemen are not ready, in every part of 
Ireland, to prosecute the abominable persons 
who break faith with the society," remarked 
her Ladyship's mamma, with a frown, an out- 
curling of the under lip, and an abrupt manly 
tone, that, aided by her stature, must have 
had on any half-crown defaulter as much 
eflFect as the civil bill course she advocated. 

"Good Lord Offally," smiled Miss FHnt, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 235 

glancing up at his Lordship, who stood in 
much dignity and a httle stiffness at her side, 
betraying, in the habitual curve of his brow, 
and in the sometimes fierce (else they might 
have been silly,) gleams of his angular eye, 
a kind of old feudal hauteur not yet laid aside 
by some of the noblemen of Ireland — " good 
Lord OfFally has been with us a long while ; 
and here 's Lord Harraer and Lord Horseman- 
town we have enlisted this evening ; and Mr. 
Priestly, too — and — where 's Captain Flood.? 
he also surrendered to my first unassisted 
attack, provided — and I assure you. Lady An- 
gelica, he was quite serious in making his terms 
— provided I agreed to let him have from one 
of our country shops half a dozen linsey-wolsey 
jackets for his next summer campaign in Spain, 
where the weather is so exceedingly hot there 's 
no wearing their heavy regimentals — think of 
that!" 

" It is certainly the interest, as well as the 
duty of the nobility and gentry of Ireland to 
support this lady's society," predicated Lord 
OfTally. 

*' One of the means of doing permanent good 
must arise from it," assented Lord Harmer. 



236 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

*' The dyers and bleachers brought up under 
its care may be taught the value of the common 
materials they use," said Lord Horsemantown. 

" Others of your newly acquired friends of 
this evening have made their terms as well as 
Captain Flood," observed Mr. Priestly. 

" Oh, we recollect all that," replied Miss 
Flint, " only, for our lives, we must not fright- 
en the poor Irish with it yet, Mr. Priestly : one 
thing at a time, you know ; when we make them 
industrious, and self-respecting, and self-sup- 
porting, and tidy, and well-dressed, and self- 
reflecting, and all their cabins white-washed 
for you, — think of that — then you and Lord 
Harmer, and the Education Societies, and the 
Tract Societies, j ust step in, you know, and the 
good work is done." 

" One of your proposed objects is * to en- 
courage the poor to send their children to 
school,' " resumed Mr. Priestly, " and so much 
being openly professed, and known to be so, by 
the people, surely you can in the meantime 
further promote the arrival of the happy sea- 
son you anticipate. Miss Flint, by arranging 
that the children shall be sent to the proper 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 237 

school-houses ; to those where they can hear 
the words of the book of life." 

" To no other must they be sent," said Lady 
Cox. 

" Make it an indispensable proviso to our 
assisting their children or themselves," advised 
Mrs. Sparrow. 

"No, no," demurred Miss De Vere; "from 
what I have heard of the Irish peasantry, and 
poor of every description, that would, at the 
present time at least, deprive us of all oppor- 
tunity of improving them in any way." 

" I cannot, upon strictly conscientious 
grounds, recommend disguised measures any 
longer," urged Mr. Priestly. 

" And yet, we that know the characters and 
situation of the Irish, from constantly going 
amongst them, would still recommend a post- 
ponement of all professed views of changing 
their religion, while we teach them not to 
starve," said Lady Offally. 

" But I am sure your Ladyship has not for- 
gotten the advice of Mr. Boanerges, a few days 
ago," continued Mr. Priestly. 

" I have not, indeed, Sir." 



238 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

"Who that has the future interests of the 
unhappy people at heart, can forget it," said 
the Lady AngeHca Hunt : " brilliant creature ! 
no zeal was ever more pure or delightful than 
his." 

" Oh, were you there, Mr. Blount .''" eagerly 
asked Miss Flint. 

" Where, madam ?" 

" At the meeting where he spoke that speech, 
to be sure ! oh, I will never forget it ! After 
fully impressing us with the necessity for ba- 
nishing the cloud of scriptural ignorance that 
overshadows wretched Ireland — ' With my 
exhortations and my morning and my nightly 
prayers,' continued the divine man, * I have, 
at present little aid to aiford you ; gold or 
silver is not in my purse ; here, notwithstand- 
ing, here is the dying gift of an only and heart- 
loved brother, sent to me across the wide At- 
lantic — ' at this moment, Mr. Blount, the dear 
Mr. Boanerges pulled out — " 

Miss Flint's utterance became impeded. 

*' Some valuable trinket ^"^ asked Gerald. 

" His poor brother's watch. Sir !" answered 
Miss Flint, bursting into tears, and then re- 
lieved, went on : * Take it, my Lord,' he said, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 239 

addressing the chairman, ' take it and keep it, 
until Heaven gives me the means of releasing 
it ; and those means may, I hope, soon accrue, 
from'—" 

" From what, madam ?" again inquired Ge- 
rald, as the fair and faithful reporter again 
paused. 

" ' From the sale of my last volume of ser- 
mons, published by Mr. Type of Cornhill, my 
Lord !'" sobbed Miss Flint. 

« Indeed !" cried Gerald. 

" Oh Mr. Blount, have you got a copy ? I 
have, we all have ; the carriages drove straight 
from the meeting to the pubhsher's, and, by 
this time, they are printing a second edition." 

" We mark you down as one of us, Mr. 
Blount .?" asked Lady OfFally. 

" By all means, Madam ; any object propos- 
ed by such advocates must be noble, indeed, 
and any connexion with it, an honour. But may 
I inquire, more particularly, into the nature 
of that object ?" 

" Our ultimate view and hope is, that the 
impulse we propose to give to industry and 
good order among the poor of Ireland, will 
have prepared many hands for co-operating 



240 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

with manufacturers, of great English capital, 
who may hereafter fix themselves in that coun- 
try." 

" An extended view, indeed." 

** It has been said," remarked Miss De Vera, 
anticipating, perhaps, one of her reports for the 
next full meeting of the society, — * that the 
disease of Ireland is too deeply rooted to be cured 
by any thing short of great measures ; and that 
industry and tranquillity can only be produced by 
a great influx of capital.' This is probably true 
as a general observation ; but we would humbly 
hope that the exhibitions of increased local 
comfort which our associations present, may 
induce capitalists to follow up the task of which 
we have made a beginning ; and that, in a few 
more years, commercial improvements may thus 
be spread over the whole country." 

Gerald, while in some manly supercilious- 
ness he felt inclined to smile at this new 
scheme, projected by lady-philosophers and 
philanthropists, to work, " in a few years," 
the complete regeneration of Ireland, did not 
hesitate to admit, allowing for the pretty little 
prattle of the " ultimate view," that conside- 
rable social and domestic good might follow a 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 241-2 

rational perseverance in any plan that sought to 
make the Irish people more comfortable. 

" In fact," he argued, " this, along with 
other efforts, may help to assimilate them 
to MS." Gerald never forgot his favourite 
theory. 

"Our dear Lady Eleanor Hope enters the 
room, and will assist us to instruct you," said 
Miss Flint. " See, Mr. Blount, — the pale, the 
very pale, the very young, and (some say) very 
interesting creature, now nodding to Lady Kil- 
bane, — with the clumsy red turban, — ay, I 
declare, and leaning on her husband's arm, too 
— think of that match, Mr. Blount! — she in 
her first teens, and he fifty — ^but such a lively, 
elderly good creature ! so funny ! and so active, 
for his age ! — hops about hec, sometimes, at 
home with his foot in his hand, instead of at- 
tending to the quadrilles she tries to teach him ; 
and is such a clever mimic ! — with his face, 
merely, I mean, for he never talks people,, only 
takes their pictures, as he says — and it is as 
sure as that you and 1 are speaking here toge- 
ther," — (" Then how dubious it must be, what- 
ever it is," thought Gerald, *' when the lady 

VOL. I. M 



243-4 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

has the whole colloquy to herself) — *' that 
he certainly can change his face— eyes, nose, and 
mouth, and all, into every other body's face he 
has ever seen once — and chatters so much to us, 
women, from the youngest, up — ay, and so well 
too, (and is such a healthy man, of his years ; 
they say, tourists always are more hardy, and 
last longer than your stay-at-homes) — that, I de- 
clare, we all patronize him. But just look at 
the fright of a red turban ! and poor Lady 
Eleanor''s poor white face under it ! — Ah !"-^as 
Lady Eleanor and her husband drew near — 
" Ah, dear friend ! how happy to see you ! how 
beautiful you look ! and your beautiful turban ! 
— Mr. Hope, you make a fool of yourself—" as the 
humoursorae gentleman proposed some grimace 
so close to Miss Flint's face, that no one else could 
take notice — " and 'tis a shame for you, a man 
of sense, and no boy, like you — go, go play 
your pranks somewhere else, and let your poor 
little wife, she looks so tired, sit down here with 
me, there — go ; dear Lady El. !" 

Not hesitating to adopt Miss Flint's good 
advice, Mr. Hope, with another imitative 
grimace at his exit, quickly went to play 



THE ANGLO IRISH. * 

his pranks somewhere else ; and that somewhere 
was, to Gerald's watchful eye, at that side of 
Miss Roper's chair left unoccupied by Captain 
Flood. Neither did it escape Gerald that, while 
showing, or studying to show, in her manner, 
the utmost innocence of the event, Miss Roper 
had not remained ignorant of Mr. Hope's pre- 
sence with his lady in the room. As they nodded 
to their hostess, and many around her, one glance 
of the young lady's eye towards the door, which, 
by the way, she had been glancing at all the 
evening, brought her the intelligence, and with 
it brought a superlative crimson — her girlish 
cheeks were always blooming — over her face and 
neck ; the next instant succeeded a hue more 
subdued than her usual colour; and though she 
continued to play her cards without embarrass- 
ment, and laughed at Flood's lispings, and, 
above all, ventured no second glance around, 
still, to any one who observed her as Gerald 
did. Miss Roper's well assumed unconscious- 
ness, was consciousness of a peculiar kind. 

Lady Eleanor soon became aware of the sub- 
ject that had been in discussion in her coterie 
before she came up, and now, with a very sincere 
vivacity, led the way in resuming it. 

" My only present misgiving," said Gerald, 



246 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

after he had listened to additional details of 
views and theories, from her ladyship and 
others, " is that you will not find the people of 
the country instructable or manageable ; and 
that they want principles of honesty and moral- 
ity to deal fairly with you, and feelings even to 
give you credit for good intentions." 

" Pardon us," said Lady Eleanor ; " mise- 
rable, most miserable, as is the condition of the 
poor Irish, we have found them all you sup- 
pose they are not. After lives spent in idle- 
ness that, of itself, could not help itself — I speak 
of the elders or matrons of families — we have 
found it, very generally, most easy to teach 
them habits of devoted and delighted industry ; 
after having all their lives been contented in 
rags and, of course, want of cleanliness, we 
have found it just as easy to give them the 
wish and the pride of clothing themselves tidily. 
In repaying our little loans, honesty, — I may 
say, honour — of the most scrupulous kind has 
marked their conduct ; and, as for feelings 
of gratitude, nay, of the tenderest affection for 
our efforts, I do believe no portion of Heaven's 
creatures can surpass them, there." 

** Your ladyship delights me, by proving me 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 247 

SO ignorant," said Gerald, really pleased at — it 
must not be said this justification of his parent 
country — but rather at finding proved such 
facilities for making the Irish — English. 

" As Secretary to the London Committee," 
said Miss De Vere amiably, yet not without a 
little official importance ; " I can verify Lady 
Eleanor's words." 

" And I," said Miss Flint ; " as Secretary to 
the principal Association in Ireland." 

" I mean, I can give you documental proof, 
Sir," continued Miss De Vere. 

" And I," contended Miss Flint. 

" From Clare, our correspondent informs us," 
pursued Miss De Vere, taking a paper out of 
her bag, " that when the institution at Clack- 
ma-cross was opened, ten women could not be 
found capable of doing the kind of work re- 
quired ; and in the course of seven months 
nearly two hundred were capable. Remark, 
too, that the neatness with which the articles 
are executed, such as lace, baby-linen, straw- 
platting, is the more praise-worthy, as it is 
done by the women in the evenings, after they 
return from labouring in the fields." 

" In the parish of St. Bridget, in the town of 



248 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Kilvogan," read Miss Flint, in emulative flurry, 
out of her official paper, too, '* forty-six poor 
women gain a livelihood by a loan of from five 
shillings to ten shillings each ; and the following 
are their occupations : — 

" ' Ten deal in vegetables ; six in fruit ; eight 
in poultry ; eight in fish ; six in hardware ; two 
in fuel; and six in offal T Think of that!" 
concllided the zealous and precise Secretary, 
with a little triumphant flourish of her elaborate 
document. 

" Loans of five shillings to reclaim Ireland !" 
cogitated Gerald. 

* ** A solitary instance occurred, during the 
whole of last year, in Cork, of a poor man who 
received a loan absconding after only paying 
part of it," continued the more considerable 
officer, still reading ; " and the circumstance was 
no sooner made known to the poor people resid- 
ing in his district, than they proposed entering 
into a subscription of sixpence each to pay the 
deficit ; so anxious did they feel that the visit- 
ing lady should not suff*er by the dishonesty of 
any one amongst them." 

** A poor woman," rapidly resumed Miss 



THE ANGLO.IRISH*fc 249 

Flint, " applied to us*' — {my present corre- 
spondent writes from Galway) — " and received 
from our re-productive fund a loan, which she 
expended in the purchase of wool. Before the 
spinning was finished, a fever broke out in her 
family, eight of whom were successively attacked 
by it, and her industry became, of course, inter- 
rupted, and she had not the means of subsist- 
ence. While one day bemoaning her distress, 
the ball of yarn, that hung from the roof of her 
cabin, caught her eye ; and then she looked on 
the sufferers around her. The struggle was se- 
vere, but her better feelings prevailed, and she 
was heard to exclaim, in her own expressive 
language, * No — no distress shall make me do 
that; it is a sacred trust' — There!" appealed 
Miss Flint, touching with ridicule — by her 
mouthy and affectedly pathetic manner of read- 
ing a really interesting fact — the natural impres- 
sion of this little anecdote. 

" The question of honesty I admit to be set- 
tled," said Gerald. 

" It might allow of a hundred other proofs," 
said Lady Eleanor ; " but does not its proof in- 
clude the proof of industry also ^"^ 
M 5 



250 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

*' Indeed the following extract,*' resumed 
Miss De Vere, " does away with Mr. Blount's 
three objections together." 

" ' We are encouraged in our exertions by the 
good disposition, punctuality, and gratitude of 
the poor whom we have assisted ; and it is most 
pleasing to us, that during three years we have 
been associated, we have not had a single in- 
stance of dishonesty ."' " 

** At Kinsale," paralleled Miss Flint, " tw^elve 
pounds are turned five times in the year; and 
some women, who trade to Cork with salt her- 
rings, have turned five shillings seven times in 
the year, and supported their families — think 
of that !" 

" Last spring," resumed Lady Eleanor, 
" when my children lay ill of typhus fever, the 
peasantry I had now and then tried to assist, 
continually surrounded my door, in defiance of 
infection, with expressions of the tenderest sym- 
pathy, bringing little offerings of whatever 
might be acceptable, which the poor creatures 
had gone a circuit of ten miles to procure, and 
for which nothing could induce them to take 
payment.""' 

** That is a proof of good feeling, honourable 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 251 

to the most civilized country," said Gerald, 
touched to the quick, and perhaps, less than 
ever ashamed of Ireland. " But," he conti- 
nued, after a pause, " why should they not 
accept payment ? The compliment they wished 
to confer was of a pecuniary nature, after all ; 
and their pretension to confer such a one seems 
absurd, and shows them wholly destitute of any 
notions of the order and proprieties of social life." 

" You did not require a proof of their know- 
ledge of the world, you know," observed Lady 
Eleanor. 

" Your ladyship is right ; I was. indeed hy- 
percritical; now, however, I have only to ex- 
press my strong hope that Irish noblemen and 
gentlemen will fully see the claim upon them 
of seconding the exertions of your most useful 
society." 

" And yet," resumed Miss Secretary De 
Vere, again seeming to anticipate a forth-com- 
ing " Report," — " in reviewing the returns from 
Ireland, the committee have frequently found 
reason to regret the diminution and small a- 
mount of the local subscriptions." 

'* The want of resident landlords is, in this 
case, as in others, severely felt," remarked 



252 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Lord OfFally, who from a late break in his in- 
come, had been compelled to live a great deal 
at home. 

*' I know a very clever Scotch gentleman who 
says it has been found out that non-resident 
landlords cause no injury in any case to a 
country," said Gerald. 

" He is right," assented Lady Angelica 
Hunt, whose husband was son and heir to an 
old nobleman, who drew thirty thousand a year 
from Ireland, and spent his life (I do not add 
his money, for his lordship had a twitch of the 
" old-gentlemanly vice,") in Hanover Square, 
or in different seats through England ; as to 
the honourable Everard Hunt, he never went to 
Ireland, and, on all possible occasions, public 
and private, called himself an Englishman ; 
" he is right ; for it is not required that a noble- 
man or gentleman shall live out of the extreme 
range of fashion, and of intellectual display, of 
every kind, in order to subscribe, liberally, to 
the wants of this or any other charitable so- 
ciety." 

•* So we think," said Miss Flint, spitefully ; 
" and if they only would remember the truth 
of your ladyship"'s remark, our Irish contribu- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 2-53 

tion to the general fund would be more credit- 
able to us ally and we might not be ashamed of 
our homely Irish fashions, and displays of in- 
tellect either — think of that, now !" 

" What is your last Report from Mayo, Miss 
De Vere?" asked Mr. Priestly, knowing well 
what it was, as one of his own friends had 
helped to supply it. 

" While I regret to say," answered the fair 
secretary, " that it is not of a pleasing descrip- 
tion, I am anxious to add that it is the only one 
of its kind sent in from any part of Ireland." 

" Such as it is, allow us, if you please, to 
hear it." 

" In answer to the query ,** again read Miss 
De Vere — " ' what are the local circumstances 
which retard the progress of the association ?* 
this grievous list has been returned. * Dis- 
honesty, long-confirmed habits of idleness, 
anxiety for gifts, disrelish to return loans of 
any description, and mendicant habits, and su- 
perstition.' ■" 

" Ay," resumed Mr. Priestly, " supersti- 
tion ; say superstition, in one word, and you 
have said all." 

" All," echoed Lord Harmer. 



954 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" All," reiterated — each in his peculiar brogue 
— Mr. Loupe, and Mr. Cornelius O'Hanlon, 
who had just joined the circle. 

And " all," agreed Lady Kilbane, with a 
hot fatigued sigh, and a heaving of a portion of 
her vast though fine figure, as, snatching a 
moment from her card-tables, she also came up. 

And, " all, indeed," still assented Lady Cox, 
sighing profoundly too, in zealous yearnings, 
exactly as Gerald's eye happened to be fixed 
on her fine features. 

" Let my sincerity and my duty be an 
excuse for my repetitions," continued Mr. 
Priestly, " when I do repeat that until this 
society, as well as every other society establish- 
ed for the benefit of the Irish, boldly and open- 
ly fights with us against the superstitions of 
the country, no good can be done ; no good 
ought to be done." 

*' The poor cratures of mi/ poor country 
are hungry and thirsty for the word, and crying 
out for the word, and hunting out the word, 
through holes and corners," declaimed Mr, 
CHanlon — " give the poor cratures of my 
poor country the word, and they will ask you 
for nothing else but the word." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 255 

" You amazingly valuable creature !" — lisped 
Flood, loud enough to be heard by all, though 
he particularly spoke for the amusement of 
Miss Roper, who, observing the juncture of 
O'Hanlon and Loupe with the circle, had, with 
suppressed titters, and signs of anticipating de- 
light, induced the dandy and her other at- 
tendant, Mr. Hope, to approach its outskirts. 
And at the same time that honest Mr. Cornelius 
made his speech, the latter mentioned gentle- 
man also ministered to her enjoyments ; for, 
after studiously confronting the Kerry orator, 
he then stood at his back, and gave an imitation 
of his face, almost of his features, so convincing, 
though so exaggerated, that happy Miss Roper 
had nearly committed the sin of laughing out- 
right. 

" I will go amonsht dem, and I will preash 
amonsht dem, and I vill thereby shee conver- 
sions amonsht dem, and the vorld vill shee con- 
versions," promised Mr. Loupe, taking up Mr. 
O'Hanlon, " and de vord shall be theirs, and 
dwell amonsht dem : I vill tell dem of my 
sojourning in de holiest chitty, and round about 
by de vaters of de Dead Shea, and round about 
de holy mountain, and on de top of de same, 



256 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

and in de holy valleys and holy places, and of 
de hopes dat vere born of my preashing and 
teashing, in every place, to de poor followers of 
de superstition of Rome ; and den, dey also shall 
believe ; for de people of Ireland are people 
ve have reashon to hope veil of, and many com- 
ing out from dem, over de vaters, to dis land, 
are good in de sight of good men." 

" You flatter," said Flood, now selecting Mr. 
Loupe for the scrutiny of his quizzing-glass ; 
and again Mr. Hope produced an imitation. 

" Gunning has made a hit," was Gerald's 
thought, as he watched the faces of Loupe and 
Lady Kilbane, during the last sentence of the 
little sermon. 

" How sad Lady Cox looks," he said the next 
moment, turning aside to Miss Flint, tired of 
the scene which still went on. . ' 

" Ah, don't you know why .?" the question, 
or something very like it, which Gerald had ex- 
pected to provoke. 

*' No ; I am only struck with her Ladyship's 
abstracted and unusual manner." 

" Think of that ! Not know what all the 
world knows ? Why, they 're in pieces !" 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 257 

" Who ? how ? what does your expression 
mean ?" 

" Broke — done up — she has cut him !" 

" Indeed ! so soon ?" 

" And in high time, I assure you ; people 
begin to think the poor little soul never cared for 
him ; only, when her mamma gave one roar and 
one stamp of her foot, (she wears Wellingtons, 
heel-shod with copper, all the morning, and 
something else to match, folks will have it — the 
Archdeacon is such a gentle good little soul of a 
dear man — hi, hi ! — think of that !) and my poor 
child, Louisa, not knowing her own mind — how 
could she at her years ? — but these childish mar- 
riages do lead to such sad doings — why shouldn't 
they? — she just did as she was bid, and had 
him, and then " 

" Well, Miss Flint, and then ?" asked Ge- 
rald, smiling at the energy of the narrator. 

" Why, then she found him out, a little too 
late ; she found that the horses in his stables were 
attended to more than she was ; that a day's 
hunting, thirty miles away from her, was much 
dearer to him than the sweetest delights of 
home ; and a night's carousing with his field- 



258 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

companions more prized than — she couldn't get 
her sleep for them !" continued Miss Flint, in- 
dignantly checking herself; " their tantivies 
and their chorusings used to invade the dear 
creature's chamber, eight rooms off ! And at 
first she never repined; but sought — " (with 
pathos) — " sought, in religious consolation, a 
balm for her bleeding heart. Do you know 
what ?" again becoming familiar ; " it was not 
till the other day when, set mad by a mere word 
of expostulation from her, he raised his whip — " 

" Vulgar scoundrel !"" muttered Gerald, as his 
eye glanced towards the object of his sympathy, 
and found in her soft and fascinating form, and 
youthful beauty, as well as in the youthful 
wretchedness (half a display as it was) of her 
airs, nothing but what wooed the gentlest ca- 
resses of a husband or a man. 

" Actually raised it," continued Miss Flint ; 
" it was not till then the dear sufferer thought 
of protecting herself; — not, indeed, by the in- 
terference of friends, or by legal proceedings; 
but, no longer finding safety under his roof, 
and, though they have been married a year 
or more, not being attached to his house by the 
tender maternal tie — think of that ! — she watch- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 259 

ed her opportunity to escape from the country 
to Dublin ; and her mamma, whom she hoped 
to meet there, having come over here — why 
here she is now, by her side — only three days 
arrived, and the most miserable of women, as 
you see — think of that 1" 

In a few minutes after he received this little 
history, Gerald was standing, unseen by her, 
over Lady Cox. She sighed dolorously. An 
answering sigh escaped him. She indolently 
raised her head and caught his eye, and they 
gazed too long at each other. 

*' May I crave the honour of leading you to 
supper .?" he asked, taking a place by her side. 

" We don't stay for supper," she answered, in 
accents still sad, but perilously soft ; " mamma 
won't have me stay ; and indeed I would not 
have myself stay/' 

" You are so tired of us,'' said Gerald. 

*' Not of all of you" — and this, with a sudden 
look up, was spoken in an echo of her former 
brilliant tones. 

" Shawls, Louisa," said her abrupt mother. 

Both started. 

" I can at least order your carriage," prayed 
Gerald. 



260 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Mamma, Mr. Blount orders the carriage," 
replied Lady Cox. 

After Gerald had conducted both down stairs, 
Mrs. Sparrow returned to speak a word to Lady 
Kilbane, and he and Lady Cox awaited her at 
the door of a room of the hall. 

*' Shall you be at home to-morrow ?'' he in- 
quired. 

" To-morrow, at two o'clock," she answered, 
laying some emphasis on the last words, " I 
accompany Lord and Lady Offally to a sermon 
at the chapel." 

" I will go too," said Gerald. 

" Then I will ask a seat in their carriage for 
you." 

" Thanks" — they paused ; a foot came down 
stairs — " 'tis Mrs. Sparrow," he resumed— 
" Good night !" — he extended his arm, while his 
eyes rested on hers. 

" Good night !" — she slowly gave her hand. 
He held it a second longer than it was necessary, 
and that second increased the danger of both. 
There was a pressure — at least on Gerald's part 
— and both again sighed. Gerald had an im- 
pulse to raise the beautiful hand to his lips. 
A stir in the room, at their backs, made him 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 261 

turn round his head, and at the remote end 
of the apartment he caught a glimpse, unno- 
ticed by them, of Mr. Hope and Miss Roper, 
enacting something very like the scene he was 
beginning with Lady Cox. He remembered 
that, like himself too, Mr. Hope had, a few mo- 
ments before he led down Mrs. Sparrow and her 
enchanting daughter, assisted Colonel Roper in 
conveying Miss Roper to her carriage ; and in- 
deed, the carriage was visible through the open 
door of the hall, the old gentleman waiting in 
it, while the young lady just tripped back with 
Mr. Hope to look for a light shawl. Error is 
never so well warned and startled as when sud- 
denly presented with an image of itself. Gerald 
could not press his lips to Lady Cox's wedded 
hand, while the lips of a wedded man were 
pressed to the hand of Miss Roper, so near him 
in the next room. He only repeated, " Good 
night !" and released it ; and at the end of the 
two little seconds during which all this hap- 
pened, Mrs. Sparrow joined them, and Lady 
Cox disappeared with her. 



262 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER XII. 

This was not the first time that Gerald's 
heart had been touched, or that he thought so : 
indeed, many fair readers will suppose as much. 
And if I have not sooner detailed any of his 
love-scenes — (for the plural number is required) 
— I am prepared to state my reasons for the 
omission. 

Whether from nature or his studious habits, 
Gerald's ability for carrying on an affair of the 
heart had not, during his growth from sixteen 
to one-and-twenty, kept pace with the develope- 
ment, almost to maturity, of his other talents. 
He was now very nearly fit to cope, in any 
exertion of intellect, with men of double or 
treble his age ; yet not as fit to lay siege to the 
heart of an accomplished girl of seventeen. He 
would have felt self-possession at a cabinet 
council ; but not by the side of '' awful beauty," 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 263 

in a tete-£l-t6te. And owing to this want, or, 
let me be allowed to assert, (for he is my 
hero,) want of practice rather, Gerald, although 
full of susceptibilities of the most ardent as 
well as of the purest kind ; although, in the 
haunts of town fashion, as he walked or rode 
or drove along the very streets, a certain de- 
scription of eye could not beam from under a 
bonnet, or a certain description of lips — the 
rest of the features hidden — peep forth, when 
the bonnet was held down ; or a certain de- 
scription of ankle glance beneath a flounce, 
without making him sigh, either to know more 
of the amiable person to whom they belonged, 
or else at the thought that he was never to 
see her again ; nay, although, when in the ab- 
stractions of C'ambridge, 



" upon a silent, sullen day. 

With a sirocco, for example, blowing, 

« n * « « * 

And sulkily the river's ripple flowing, 

And the sky showed that very ancient grey. 

The sober, sad antithesis of glowing, 

'Twas pleasant, if then any thing is pleasant, 

To catch a glimpse even of a pretty peasant — " 

although these exculpating facts be taken 



264 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

into consideration, Gerald never yet had had 
courage or tact enough to commence and 
carry on a love affair ; or else such love af- 
fairs as he did commence he never carried on ; 
or, worst of all, they were of that ridiculous 
kind, as regarded the suitableness of the ob- 
ject, which leaves me little inclination to reveal 
them to the criticism of, especially, my gentler 
readers. 

And in selecting, for my history, his new 
fascination with Lady Cox, very sincerely do I 
wish that the occasional practices of our fashion- 
able circles left questionable the taste with 
which, reasoning from the last sentence, I ap- 
pear logically to infer her ladyship's suitable- 
ness as Gerald's new object ; yet, believing 
that he will lose less of character by being 
shown in love with a married woman, his equal 
in society, than if he were boyishly to waste 
his raptures upon — (it was, however, twice the 
case,) — some fresh and blouzy rustic maiden, 
the piano-thrvimming and Lady of the Lake 
reading daughter of some sturdy farmer, I pro- 
ceed in my task, no matter with what regret 
at the very probability of being attended to. 

First then, upon going to rest, the night of 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. S.65 

Lady Kilbane's rout, Gerald resolved not to 
avail himself of Lady Cox's promise to bespeak 
him a seat for the sermon in Lord Offally's 
carriage. The next morning, at his toilet, he 
renewed, after some lapses, this good and valiant 
determination. He kept it up during break- 
fast ; nay, after breakfast called for pen and ink 
to write a line of apology, when, in answer 
to his ring, a servant appeared, bearing upon 
an embossed silver waiter a little three-cornered 
note. After examining the delicate running- 
hand of the superscription, and the sober de 
vice of the seal, Gerald read as follows : — 

*' Lady Cox presents her compliments to the 
Honourable Gerald Blount, and has the pleasure 
to say that Lady Offally will be happy to make 
the Honourable Gerald Blount one of her party 

to the sermon at chapel, at two o'clock 

to-day. Lady Cox would add that, from the 
known talent and zeal of the preacher, much 
desirable advantage to religious feeling may 
on this occasion be expected." 

" Staying away, after the trouble her I^ady- 
ship has been at, would be unseemly/* said 
Gerald. 

It was the first time he had heard a sermon 
»VOL. I. N 



266 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

in a dissenting chapel ; and while this one seem- 
ed not so proper or tasteful in language as 
those to which he had been accustomed, its 
energy and exciting power surprised him. He 
could observe, as he sat. Lady Cox's face, and 
upon her it had an extraordinary effect. At 
passages of different kinds she grew pale, or 
flushed, or, with unrestrained sighs, and some- 
times murmurs, wept profusely. 

The preacher was young, indeed very young 
for a preacher ; not more than nineteen or twen- 
ty ; and, Gerald had been given to understand, 
was one of those destined to preach the Gospel, 
at the next departure of Missionaries, to the 
savages of our remote colonies. Many of his 
allusions were to his proposed work, and, mixed 
up with a zealous egotism that was excusable, 
formed the most touching part of his discourse. 
He was, too, handsome as well as young ; and 
few ladies could hear him advert to the pathless 
jungles, only inhabited by tigers and boa-con- 
strictors, and to hundreds of miles of swamps, 
and to impassable rivers, as broad as some of 
our seas, and to the scorching terrors of the 
desert sun, without feeling for him, as well as 
for the subject he explained. In fact, the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 267 

preacher proved as interesting as the sermon ; 
and Gerald was jealous of him when, after he 
had left the pulpit, he heard Lady Cox ask her 
friend Lady Offally, if any one knew any thing 
of him. 

He accepted a friendly invitation to meet 
Lady Cox that day at Lady Offally's. They 
sat together during dinner. Gerald, a little 
bored with incessant preaching, strove to divert 
Lady Cox into subjects he knew she had pre- 
viously liked to prattle on. With the exertion of 
a little ingenuity he succeeded ; and once more 
her charming eyes glowed or moistened at 
poetical allusions, or her voice murmured, or 
tears started, though not so profusely as at the 
sermon. 

" She is an exquisite compound of sensibi- 
lity," said Gerald ; " such a heart, and such 
talented apprehensions, too, might, if conge- 
nially and properly directed — assisted, I mean — 
have formed a character as superior as fascinat- 
ing. All this childish exaggeration might have 
become steady principle, or active intellect ; 
but now, while still almost a child, at the mercy 
of a bad husband and a maudlin sect — what a 
pity !" 

N 2 



268 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

After dinner, he accompanied her, and Lord 
and Lady OfFally, and other grave guests to 
evening devotions in the chapel they had that 
day visited. The scanty, pious hght of the 
place, the primitive service, the simple yet 
fervid union of the whole congregation, male 
and female, in singing the psalm, pleased Gerald 
as much as the sermon had surprised him. At 
the same time he felt that in no other situation 
can man and woman be more likely to imbibe 
those sentiments of admiration for each other, 
which, sons and daughters of Adam and Eve 
as we are, lead, no matter how commenced, to 
but one predicament of heart — mere heart. For 
when can lovely eyes look more lovely than in 
the meek up-turning of (let it be) the purest 
devotion ? or vermilion lips more delightful 
than in the gentle out-breathing of the psalm ? 
or an exquisite hand more exquisite than, in a 
sisterly assistance to piety, turning over, for a 
brother, the leaves of the psalm-book .'' 

While Gerald watched Lady Cox's eyes and 
lips in the occupations and expressions alluded 
to, I shall not even hint what unsaintly conclu- 
sions were wrought within him ; but when her 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 269 

hand, her fingers, sweetly and unconsciously 
touching his fingers, busied themselves, as has 
already been predicated, I admit that, first 
throwing a watchful glance around, he breathed 
a little sigh upon it ; and, so privileged are the 
attentions of the chapel, or so unconscious the 
holy calm it communicates, I also admit that 
his innocent incense was not rejected. 

Sir Archy instructively advises his son that, 
after trying all other places, he found Mrs. 
Mac in the Tabernacle. It was in her favourite 
chapel that, after the lapse of about a month, 
Gerald first felt sure, or very nearly sure, of 
I.ady Cox's love for him. The evening service 
was over ; the congregation, having been very 
numerous, took some time to go out, and Lady 
Coxa's party, sitting far from the door, remained 
in their pew until the passage should be clear. 
Lady Offally, who guarded Lady Cox's right 
hand, bent over a row of ladies before her, and 
began speaking with them. Gerald sat close 
at Lady Cox's left hand. Some of the lights 
had been extinguished, and what with the 
gliding of feet, and the rustling of those in mo- 
tion, and the decent and demure gossiping of 



270 THfi ANGLO-IRISH. 

those who could not stir, any two persons dis- 
posed for a tete-a-tete of a few minutes might, 
to a certain degree, enjoy it. 

" What a delicious quiet of soul," said Lady 
Cox, as usual rich in her language, " succeeds, 
even with the miserable, to the performance of 
religious duties." 

•' That ^ou can say so is pleasure to me," 
said Gerald. 

" Yes,'' with a tremulous sigh of praise ; " I 
know, at last, the value of my immortal spirit ; 
and that ought to recompense me for the loss 
of every earthly hope and joy." 

" Do you think the Giver of virtuous int- 
pulse to earthly happiness, and of facilities for 
its attainment, meant that it ought .''" asked 
Gerald. 

" No ; oh, no ! with my rebelHous heart con- 
vincing me of the contrary, I do not think so ; 
but for the wretch whom it has been Hi.s will 
first to form for earthly joy, and then to doom 
to earthly woe, religion produces consolation 
here, and rewarding raptures hereafter." 

" Your melancholy forebodings of a life of 
sorrow may not be well founded, and — permit 



THB ANGLO-IRISH. 271 

a devoted friend to add — ought not to be in- 
dulged." 

*' What do you mean ?" 
" The changes of youth cannot be foreseen. 
The miserable to-day may be the happy to- 
morrow ; and, alas ! the happy of to-day the 
miserable of to-morrow !" Gerald interrupted 
his syllogism with a selfish digression. 
" I admit it generally." 

" Even those," continued Gerald, less sel- 
fishly, " who, to-day, do not possess the qualifi- 
cations for making others happy — others, whose 
happiness depends on their making — may, by 
some natural alteration of character, possess 
such qualifications to-morrow." 

"But can those who, along with the want of 
qualifications, want the wish also, — do what you 
say? Can will be controlled.^ what's its master.?" 
" It has, indeed, no master," answered Ge- 
rald ; " and, I grant, cannot be controlled by 
its own possessor." He was again an egotist : 
" For will controlled ceases to be will, and the 
term passes to the controlling force, passion, 
impulse, or whatever it is to be called." 

" Then, Mr. Blount, for me life is hope- 



272 THE ANGLO-IRISH 

less indeed. The being who now wants the qua- 
lifications to make me happy, also wants the 
will ; and — "" she stopped and started as a stifled 
short laugh, or rather a kind of hystenc " ha !" 
sounded in a pew at their back. Both turned 
round ; but among the row of demure people, 
male and female, some whispering, and others 
silent, there to be seen, no face or eye fixed 
their notice. 

" Go on, go on,"' said Gerald. 

" Ob, Mr. Blount, why need I ; why should I 
go on ? and why should you ask me ? We have 
never before spoken openly on the subject ; but 
surely you cannot be Ignorant that you address 
yourself to a wretched woman, whose trusting 
heart — {trusting, at least, if truth permits no 
other term)" — the parenthesis was emphatically 
marked — " has been deceived, wronged, outrag- 
ed ; whose domestic attentions, if not her feel- 
ings'" — another emphasis — " have been flung 
back upon her, and whose lot in life is cast 
either for still experiencing this misery, or for 
solitary and wretched regrets, away from its 
actual presence.'" 

" Enchanting wretchedness !" faltered Ge- 
rald, taking the languid hand that rested on 



THE ANGLO-IRISH, 273 

the seat by his side ; and forgetful of the roof 
that covered him, Gerald felt one of those head- 
long impulses of strong affection that, for the 
sake of sharing the lot of a beloved object, would 
give up friends, fame, and country, and, if pos- 
sible, hurry her off to any remote solitude which 
the earth seems to reserve for such peculiar 
temptations. 

" Oh ! had it been my doom to have met, be- 
fore I met HIM, a different person !" continued 
Lady Cox, not withdrawing her hand. 

" You might have loved — and still, not 
worthiness" — said Gerald. 

" Impossible ?'' murmured Lady Cox. 

" How, impossible }" 

She was silent. He kindly and earnestly re- 
peated his question. She was silent still ; but, 
unhappy young lady ! she wept. The tears 
fell on their joined hands. 

" How ?" he asked a third time. 

*' I will — can — only say — impossible !" she at 
last answered ; and Gerald did feel a delicate 
return of the delicate pressure with which he 
had unconsciously eked out his last " how .'"' 

" Heavens!" starting up, as another strange 
though scarce audible " ha !" reached her ear ; 
N 5 



^4 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" we are lost,'' she continued, dropping in her 
seat. " We ! oh I what have I said now ! and 
the moment before — what have I said !" she 
hid her face in her hands. 

*' Has any thing particular disturbed you ?"" 
he asked, not again selfish enough even to 
notice expressions that overpowered him with 
happiness. 

** Disturbed me .' particular !" repeated Lady 
Cox : " rise, and look, if you dare, at the last 
persons now in motion towards the door.** 

•' I see them," said Gerald calmly. 

"Observe one of them, then; the tall man, 
in Quaker-brown, with the broad-brimmed hat — 
his face t/ou cannot now see — ^his back is turned 
— is it not ?" 

« It is— what of him ?" 

^* He sat the whole evening behind us ; his 
head down, until that instant, when I sprang 
up." 

'« Well ?" 

*' But then / saw his face — and that man 
is my husband !" 

She was able to deliver the last words in a 
whisper; but no sooner had they been spoken, 
than they were followed by a shrill scream that 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 275 

terrified all in the chapel, and she lay senseless 
in Gerald's arms. 

Scarcely restored by Lady OfFally's salts, 
she was conveyed home by her alarmed pro- 
tectress. Gerald gave no explanation : Lady 
Cox continued, during their ride, too ill to be 
questioned, or, if questioned, to answer. She 
had the power, however, to whisper Gerald, 
as he assisted her down the step of the car- 
riage at her mother's door — " Not a word ! — 
and do not go yet." 

When, after Lady Cox had been led to her 
chamber, and Lady OfFally had taken her leave, 
Gerald remained alone with Mrs. Sparrow, he 
could not comprehend what the last injunction 
meant. He took advantage, however, of his 
situation, to learn, by indirect allusions, how, 
at or about the present moment. Sir Richard 
was, according to his mother-in-law's belief, 
occupying himself: and indeed, the motherly 
indignation of that lady, on the head of the 
treatment of her daughter, joined to her cha- 
racteristic abruptness, left Gerald no necessity, 
for all his purposes, to do any thing but allude. 
Besides, independent of his having been very 
friendly upon a former occasion in the family, his 



276 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

polite attentions, during the last month, seem- 
ed to entitle him to some confidence. 

Mrs. Sparrow, then, was sure that, at the 
very instant she was speaking — (it was about 
eleven o'clock at night) — Sir Richard Cox was 
either getting brutally intoxicated, at the head 
of a set of roaring fox-hunters, at his country- 
house in Ireland, or else engaged in other 
society, more degrading to him, and more 
dishonourable to her and her daughter. Since 
the arrival of his wife in England, he had, 
indeed, twice written to her and to Mrs. 
Sparrow, to command her home again ; but 
when the answers returned would agree to a 
re-union only upon an acknowledgment of 
lieavy crimes and offences on his part, accom- 
panied by the most solemn written promises of 
good conduct in future, Sir Richard became 
silent ; had never since made an application ; 
and, Mrs. Sparrow added, seemed to have come 
to a resolution to trouble himself no farther in 
the business. 

A modest double-knock at the hall-door 
disturbed the conversation, and a servant came 
up to say that Mr. Newbury, having heard of 
the illness of Lady Cox at chapel, had called. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 277 

late as it was, and offering excuses for his 
call, and a protest against intruding up-stairs, 
to inquire after her Ladyship's health. 

Now this Mr. Newbury was the unordained 
preacher whose eloquence had first attracted 
Lady Cox to the chapel ; and, it will be re- 
membered, Gerald had felt jealous of him on 
that very occasion, in consequence of Lady 
Cox's question to Lady Offally, " Does any 
body know any thing about him ?" Since 
then he had repeatedly met him in her com- 
pany at Lady Offally's, and, though Mrs. 
Sparrow ought to have acted more orthodoxi- 
cally, also ; in the house in which he at present 
sat, and whether over-sensitive jealousy, playing 
its proverbial fooleries, turned little nothings 
into expressive somethings, or that Mr. New- 
bury's manner really warranted his conclusions, 
Gerald continued to lay up in his breast ad- 
ditional suspicions of the handsome young 
preacher at least, if not of Lady Cox herself. 
More than once he had found them alone ; 
always, indeed, with the sacred book in their 
hands ; but once, when Gerald entered, rather 
suddenly, Mrs. Sparrow's drawing-room, they 
sat, he would venture to say, unnecessarily 



278 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

close, for a mere lecture ; and the pocket-bible 
having been hastily laid aside at his appear- 
ance, and also, being newly obtained from a 
distributing repository, the place they had been 
studying did not at once shut close, so that 
Gerald, as hastily taking it up, and opening it 
wide, at the same place, found this lecture to 
have turned upon the Song of Solomon. The 
present untiraed and officious call of the mis- 
sionary-elect, gave him, therefore, no pleasure. 

But he recollected Lady Cox''s delightful, 
though confused, and, he firmly believed, in- 
voluntary admissions to himself, an hour before, 
in the chapel, and doubt of her, at the least, 
vanished from his mind. He could then dwell on 
Mrs. Sparrow's assurances of the absence of Sir 
Richard Cox from England, supported as they 
were by his apparent indifference, during many 
weeks, to negotiate for a re-union with his Avife; 
and Gerald doubted if, in the person of the 
gravely-dressed, saintly-looking, and elderly- 
looking person, whose back, indeed, he had only 
observed. Lady Cox had really seen her youth- 
ful husband. 

But the question which at present most ab- 
sorbed him was, with what view had Lady 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 279 

Cox commanded him not immediately to retire 
from the house ? Did the words originate from 
any settled wish, or were they only the result 
of her agitated and incoherent state of mind ? 
or, supposing them to mean any thing, for how 
long a time were they to insure his attendance ? 
It was growing very late, and, without a seem- 
ing reason, how could Mrs. Sparrow explain his 
pertinacious tete-a-tete with herself.? Besides, 
Mrs. Sparrow evidently took it for granted that 
her daughter had retired for the night. 

While both now sat silent — " Hush !"" cried 
Mrs. Sparrow, " can it be possible ? What can 
she mean.'' or is the poor sufferer's head affected.?" 
a slow foot came down-stairs; and, an instant 
after. Lady Cox appeared at the drawing-room 
door, a chamber-light in her hand, and her face 
very pale, yet very composed, except that her 
black eyes glittered anxiously and wildly. Hav- 
ing looked forward, she stopped, her disengaged 
hand resting on the door-handle. 

" My child! Louisa! what means this.?" asked 
Mis. Sparrow, somewhat frightened. 

" Not yet alone. Mamma .?" said Lady Cox, 
in seeming surprise at Gerald's presence, which 
her hesitation at the door might also have ex- 



280 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

pressed; " I only came down, being quite re- 
covered, to speak a word with you."" 

" My appearance here certainly requires an 
apology," said Gerald, in a marked tone, as he 
arose to go away; now much embarrassed, whe- 
ther he considered the matter as a whim of Lady 
Cox, or inclined to account for her sudden en- 
trance as her mother had done. 

" No, do not be disturbed," resumed Lady 
Cox, advancing with an uneven step into the 
room, and holding a hand to her forehead, " not 
just this moment, at least; I thought I was 
quite well, yet now — " she sank in a chair 
— " Mamma, excuse me — but some Eau de Co- 
logne would soon revive me ; pray do not wait 
to ring." 

Mrs. Sparrow left the room. 

" And now," resumed Lady Cox, rising firmly, 
and with a sudden assumption of that perfect self- 
possession which women of every description of 
character, no matter how weak on former occa- 
sions, can, in her situation, or in similar ones, 
so surprisingly command : " Now, do not be- 
lieve my pretence ; I am perfectly recovered; I 
want no such aid as my Mamma goes for; I did 
not want it. Mark if circumstances do not make 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 281 

a quick scholar in the art of dissembling ; of 
insincerity ; of petty artifice. I wished you to 
remain here till I could say to you — I came 
down here to say to you — I equivocated and 
sent my mamma away to say to you — THIS. I 
have long understood you ; oh, that it had 
been but a little sooner ! My husband, to- 
night, has heard me confess I never loved him, 
and, at the least, could have loved you. No- 
thing but one course lies open to me ; therefore, 
and, as a first step upon it, we meet to-morrow 
morning, at six o'clock, to speak fully, in Ken- 
sington Gardens — farewell!" — She extended 
her hand ; as Gerald pressed it to his lips and 
bosom, the tears of a thousand contending 
emotions streamed upon it ; her cheeks were 
dry, and her eyes rounded and glowing. — 
" Farewell ; my mamma returns ; meet her at 
the door, and there say good night ; I would 
not have you once more witness my wretched 
dissimulation.'^ 



S82 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

Gerald went home to pass the first sleep- 
less night he had ever experienced ; the first 
wretched one, it may be added. For hours the 
new, the happy, and yet the terrible excitement 
of his situation deprived him of the power of 
thought. He still trembled, as when, meeting, 
according to Lady Cox's instructions, Mrs. 
Sparrow at the drawing-room door, he had 
hurriedly bid her farewell. Passionate tears 
relieved him, and they were followed by softer 
tears of tenderest pity for the youthful wretch- 
edness of the being he so fervently loved. 

Her sudden change of character, from lan- 
guor and childishness to the full force of woman- 
ly energy, then occurred to him ; and, glancing 
over the future fate it seemed to propose, nay, to 
command for her and for him, Gerald's feelings 
were those of consternation. Like many others, 
he had, up to this moment, absurdly, as well as 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 283 

wickedly, gone on towards but one conclusion ; 
yet, because that conclusion now appeared in 
view, he shrank from it. Nay, he tried to form 
excuses for himself, that pretended, though they 
dared not avow the pretence, to deny that he 
had ever so gone on at all. 

" I loved her, indeed, wildly loved her, 
from the first ; but if I recollect my own mind, 
never sought more than to share her society, 
and, by all allowable means, assuage the grief 
that weighed her down : — then her religious 
zeal was my farther security, though now she 
avows that she has long understood me. Could 
I think that, through a month of pious obser- 
vances, and, morning and evening, of the most 
glowing sentiments of devotion — she was engross- 
ed by other feelings.'' — Is it the nature of 
poor, weak, but dear, dear woman, to feed, in- 
differently, with virtuous aspirations, or with 
throbbings of a different kind, one life-long 
tendency of the heart ?— oh, I am taken by 
surprise, and the surprise is tremendous i" 

The sober, mental habits of his education, 
were, indeed, presented, in the latest conduct of 
Lady Cox, with, to them, a kind of scenic, 
overpowering energy, previously unsupposable. 



284 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

And here, for a second, was intruded an egotis- 
tical and, it may appear, unfeeling silliness ; yet 
those who are aware of the pervading power of 
a favourite theory, applied, since an early age, 
in some wa}' or other, to almost every new ac- 
cident in life, will perhaps account for his ab- 
surdity, if they cannot excuse it. " It is not 
English," said Gerald ; — " though claiming to 
he half English, I.ady Cox is Irish ; — in bring- 
ing-up, in mind and heart, — Irish ; — there was 
my mistake." 

But, above all he could devise to exculpate 
himself, even by criticising her, Gerald loved, 
adored : and the full influence of the sentiment 
soon returned, to sweep away every previous 
thought. And now, life spent with Lady Cox, 
a whole life, in solitude, became his only vision. 
She loved him ; she had " but one course" to 
take in consequence of loving him, and would 
he not take it with her ? would he not, rather, 
permit her to take it, since she could only do 
so hand in hand with him ? What was fame, 
what were court friends, what was accumulated 
fortune, compared with happiness .? His pre- 
sent fortune was limited, yet sufficient for in- 
dependence ; he would be hers eternally. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 285 

A posthumous letter, written to him by his 
mother, with instructions to his father and 
friends not to deliver it to Gerald till he should 
gain the age of sixteen, lay before him ; he had 
that day, been perusing it for the hundredth 
time. The late Lady Clangore was a woman 
of strong mind and observation, and the advice 
to her favourite son, contained in this epistle, 
while applying to every prominent error into 
which a youth may be supposed likely to fall, was 
penned in an impressive style. Amongst other 
hypothetic cases, that in which Gerald now 
stood, had naturally engaged the anxiety of the 
mother. He read and trembled once more. 
The voice of a parent speaking to him, as it 
were, from the grave, in the dead silence of 
night, and speaking, too, of all that forms the 
character of man — honour, religion, feeling, 
social rank, — this could not fail to produce al- 
most a petrifying eflPect. In fact, when, with- 
out having slept an hour, and after renewed 
struggles that compelled renewed and bitter 
tears, Gerald went out to keep his appointment, 
he had formed a manly and a noble resolution. 

He walked across Hyde Park, intending to 
enter the Gardens at the small door that nearly 



286 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

faces Knightsbridge barracks. Ere he passed 
quite in, a carriage and four drove furiously 
towards him, along the open road. Gerald 
glanced at it. A female attendant sat on the 
dickey, seemingly dressed for travelling. He 
looked more accurately and recognized Lady 
Cox's maid. The rapid associations produced 
by the discovery, startled — frightened him ; 
and he walked hastily into the Gardens, and 
proceeded, by the little mound, along the pri- 
vate path that leads into the more solitary 
regions of the fine pleasaunce. His first im- 
pulse was absolutely one of terrified avoidance. 
Even yet, he doubted himself; and from her 
presence, still arrayed in the charms that had 
captivated him, and made formidable by her 
new accession of character, his resolved heart 
turned away in fear. Then he recollected that 
this charming, wretched, and beloved object, 
came to tell him, to prove to him, how devoted- 
ly he was loved by her ; and Gerald's heart was 
no longer resolved, but yearned to turn to hers. 
I cannot, indeed, aver in what frame of mind 
he ftt last stood still at the outskirts of one of 
many clumps, or rather masses of trees, that 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 287 

nearly enclosed the most private spot in the 
Gardens. 

After the lapse of a few moments, a single 
figure appeared at a distance, moving along the 
path he had taken. In the firm step and self- 
possessed air it displayed, Gerald saw little of 
the former step and air of Lady Cox. As his 
eye remained fixed he ascertained, at a nearer 
view, that it was, however, no other than that 
ill-fated young lady : like her maid, she was 
clad for a journey. 

They met in silence. Their clasped hands 
only made a greeting. But in a few seconds 
Lady Cox spoke. " Your actions, and your 
words too, have, as I said before, long assured 
me you loved me ; but your more positive ex- 
pressions last night in the chapel left me no 
doubt.'' 

" Enchanting I^ouisa — I have loved beyond 
words or utterance — ay, since the very hour 
we met, though I dared not then admit it to 
my own heart." 

" Well ; and I have said enough to inti- 
mate my feelings; but I will now add that, 
from the very same hour, I loved, too. Do not 



288 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

interrupt me — I have much to say ; — I ought to 
say much. But let me try to condense my words. 
The impression you made, at our first meeting, 
upon my very young and girlish heart, was 
not made because that heart was naturally light 
and fickle, or disposed to transfer its preference. 
Before it felt one for you, I became a wife at 
my mother's command, as I would have done- 
any other thing she commanded, which was not, 
or did not seem decidedly odious: and Sir 
Richard Cox was not old, nor deformed, and I 
knew nothing of him but what he looked. 
Another object called up the hitherto sleeping 
feelings he had failed to awaken ; and this, as I 
did not will or wish it, and as, up to that in- 
stant, a thought never strayed from my hus- 
band (he did not become or appear what he is 
till we returned to Ireland) — this, I say, was 
not my fault. 

" But though the involuntary sentiment could 
not make me guilty in its mere occurrence, I soon 
decided that its indulgence would : and, from 
the day that I entered my husband"'s house, my 
constant efforts were to forget you and esteem 
him. I must have been successful if he had 
assisted me. But he changed into a careless. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 289 

dissipated, bad, unfaithful husband ; coarse in 
his manners ; unintellectual in his thoughts ; 
gross in his errors ; and, at my least word of 
expostulation — (and believe me, my words 
were not many nor loud) — tyrannical, cruel, 
barbarous. I tried to make him love me again 
by the little attentions that he used to call en- 
dearments ; but my power was gone, my spell 
dissolved, my wand broken. I read to him, 
and he yawned and cried out * nonsense' on 
the book and me ; I sang and played to him, 
and he laughed and scoffed : and when, hiding 
my perhaps childish tears, I have stood up, and 
in poor smiles approached him, and put my 
wife's arms round his neck, and with my wife's 
lips offered to kiss his, he would — not gently — 
untwine my arms, avoid my kiss, and put me 
from his side. 

" I had been alone with him ; now, I was 
worse than completely alone ; and in this soli- 
tude, considering my years, my natural vivacity, 
my imperfect education, is it surprising, is it a 
proof of levity, that the thought once overcome 
should return upon me ? that I should remem- 
ber I had seen one, a little while too late, from 
whose conversation, talents, and turn of mind, 

VOL. I. o 



290 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

manner, sensibilities, and character, I might 
have hoped happiness ? in whose presence my 
song and my music, my book and my smile, 
would not pass as idle or tiresome ? and even 
if, in word or thought, pursuit or conduct, I 
had proved deficient, who must have been as 
anxious as he was highly quahfied to woo me 
into improvement, rather than to scofF or spurn 
me into despair ? — Do not speak yet, you think 
my words sound flatteringly, and call for pro- 
fessions : but pass that, and hear me still. 

" In the midst of my sufferings, an old lady, 
a relative of my mother, came to live in our 
neighbourhood, and from the first, I clung to 
her fellowship and sympathy. She was of a 
very pious cast, and, in her repeated conver- 
sations, could only propose to me the conso- 
lation of religion. Her language possessed a 
power and zeal which speedily moved me, and, 
in full sincerity of heart, I became her disciple. 
She introduced me to persons of her own ardent 
sect ; and, influenced, perhaps, as much by the 
novelty as by the truth of my feelings, I ima- 
gined that I had indeed found a partial cure 
for misery. 'Tis true, I never smiled in my 
new paradise ; and quite as true that two ob- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 291 

jects, one celestial, and one earthly, almost 
divided my devotions. I cannot explain the 
seeming contradiction ; but it is certain that I 
never poured out my soul in sincere prayer and 
zeal, without loving you the more. 

" An extreme outrage drove me to London, 
and we met again. 'Tis useless to say how 
much your now perfected manner and education 
exalted you above even what I had recollected 
of you in my Irish solitude. But I will so- 
lemnly declare, that, until last night, notwith- 
standing our increased acquaintance, and my 
conviction that you loved me well, a thought of 
sharing life or fortune with you never occurred 
to my mind. I was only blessed in worshipping 
and praying by your side ; and in the reflec- 
tion, that even when deprived of that blessed- 
ness, I could remember it had been, and also 
remember that I was dear to you. 

" An instant of treacherous weakness betray- 
ed me into half of what I had resolved to die 
without saying ; and the appearance of my cruel 
husband involuntarily extorted a conclusive 

expression. It did more. It "" 

" Adored Louisa !" at last interrupted Gerald ; 
" might you not have been mistaken as to that 



292 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

person ? All probability is against his appear- 
ance in such a place, at the present time. Your 
mother thinks so.^ 

" What ! have you mentioned it to her !*' 
cried Lady Cox, in a sudden frenzy that startled 
Gerald, and gave him the first indication of 
the vehemence that lay only smothered in her 
bosom. 

" No," he answered, " not a word, not a 
breath — for worlds I could not have done so ; 
but, by other means, I induced her opinions of 
the great improbability of Sir Richard being 
now in London — and, indeed, his character and 
his silence, for many weeks, seem quite against 
the supposition." 

•* You do not know all his character. In the 
midst of dissipation, and of seeming carelessness 
of every thing on earth but his vulgar pleasures, 
he possesses a power of starting to his feet, 
sternly, if not calmly, and then of vigorously, 
if not properly, pursuing any plan of self-asser- 
tion he may, with or without cause, take into 
his head. From one or two unexpected ex- 
amples of what I say, I dread, as much as I 
abhor, my bad and tyrannous husband. Since 
I came to London, at least since his silence, after 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 293 

my mother's letter and mine, I have not been 
able to divest myself of the terrible notion that 
wherever I moved he was in my track, and his 
unseen eye always watching me. As to the 
possibility of my mistaking another face for his 
last night, that is out of the question. Oh ! the 
sufferer cannot so soon forget the features of 
the persecutor ! One glance at the brow of his 
former gaoler is enough for the escaped and 
trembling prisoner ! And though I hope he 
did not notice my recognition of him, for it 
was but a glance I had, and of his profile, too, 
and only half of thaty as he bent his head to his 
breast, yet ah ! — heaven of heavens !" 

Lady Cox screamed till the little soUtudes 
around rang to the piercing sounds, as, clasping 
her hands together, she looked up a vista of 
trees. 

" What ? what 's the matter ? " inquired 
Gerald. 

" Look ! look where I point, or he is gone I" 
Gerald, indeed, saw a man running fast, and just 
turning the edge of a thick clump, at about 
thirty yards distance. " 'Tis he again ! " she 
continued, " and he has, until this moment, 
been near enough to hear every thing we said ! 
o 3 



294 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Perhaps but hiding behind this very tree we 
lean against ! But he does not make me swoon 
now ! For now, indeed, my path is marked out; 
the path that bears me from him, from destruc- 
tion, death at his hand ! Oh ! he would no more 
pause to shed my blood, than he would hesitate 
to shed that of the poor bird his cruel pastime 
dooms to slaughter ! This morning, this instant, 
I leave London !" she advanced towards the 
entrance by which she had come into the Gar- 
dens, and continued to walk rapidly, Gerald 
following: — "London, England, Ireland, for- 
mer friends ! Him and the world !" 

" Compose yourself, for mercy's sake 1" cried 
Gerald, taking her hand, as they walked along, 
" be more collected — what do you mean ?" 

" And you ask me that ? " she exclaimed, 
dropping his hand : " you who have brought me 
to say it ! why are you here ? why are we here 
together ? If you could have interpreted, in a 
second sense, my parting words last night, the 
words that proposed this meeting, why did you 
listen to them ? why act on them ?" 

" Beloved Louisa, hear me : I did, indeed, 
give those dear words but one sense — ^a sense 
that intoxicated me with happiness, that made 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 295 

me at the moment, and afterwards in the soli- 
tude of my sleepless chamber, resolve to devote 
every hour, every day of my life, to your most 
honouring love and confidence ; yet, reflection — " 

" Reflection ! you can reflect at such a mo- 
ment ! in such a situation ! — you love, and you 
can reflect ! Let go my hand .' I spurn your 
calculating and cold conceit, as I loathe and fear 
him ! Restrain me not !" Gerald struggled to 
restrain her. " I can dare my fate alone !" 

" Louisa !" he flung himself on his knees, 
while mingled tears of pity and of contending 
passion burst forth — " let me speak on ! You 
ask me why I am here ! I answer, to say that 
which may restore — which — have mercy and 
hear me !" 

His voice failed, and his head sunk on his 
clasped hands. As sudden a change occurred 
in her emotions. After looking at him a mo- 
ment, she, too, wept, and also kneeling, al- 
lowed her arms to fall on his shoulders as she 
said, " Not to me, Gerald ! not this low atti- 
tude to me ! — not this bending to her whose 
almost idol you are ! That you love me as it 
is my pride and my joy to be loved, I now see ; 
and I could curse the tongue that has given 



296 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

you one angry word ! Oh, Gerald, anger is 
new to me, as well as other things ! this is the 
first time in my life I have forgotten I was a 
lady, and that I should forget it to you, makes 
the thought sharp as a piercing sword. But I 
know not how it is,'' she continued, allowing 
him to raise her — " you have changed me, Ge- 
rald, into something I have no recollection I 
ever was ; and, be the change for good or ill, I 
am not the Louisa I have been. You have 
given me, along with strength — ay, daring of 
mind — a wish to think and to excel, which, T 
believe, was not born with me. Beloved Ge- 
rald, do not forsake me in the undetermined, 
undirected force of a new consciousness and 
character ! — send the freshly-burst stream upon 
an even course, lest it rush foaming over the 
precipice ! In my present utter misery, horror, 
and fear, do not cast me off ! This is not wo- 
man's usual language, but must not the loving, 
desolate, and terrified heart speak or break !" 
She again suddenly knelt. " Make of me what 
you will ! oh ! I will be endowed with a mind 
and a power to prove worthy of you ! And, 
were we away from imminent peril — time, a lit- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 297 

tie time, and the natural course of events, may 
allow us to remain together in admitted vir- 
tue r 

" Rise, if you would not make me mad, 
Louisa !" After many efforts, during which she 
almost laid her head at his feet, he once more 
raised her. " If I do not love, worship you, 
with heart, and soul, and if I would not che- 
rish you, with heart, and soul, and hand, against 
the world, let the power I invoke to decide, 
destroy me ere another word escapes ! But — " 

" That ends it !" she cried, relapsing into her 
wilder mood — " that one little breath ! — fare- 
well !" she moved from him more quickly than 
before. He still followed, but vainly sought to 
stay her — " I will take my revenge !" she added. 

Dreadful misgivings occurred to him. 

" Louisa ! adored ! what mean you ?" 

" You think I mean self-murder, but you 
err." 

" Oh, Louisa ! promise me that, faithfully 
and solemnly, if indeed you will not stay to 
give me a hearing." 

" Do not be alarmed, Sir !"" she answered, in 
a bitter and scoffing tone ; *' perhaps, after all. 



298 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

your superb disdain may not prove enough to 
kill a poor rejected lady; yet, expect to own 
me revenged, still." 

" Jeer me as you will, Louisa, but promise 
that your hasty thought suggests no violence of 
any kind to yourself or others !" 

" Others !" she laughed out : " why, you 
fear for yourself, now. But, farewell, I say, — 
you need not." 

She had approached within view of the door. 
All his virtuous resolutions tottered to their 
downfal. 

" Oh leave not London thus !" he cried — 
" alone, unprotected, helpless." 

" I mean it not. Sir;"" the distance increased 
between them ; he sprang after her — " or, take 
me with you !" he continued : " no matter what 
ties are broken, what principles violated, what 
results dared, let me share your precipitancy 
and your lot !" 

In unmixed pride she answered, " No, Sir ! 
you shall violate no principles for me, you shall 
gain no opportunity to reproach me with the 
precipitancy which, even in this moment of 
relapsing ardour, you can so coolly calculate. 
Release me, Sir, and do not presume to follow." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 299 

She swept from him to the door and disap- 
peared through it. After a moment of stupor 
he ran on. The carriage was already out of 
hearing of the cries of " stop ! stop !" which he 
addressed to the coachman. Unconscious of 
the amazed and perhaps sneering observation of 
the garden-keeper who sat at the door, he fol- 
lowed in its track. But the horses went on at 
a gallop, and all his efforts even to keep the 
distance he first held from it were unavailing. 
He only had the consolation of observing that, 
after having gained the Hyde-park-corner en- 
trance, it turned to the left, up " the Ring," 
and whirled townwards through Grosvenor- 
gate. 

Arriving at home, exhausted with emotion, 
exertion, and want of sleep, he hurried to his 
chamber, and flung himself down. Nature 
asserted her right, and he slept profoundly. 

At about one o"'clock in the afternoon a 
servant awoke him by tapping at his door. He 
started up from dreamless slumber to a broken 
recollection of the morning, that more resem- 
bled, however, a hideous dream, or the calling 
back of one, than it did the realities of his ex- 
istence. The servant said that a gentleman. 



SOO THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

who had not the honour ctf being known to him. 
requested an interview on pressing business. 

He hastened, with ominous though vague 
expectations, to the parlour, and found in it a 
fashionable-looking young man, whom he cer- 
tainly had not before seen. The stranger bowed 
distantly, though pohtely ; and, when both were 
seated, began, by saying that he called on the 
part of his friend Captain Stanhope, of whom, 
perhaps, Mr. Blount had heard. 

" Yes," Gerald said ; " a distant relation, he 
believed, of — of Lady Cox ;" — (gulphing down 
half the words,) — " and her Ladyship had slight- 
ly spoken of young Captain Stanhope to him." 

'* And now. Sir,"" resumed the stranger, 
" Captain Stanhope would, through me, speak 
to you of her Ladyship." Gerald was much 
honoured, and all attention. 

" As the business is sudden, Mr. Blount, I 
fear I must be abrupt. The elopement of 
Lady Cox has just transpired." 

" Gracious Heaven, Sir !"" gasped Gerald. 

*' And," continued Captain Stanhope's friend, 
smiling, as if incredulously, at his ejaculation ; 
" as it is well known that you met her Ladyship 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 301 

alone, very early, this morning, in Kensington- 
gardens, Captain Stanhope requires an instan- 
taneous account of her place of retreat at your 
hands." 

Gerald protested his incompetency to supply 
any such account. He was amazed, distressed, 
thunder-struck ; but he knew no more of Lady 
Cox's elopement, until now communicated, than 
of what was passing in Nova-Zembla. 

" You met the lady this morning. Sir, clan- 
destinely." 

*' He had certainly happened to see Lady 
Cox that morning, but " 

*' Enough, Sir ! it is now my duty to hand 
you this." 

Gerald tore open a note and read — " Sir, 
supply the information required by my friend, 
or immediately arrange with my friend place 
and time, to satisfy me for your refusing to do 
so, or submit to be termed a dishonourable and 
dishonoured man. — R. Stanhope." 

Gerald was in a state of excitement ready to 
explode in any shape. Within three hours, 
accompanied by his old schoolfellow, Flood, he 
gave Captain Stanhope the required meeting. 

VOL. I. P 



302 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

They fired together ; both fell. Their surgeons 
reported that Gerald's wound was slight, Captain 
Stanhope's mortal. 

" Peace has been proclaimed at a monstrously 
convenient time for you, worthy Blount," said 
Flood, " inasmuch as this little aflPair gives 
you an opportunity to see la belle France ; 
and I am preposterously inclined to accompany 
you." 

In a stupor of emotions, Gerald, after his 
wound had been dressed, allowed Flood to help 
him into his carriage, and they were whirled, 
in a few minutes, towards the coast. 

He had just recovered, in Paris, from a short 
and not very violent fever, produced more by 
his astonishment and anxiety on account of Lady 
Cox's mysterious conduct, than by his wound, 
when the following explanation flung him back 
into an illness that brought him to the verge of 
the grave. It is condensed from Lord Clan- 
gore's letter, and other information. 

After Sir Richard Cox hurried out of Ken- 
sington-gardens, where, indeed, he had heard 
all that his wretched young wife had feared he 
had, he called upon his intimate friend young 
Stanhope, told him, for the first time, the his- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 303 

tory of his own dishonour, and enjoining him 
to watch Gerald, proceeded to follow, with his 
own eye, the conduct of Lady Cox. From that 
time Stanhope lost sight of him; but when 
Louisa's elopement became known among her 
friends, Stanhope, though at a loss to account 
for the husband's disappearance also, resolved 
himself to call Gerald to account. 

But Sir Richard was fully occupied. He 
had ascertained, before his visit to Stanhope, 
that his wife and Gerald did not leave the Gar- 
dens together. He had tracked her carriage to 
the door of a rather obscure house near the 

chapel ; had seen her dismount, and 

go in ; left one of his spies to keep watch ; 
and not till then sought his military friend. 
Returning to his spy, he learned that a young 
gentleman, dressed in black, had, seemingly in 
much agitation, issued from the house with 
Lady Cox, handed her into her carriage, step- 
ped after her, and that they instantly drove off, 
in a direction which a second spy, dispatched 
for the purpose, would soon ascertain. — One re- 
trospect is here necessary. Gerald had been 
correct in suspecting the attentions of the young 
unordained preacher ; he had only not gone far 



304 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

enough. Taking advantage of Lady Cox's un- 
formed state of mind and feeling, of her devo- 
tional zeal, and of her deference to his talents, 
and, perhaps, though it did not amount to love, 
of her obvious personal interest in him, Mr, 
Newbury, indulging the impulses of a violent 
attachment, with which at a glance she had in- 
spired him, found opportunity to insinuate, in 
his mixed love of God and of his neighbour's 
wife, that, situated as she was, in the power of 
the bad and wicked man her husband, she could 
do nothing better calculated to promote the gene- 
ral good, her own earthly and future happiness^ 
and, withal, the happiness of a loving brother, 
than to forsake the t3rrant and tempter, who at 
once treated her cruelly, and might, at a future 
re-union, peril, by bad example, her immortal 
soul. But, rejecting at the time his eloquent 
and specious doctrine, Lady Cox afterwards en- 
tertained little partiality for the handsome young 
apostle, until, in a moment of frenzied fear of 
her husband, and of womanly indignation against 
Gerald, he occurred to her as her only present 
means of personal protection, and of the revenge 
she had promised Gerald to take, and which; 
by thus rushing from his arms to the arms of 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 305 

another, she believed must be fully acknowledg- 
ed in the bitterness of his mortification. 

Sir Richard, though petrified at her sudden 
changing of lovers, lost not an instant in pur- 
suing her. It was enough for him that his 
wife had dishonoured him ; with whom, or why 
with this strange gallant instead of Gerald, 
though a question of great interest, he did not, 
in his present mood, care or condescend to de- 
bate. 

It formed no part of his terrible plan to over- 
take them on the road. As they halted, there- 
fore, he halted ; until, about four o'clock of a 
sunny day in May, he saw them put up at a 
hotel in Rye. Half an hour after, he dogged 
them to a ready-furnished solitary house in the 
suburbs of the town, upon which was the pla- 
card " To Let." He saw them go in, and 
Newbury returned alone to the hotel, but 
soon came back, superintending some luggage. 

Sir Richard, cursing the slow approach of 
night, still kept his eye fixed on the solitary 
house. At last the evening fell, and the win- 
dows of their sitting-room glowed with candle- 
light ; the linen blinds only had been drawn 
down. The shadows of their figures, passing 



306 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

backward and forward in the apartment, closely 
united, were caught on the blind. Sir Richard 
walked rapidly, but cautiously, to the kitchen, 
or back-door. 

He feared to have found it locked, so that he 
must have tapped, or made some noise, which 
it was not his object to do. But, gently raising 
a latch, he crossed the threshold and presented 
himself before the only attendant yet established 
in the house. Lady Cox''s own maid. 

" Not a word, or you die !" he said in a 
fierce whisper, drawing a pistol. She fell sense- 
less without screaming. He observed if the 
windows of a small back-kitchen were barred, 
and ascertaining that they were, he lifted her 
into the place ; locked the door ; sat down to a 
table ; took out a paper that afterwards was 
found to contain an account of his proceedings, 
continued from day to day since he arrived in 
London ; added to it, in pencil, a statement of 
the last circumstances here described, together 
with an avowal of what he yet resolved to do : 
folded it and put it in his bosom ; drew forth a 
second pistol, and snatching the servant's can- 
dle, stept softly up-stairs. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH-. 307 

He found the door of the sitting-room bolted 
against him ; perhaps they had heard his creep- 
ing footsteps, and secured it in terror. The 
crash of bursting it open recalled the girl below 
to her senses. She listened. Piercing screams 
succeeded. Then a shot ; a pause ; and then 
another shot. 

She could tell no more. But those who re- 
leased her in the morning from her fearful im- 
prisonment, learned, upon proceeding to search 
the house, the sequel of the story. Upon the 
middle of the floor lay Sir Richard Cox, dead 
and cold. At one side, near a sofa, were 
stretched Newbury and Lady Cox, bound to- 
gether with her own sash and shawl. At first 
the people thought that they, too, were both 
dead. But, to their horror. Lady Cox moved 
her head sideways, when she heard their ap- 
proach, and fixing her large dark eyes on them, 
smiled. Her companion was, indeed, lifeless 
and stiff; she was only mad : her husband had 
offered her no personal injury ; but, having 
shot her paramour through the heart, he bound 
her to the body, placed its arms round her neck, 
and demoniacally refining his revenge, preferred 



808 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

to let her live, that she might see him die too, 
and then pass the night in the situation in 
which the people found her, and afterwards 
remember it if she could. 



END OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 
THE 

ANGLO-IRISH 

OF 

THE NINETEENTH CENTURY. 
VOL. II. 



LONDON : 
PRINTED BV S. AND R. UENTLEY, 

Dorset Street, Fleet Stteei. 



THE 



ANGLO-IRISH 



OF 



THE NINETEENTH CENTURY. 



A NOVEL. 



IN THREE VOLUMES. 



VOL. 11. 



LONDON : 

HENRY COLBURN, NEW BURLINGTON STREET. 

1828. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER I. 

" Now that you have the sense to be well, 
good Blount," said Flood to our hero, as, more 
than a month after Gerald received the intelli- 
gence detailed in the last chapter, they saun- 
tered through the solitudes of Pere la Chaise — 
" now that you have the sense to be well, good 
Blount, let me, in the first instance, very de- 
licately intimate that I am rather disposed to 
acknowledge myself amazingly tired of the 
whole affair." 

*' Indeed, Flood, I do not wonder. The 
kind and constant attentions you paid me 
during that wretched relapse — " 

*' Neither kind nor constant," interrupted 
Flood : " kindness, as it vaguely appears to 

VOL. II. B 



2060836 



2 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

me, having little to do with the description of 
necessity I was under to perform what I have 
performed ; and constancy to your bed-side, 
most especially during the period of your very 
preposterous loquacity, having just as little 
meaning, when I sum up the diversified pas- 
sages of life by your humble friend experi- 
enced in the company of such specimens of the 
gentler sex, as this land of the Gaul doth sup- 
ply for the arousing of a slight interest in the 
bosom of man." 

" And how do you like them. Flood .''" 
*'Like.? worthy Blount, people of sense 
never * like.' 'Tis a word insufferably strong. 
Yet, in some degree to afford the indulgence 
of an answer to your philosophic inquiries, I 
permit myself to intimate that, of a French 
woman's face, there is nothing pretty but the 
eyes ; of her figure, nothing so potent as the 
corset, with its appendages; and yet is her 
step, her walk, her manner of motion, supreme- 
ly worthy of womankind." 

" More so than, as you term it, the manner 
of motion of our own majestic beauties, entering 
a saloon in one of our squares, or sailing statelily 
up Bond-street, under the surveillance of the 
male duenna — the gold-headed stick .?" 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 3 

" Frightful 1 Enormous to a degree ! 'Tis 
military striding, not walking, under a flounce.'" 

" Very grand and awful, though." 

" Yes, very. But people don't want that 
from them. People don't want a fine woman to 
be always ' keeping the step.' Yet our su- 
perb women icill try to pace with one, no 
matter how one's boots and spurs, belts and 
sabre, to say nothing of Vair militairey compel 
one to stamp and clank, at slow march, by their 
side. Now the peculiar eulogy of a French 
girl is, that she leaves your legs and feet to take 
care of themselves, and pursues her own little 
graceful pitter-patter, just as if you were a 
mile oiF, though all the time her finger-tips 
touch your arm, and she is firing up, from 
under her bonnet, straight into your face. If 
the war break out again, and that one slightly 
fancies a feminine companion, for the march, 
let her country be England ; but in times of 
peace, at least, if the lady be required, partly 
for the purposes of entering and leaving a 
room, like a woman, allow the suggestion that 
she may be French, in preference." 

" Apropos to war, Flood, have you heard 
some strange rumours this morning .''" 
B 2 



4 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Something I have heard, possibly ; but 'tis 
so long ago, ever since before breakfast, spare 
me the considerable pain of an unnecessary- 
effort to recollect and combine, good fellow." 

" Well ; the French women are like to make 
you turn traitor, Flood."" 

" Egregious ! One must have been, some 
time or other, the subject of some one power or 
other, in order to be liable to the commission of 
treason towards any second power of the earth." 

" And you have never yet declared yourself 
the sworn subject of beauty, in our land of 
beauty, — of beauty in its excellence — England ?" 

" The thought is old enough to cause a loss 
of a considerable portion of self-estimation and 
esteem. I must cut you, fellow-student, or 
your overpowering notions will prove the disso- 
lution of your friend. Barbarous. We do not 
dress, and get three tailors to superintend dif- 
ferent parts of one suit — we do not live for that." 

" But they pique you more than the brilliant 
creatures at home ?" 

*' Too astounding again. I tell you, old 
school-mate, nothing piques, or pleases, or in 

any way quite interests us. Get rid of all 

that downright way of speaking, and of those in- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 5 

earnest notions that absolutely amount to a con- 
ception, and, I repeat, overwhelm and agitate. 
Yet, still to flatter that fever-worn frame, and 
pallid countenance, apprehend, very remotely, 
that, since we came to Paris, your faithful ad- 
mirer has had something like a glimpse of an 
individual, whose English perfection of feature, 
and French manner of motion, saying nothing of 
a style of discourse, and of a vivacity and a 
smile peculiarly her own — " 

" She has piqued you," interrupted Gerald ; 
" and she is real French ?" 

" By her tongue, at least : but, now, do not 
insist on your particularities, excellent Blount." 

"Have you met her often?" 

" Twice, or once, as it may prove to be. 
Still you hem me in. Change we the topic, 
' oh thou particular fellow.' In some measure, 
I may say, I have a new matter to indicate. 
You get able to protect yourself in good time, 
for I have a notion my admirable father wishes 
me to meet him in London in a few days, on 
what need I do not dare to conjecture, and you, 
it strikes me, will not so soon return to England." 

" Oh, Flood, do not glance at such a thing : 
it shakes me to the centre." 



6 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" If I have agitated you, good Blount, learn, 
from your own sensations, to spare others the 
agony your words every moment inflict." 

" But your allusion reminds me, however, of 
a question it is quite necessary I should ask. 
A serious question, Flood."" 

" Ever the same. Never to be taught : give 
me breath, however, and go on." 

" My poor young antagonist ?" 

" A man of your tenacious habits of mind 
ought to recollect, that his surgeon pronounced 
him mortally hit, on the ground." 

" The surgeon might have erred." 

" Very impossible. Or even so, he would make 
his own words good to save his credit after- 
wards; so that, in any case, the chivalrous 
youth is extinct." 

" My first illness here came on too soon after 
our arrival to allow me to consult the English 
papers : but what said they .^" 

"I apprehend the little affair was judiciously 
hushed up by your good friends in them ; yet, 
in a provincial English print, as it slightly pre- 
sents itself to my mind, I have read or glanced 
over a few lines that intimated his demise, some 
hours after we parted from him." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 7 

Gerald was silent, but he shuddered. Flood 
pretended not to notice him, but turned away 
his head, and lispingly hummed a French air. 
In a few moments, Gerald resumed. 

" It must be so. Yet I had hopes, vague 
hopes, that, mixed up with the horrors of my 
fever, used to bring a relief. My brother's 
letters, too, were completely silent on the sub- 
ject ; and if he could have imparted good news, 
I should have had it. Flood, I am amazed 
you never wrote to London to make inquiries." 

" Be not therefore amazed, fellow-student ; I 
did take the incalculable trouble of writing to 
London for that especial purpose ; but from the 
fact of your opponent having been only a few 
weeks in town, and, more important still, un- 
known in our set, by self or friend, I might as 
well have written to the North Pole. No civi- 
lized person of my acquaintance or yours could 
possibly be aware of his existence or demise, 
life or death ; or whither they carried him, or 
where they interred him." 

" I am, then, the murderer of a fellow-crea- 
ture," muttered Gerald. 

" Preposterous, good school-mate. Ah !" in- 
terrupting himself, and looking down one of 



8 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

the shady walks at the top of which they stood ; 
" that bonnet can be worn so only by one 
head in the spacious world ! — those twinkling 
feet can prop but one enormously engaging per- 
son ! — stand for yourself a moment, too prosing 
Monsieur Melancholy, I will perchance return ;" 
and, in a pace as gallant as his usual half- stride, 
half-glide, would permit. Flood clanked off' to 
join a group of ladies, who just then turned 
out of view into another walk. 

At this period, France had, for the first time 
during many years, been thrown open to the 
observation, the criticism, nay, the hypercriti- 
cism of England. We had been living to our- 
selves so long, that, beyond ourselves, nothing 
was good, fair, or " in taste." Doctor Prim- 
rose, with a depth of philosophy of which he 
does not suspect himself, declares, that, at his 
own fireside, among his own family, every man 
is a greater man than his neighbour : what is 
true of an individual is true of a nation ; and 
Englishmen isolated from the rest of the world, 
had, indeed, been such a considerable time 
cooped up, at their own fireside, too, that, 
singly and collectively, they illustrated the 
good divine's proposition. We crossed the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 9 

Straits, in fact, to convince ourselves of our 
own preeminence ; and, in this humour, every 
novelty was an innovation, every difference an 
inferiority ; and French manners, French streets, 
French ragouts, French posting, French affec- 
tation, and French sentiment, indiscriminately, 
formed the themes of our self-flattering animad- 
version. 

Gerald wished to be, if he was not, quite 
English ; and while from his peculiar national 
relations, Ireland, as has been seen, was perhaps 
peculiarly undervalued by him, he shared, with 
the bulk of the country he fain would claim as 
his own, no small portion of this English indiffe- 
rence to every thing French also. At the head of 
offences against " good taste," was French sen- 
timent, of course ; and in no instance did it 
appear more glaring, or cause more annoyance 
to his proprieties, than in the arrangement and 
observances of P^re la Chaise, the place where 
he now stood. 

I speak of Gerald's former feelings, when, at 
a first visit, he wandered through the shady 
cemetery. Then, he had turned with offended 
sensibilities from the tomb-slab, of which one 
half-showed an inscription written by a widow 
B 5 



10 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

to her departed spouse, rather than upon the 
event of his death, and ending in an avowal 
that she had caused the other half to remain 
blank, in order to keep a place for her own 
epitaph. The ostentatious fidelity of this wi- 
dow, reminding him of an anecdote of Voltaire, 
sent Gerald twirling off on his heel ; although, 
had he paused a moment longer, he might, 
perhaps, have seen that very woman, coming, 
after the lapse of ten years — the inscription on 
the slab marked the interval — still dressed in 
her weeds, upon that anniversary-day at least, 
to hang a fresh garland over the grave, and, 
kneeling or sitting down within its little enclo- 
sure, to drop a fresh tear, read or say a prayer, 
or meditate upon the happy days she had 
passed by her husband's side, or the still 
happier time when she hoped to meet him 
again. 

At one glance, every thing he saw about 
him suggested to Gerald an elegant affectation 
of natural feeling ; an overstrained attention to 
the unheeding dead. Garlands, and kneeii..g 
mourners, and all — it was French. This day 
he had sauntered to Pere la Chaise full of the 
same prejudice : and at the moment of Flood's 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 11 

departure, he still found in his heart to censure 

whatever he looked upon. Similiarities to the 
widow's slab occurred, and he cried, " pshaw V 
Even the simple little inscription over a little 
grave—*' Adieu, Julie ! adieu mon enfant !" in 
which a father might naturally be supposed to 
speak, did not touch him, until, as he passed 
the lowly gate that led into poor Julie's last 
abode, a sob struck on his ear, and glancing 
round, he saw a respectable-looking man of 
middle age, sitting on a rustic chair at the 
head of the grave of her who had been, perhaps, 
his sole earthly care, pride, and solace. 

Suddenly touched, Gerald felt as much 
ashamed as if he had openly sported with the 
sorrows of a fellow-creature. His pale cheek 
flushed with the apprehension that his careless 
or contemning air might have been observed ; 
and he walked on rapidly, under the impulse, to 
avoid a humiliation. In a short time, it struck 
him that he would walk back, watch the father 
going away, and ascertain how long he had 
been a sincere mourner : and when, with every 
facility for his purpose, Gerald did return and 
examine the date of Julie's death, her little 
grave-stone informed him, that he had indeed 



T^ THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

made light of regrets sanctified and ennobled 
by the lapse of many years. 

" After all,"" he thought, " there may be 
much true feeling amid all this painful display 
of it. Besides, what is display to us may not 
be so to them. While we see these people all 
in parade, they may have no notion of giving us 
the impression ; they may be sincere, when we 
suppose them ostentatious." 

His thoughts thus turned into a more liberal 
course, he allowed them to lead him on. He 
admitted the great propriety of the views in 
which the cemetery had been formed, and the 
decency, at least, of the observances with which 
it was characterised. The funeral processions 
that caught his eye, crossing or winding down 
some of the numerous alleys of the extensive 
grounds, seemed more natural, more real, than 
the funerals he had seen " performed," as the 
undertaker candidly admits, in London. And 
that each grave, the humblest of the thousands 
around, should have its little enclosure, its 
seat for the surviving visitor, its inscription 
out of the hackneyed form supplied, time imme- 
morial, by the English stone-cutter, its little 
urn, or its memento, no matter how frittered 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 13' 

or fantastic, according to the taste (only) of 
the mourner, did not now seem to Gerald ne- 
cessary to imply, in the people of Paris, a total 
absence of those sensibilities common to the 
heart of man all over the world. He called to 
mind a churchyard in the vicinity of his own 
metropolis ; and, in the piling of coffin over 
coffin, of strange bones over strange bones ; in 
the squabbling about the price of graves, and 
their depth, to feet and inches ; in the unseem- 
ly dispatch of an interment of one of the humbler 
classes upon a Sabbath, when funerals crowd 
after each other to the same burying-place ; 
in all this there was a contrast to the advan- 
tage of the scene amid which he stood. He 
remembered to have once seen a group of little 
boys left to finish the raising of a shallow, grass- 
less, dusty grave, when the regular " goodman 
delver," was called away to attend to a new 
arrival ; and the sportive rivalry of the un- 
thinking youngsters, as they flourished and 
clattered their shovels, suggested a want of 
habitual decorousness of feeling, that, at least, 
was as disagreeable as its redundancy amid the 
umbrageous solitudes of Pere la Chaise. 

" And again," said Gerald, " even those who 



14 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

only play a part here, cannot be injured by 
their cold conformance to observances which, 
in the first instance, must have been prompted 
by all that is good and tender in the human 
bosom. ' The fool who came to laugh re- 
mained to pray,"* after the good man's sermon ; 
and surely, in the impressive loneliness of this 
sumptuous public cemetery, coldness itself may 
be warmed, and the hardest heart made gentler 
than it was. ' Affect a virtue if you have it 
not,' is a farther argument against my na- 
tional prejudices." 

He sauntered through alley after alley ; as- 
cended and descended the many inequalities 
of the place of graves ; examined the broad 
ways upon each side of which were ranged the 
spacious and costly mausoleums of the rich 
and great ; lost himself in the green and bushy 
intricacies of the narrower paths that ran 
amongst the last houses of the humbler dead ; 
perused the printed placards that prescribed, 
in a good spirit of serious feeling, fit conduct 
and demeanour to those who should curiously 
visit the sacred solitude ; and all he saw and all 
he pondered on, now affected Gerald in a very 
different way from his former prepossessions. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 15 

" It is meet," he continued ; his own recent 
sensations (for he had been contemplating 
death) assisting, perhaps, his rapid change of 
opinion — "it is meet, it is honourable to hu- 
man nature, even though it be over-done. 
Delicate attention to the departed friend, en- 
nobles a prince or a lord ; why should it not 
be creditable as the habit of a whole people ? 

" The shadowed extent of the place creates 
awe," continued Gerald, ascending its utmost 
heights : " as I walk over these intersecting 
paths, the mansions of the dead so thickly 
piled at either hand, and they alone the dwellers 
here, can my feelings be those of indifference ? 
It is their possession — their city — the city 
of the dead — and dense though noiseless is the 
population ! — Yes !" as at a break through seome 
trees,^ Paris confronted him, seemingly upon 
another elevation, spread out in all the beauty 
of her domes and spires — " yes ! yonder is the 
city of the living ; here is the city of the dead. 
Living, busy Paris ; and dead, breathless Paris ; 
for the crowds that slumber here, once toiled 
and sweated there ; as the crowd that now sup- 
plies their place, jostling and clamouring, and 
humming, along the streets, and quays, and 



16 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

bridges of yonder concatenation of life, will 
soon lie down by the sides of their predecessors 
in vain effort and useless existence. Ay ! in 
less than ninety years, not a soul of that un- 
thinking multitude shall possess the proud capi- 
tal they imagine to be exclusively their own : 
and yet another multitude succeeds; and ano- 
ther still ; — the torrent ever similar, though no 
drop that forms it is the same. Well, here is 
room for all : men give way to each other in 
the grave as well as in the world ; and here, 
too, can all ranks be accumulated ; grandes 
rues for the great and rich ; cross alleys for the 
humble and the poor ; 'twill be all the same, 
or they will think it so." 

Gerald's moralizing was interrupted by catch- 
ing, round the angle of tl\e green alley at the 
end of which he stood, a glimpse of a vision 
that speedily put to flight his sombre thoughts, 
and presented human existence in its most fas- 
cinating form. At only a few steps from him, 
a tall and finely shaped young lady, dressed in 
the perfection, though not in the extreme, of 
French fashion, leaned over the palings of a 
grave very simply adorned, and gazed sted- 
fastly on the brief inscription of its little mo- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 17 

nument. Youth and loveliness never appeared 
more luxuriantly expressed than in the lines of 
her figure. As one foot stood at rest, Gerald's 
eye fixed on an instep that conveyed to his 
mind a promise of all he had fancied of the 
united symmetry and elegance which ought to 
distinguish polished beauty. The face appeared 
only in profile, yet showed a high, fair fore- 
head, a long, and slightly aquiline nose, small, 
red, parted lips, and a round, glowing cheek, 
such as formed a singular and delightful ex- 
ception to the general cast of French features. 
It was, or should have been, English beauty of 
the first order ; and, indeed, Gerald puzzled 
himself for a moment with the question — 
" Where can I have seen her before ?" The 
eye he did not at all catch ; it was quite drooped 
over the little grave : but the golden locks 
which, lightly as summer clouds at sunset, 
thronged over it and round it, farther assured 
him that this lovely lady was a daughter of old 
Ocean's first and proudest Island. 

He looked more studiously, without motion ; 
still hoping to convince himself of his right to 
address her upon the grounds of former ac- 
quaintance ; but the more he riveted his gaze, 



18 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

the less familiar to his mind did her features 
become, until at last they seemed to assume a 
perfectly strange, though not less charming cha- 
racter, like the fleecy vapour in the sky gra- 
dually, at the impulse of the light breeze, 
changing from one phantasy to another; and 
Gerald finally felt assured that he had been 
only beguiled into his first impression by the 
sister-likeness that beauty of a certain stamp 
wears, or makes us think it wears, through all 
its diversities. 

He advanced a step, treading softly on the 
greensward that edged his path, and so did not 
disturb the lady. As his eye continued fixed 
on her cheek, he saw tears burst from under 
the long silken fringe of her rosy lids. He 
stopped ; her emotion increased ; she sobbed 
and hid her face in her hands. He glanced at 
the inscription over the grave, and read, " Ma 
jeune et belle epouse, Justine ! age de 18 ans.'''' 

As a tear glistened in his own eye, Gerald 
thought — " she is French, after all. This grief 
must flow from her connexion with the poor 
Justine ; perhaps they have been sisters." 

He again moved, and the lady started ; un- 
covered her face ; flashed upon him, while they 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 19 

Still floated in tears, the most beautiful blue 
eyes in the world; as suddenly withdrew them; 
and, turning away, rapidly applied her handker- 
chief to her cheeks. 

" I have intruded without intending it. Ma- 
dam," said Gerald, a little confused ; while 
the recent touch of pathos he had experi- 
enced, agitated his voice, *• and I am much 
distressed, — I exceedingly regret — " and he 
stopped. 

She answered in French- — " I am not Eng- 
lish, Sir; and pray do not speak English, if 
you please; perhaps you enquire the way to 
the entrance .'' I will tell you with pleasure ; 
that way." 

During this speech she had gravely turned 
round, her looks cast down; but the play of 
her lips, and the vivacity of her action, as she 
pointed out the way, was, along with her pure 
accent and quick utterance, abundantly French 
to Gerald's eye and ear. He had not yet quite 
regained his self-possession ; but, irresistibly, he 
uncovered his head, bowed, and held his hat in 
his hand, as she spoke. When she had ended, 
he found that, from his slight agitation, he 
could not fully collect her meaning. He under- 



20 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

stood enough, however, to answer, that when 
he had addressed her in English, he only meant 
to apologize for intruding upon her private 
meditations at the grave of a friend. 

She laughed slightly, and, still speaking 
French, said, " Your apology need not be so 
empresse, then, for no friend of mine lies here : 
la jemie et belle Justine I never before heard 
of: only, in passing, a little fatigued, in my 
search after some acquaintances who accom- 
panied me hither, and whom, out of a frolic, 
I foolishly ran away from, just now — (in fact. 
Sir, it was to avoid other company,) — the railings 
of poor Justine's inclosure happened to be the 
first I leaned over to rest myself; and so I have 
given you cause to suppose me a more afflicted 
lady than I would pretendvto be." 

All traces of her tears had now faded away ; 
her face was unclouded sunshine, her eyes again 
played around Gerald with all their dangerous 
power, and, joined to their beams, the dimpling 
smile of her perfect mouth was the most lovely 
thing in nature. 

" She is French, indeed," he thought ; " that 
manner, that frankness, a little too liberal in the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 21 

first interview with a stranger ; that fascination, 
a little too evident in its effort to conquer, — ay, 
and those ready tears at an unknown grave, 
provoked by a few words of blazoned senti- 
ment — "(his antipathies were returning) — "and 
shed in the very climax of, as she confesses, a 
frolic, — all is French about her, except — " and 
Gerald was stopped by his own sigh — " except 
her personal charms, and those are radian; 
enough for a heaven." 

But this piece of Gerald's habitual criticism 
did not, in the thinking, occupy a tenth part 
the time spent in noticing it ; nor did he seem 
to have been guilty of any want of attention, 
when, after a second's pause, he replied to the 
lady's last words, by hoping that she might 
easily and soon discover her friends. 

" It does not trouble me much," she resumed ; 
*' I am too precious in their eyes to be left to 
spend the night with Justine here. — But are you 
well acquainted with the intricacies of this 
strange and beautiful place ? Though, just 
now, I superfluously pointed out your way to the 
entrance-gate, the knowledge I was then able to 
impart contains the sum of all I know about it ; 



a» THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

and where, or in what direction I must turn to 
regain my friends, is, indeed, a mystery for the 
present." 

Gerald was very sorry he could not have the 
honour and pleasure of assisting the lady out of 
her embarrassment : and, at the same time, he 
took the liberty of requesting that she would 
have the goodness to speak a little slower, in 
order to allow him the great pleasure of com- 
prehending every single word she did him the 
favour of addressing to his ear. 

"A little slower!" she repeated, laughing; 
" well, with all my heart ; but you will excuse 
my laugh when 1 tell you that your request is 
so precisely the same preferred by all your 
countrymen, on their first appearance here, I 
could not help enjoying it, — ' a little slower if 
you please, a little slower;' toujours slower; 
toujours V and she resumed her laugh : " you 
are quite English, of course, Sir ?" 

*' Not quite," answered Gerald. 

" Ecossois, then .f*" 

"No; not at all Scotch." 

*' But you cannot be German, nor High or 
Low Dutch, for the manner of your own which 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 23 

you have is beyond them — nor Italian, for you 
dress too well, and don't look picturesque — nor 
Spanish, for you don't look like Talma acting 
the grand ; let me see — you are Irlandois ?" 

*' Nor quite Irish, either," replied Gerald, a 
little annoyed at this unceremonious cross-ex- 
amination, and disposed to question the lady's 
claim to be very well-bred, even making every 
allowance for her Frenchism. 

" What ! neither Dutch, German, Italian, 
Spanish, Scotch, nor yet English-quite, nor 
Irish-quite ? Have you a country at all. Sir ?" 
— Gerald suspected that a tone of irony ran 
through this speech — " or is your country so 
unworthy that you grow ashamed of it, as a 
youngster might of a humble parent ? or, per- 
haps, since you are not English-^weVe, nor Irish- 
quite — " her repetitions were marked with such 
emphasis, that, added to the effects of her last 
words, Gerald's cheeks flamed — " perhaps we 
must call you by that doubtful title which peo- 
ple who have a country laugh at — you are 
English-Irish, Sir ?" 

Gerald bowed low, and, with much cold dig- 
nity, assured the lady that she had, no matter 



24 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

how people might be amused at it, bestowed 
on him the very title which, in this case, he 
preferred. 

" If you have true friends, Sir, they must 
regret your preference. The title gives you no 
claim to one country or the other; and every 
man ought to claim one country to stand by 
against all the world — every young man, at 
least, — as he would stand by one true mistress, 
one mother, one rule of conduct, one belief in 
God. It is expected from him ; men expect 
it, and women too. A young man who cannot 
name his country, and name it with love and 
sorrow, if not with pride and boasting, is like 
the unfortunate who blushes at his mother's 
name, or the worse than unfortunate who can- 
not assert and show his hope in a Creator and 
in Heaven. Considering nations as but different 
branches of one great family, he stands un- 
connected in interests, in importance, with his 
kind— ^' 

" Madam," interrupted Gerald, smiling at 
the French female-oratory to which he stood 
so strangely exposed, " although I cannot en- 
gage to conduct you to your friends, may I 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 25 

crave the honour of accompanying you in quest 
of them ?" 

" And think you, Sir," the beautiful lady- 
continued, not noticing his attempt to change 
the subject — ^" think you that, while the coun- 
try which such a person gives up, indignantly 
resents his apostasy, the country he would fain 
adopt, or rather, which he would crave to 
adopt him, honours or respects his trifling pre- 
ference ?" 

" Or, Madam," again interrupted Gerald, 
now very briskly, " shall I singly endeavour to 
find your friends, and direct them to this spot 
to meet you ?" 

He was bowing himself away. 

" Tarry a moment, Sir," resumed his strange 
lecturer, as she relaxed into her smiles, and 
her former playfulness of manner ; " I have 
frightened you, scarecrow that I am"" — her 
laughing eyes met his, and, without the slight- 
est want of female dignity of expression, con- 
veyed a glance that was meant to impart her 
own unaffected belief that she was not what her 
words said she was — " I have frightened you ; 
and now you look and act more like an English- 

VOL. II. c 



Xb THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

man than like any one else, with your superb 
manner, and your keeping up your consequence; 
— but I wish you to remain to hear me tell 
you — first, that you must be no Englishman ; 
that, in fact, you must be an Irishman ; 
what your birth and your social relations have 
made you ; what, in spite of yourself, you are ; 
and what a certain future event, — a melancholy 
one, indeed, — by increasing and strengthening 
your natural connexions with that country, 
ought to give you a proper ambition to be." 

She paused an instant, as if to note the sur- 
prise in which Gerald heard the last allusion, 
that, although vague, and not at all understood 
by him, seemed to argue, on the part of the 
lady, some knowledge of who he was. 

" A certain future e^ent. Madam !" he re- 
peated, in great interest, while he again ad- 
vanced ; " if you now speak seriously — and I 
cannot, must not, doubt it — what can you pos- 
sibly mean ?" 

" The second reason for which I commanded 
your stay. Sir," she answered, *' was to give 
you some little proof, that in at all entering into 
conversation with you, under such peculiar cir- 
cumstances, I did not follow the mere impulse 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 27 

of a light head, or act unworthy of my station 
and social habits, but rather because I had a 
reasonable motive, arising out of some anxiety 
for your interests.*" 

** And some knowledge of them, too, Ma- 
dam ?'' 

" It would so appear." 

" I have the honour of being known to you, 
then ?" with much eagerness of manner, as he 
recollected his impression at a first view of 
the lady. 

" Many persons are known by me, who know 
nothing of me," she answered, mysteriously, or 
in affected mystery, while a slight tendency to 
smile lurked, however, in the dimples round her 
mouth. 

" But surely no person can be aware of hav- 
ing the honour and happiness of being known 
hy you, without also wishing and soliciting to 
know something of you," he resumed, his good- 
humour now restored, and his interest raised 
to the utmost. 

" How can you tell ?" she asked, with a so- 
lemnity well assumed, if it was not real ; " how 
can you tell — how can you guess the feelings 
with which you would receive the intimation of 
c 2 



»8 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

who and what I am ? You find me in this 
ominous solitude ; alone and unprotected, raised 
up before your eyes under the shadow of the cy- 
press-tree, and watching the grave of one who, 
young and fair like myself, died before her 
time: are you certain that a true account of 
my coming here, and of my connexions and na- 
ture, would not startle you ? I told you I had 
just parted from my friends in a frolic — will 
you venture to decide what kind of friends they 
were ? I also said I had done so to shun dis- 
agreeable company — can you assure yourself 
what company I meant ?" 

" Admirable, Madam !" laughed Gerald, now 
beginning to suspect that the lady, brilliant and 
graceful as she was, might be no paragon of 
female respectability, and only anxious to as- 
certain if she really knew any thing certain 
about him ; " but I ivill venture even the dis- 
covery of some German diablerie to ascertain — " 

" It is in vain. Sir," she went on : " for the 
present, you shall not hear my name or quality ; 
enough, that / am sure of you ; at least I think 
I am ; let me determine ; extend your right 
hand and lay it on that paling i" Gerald ex- 
tended his right hand, indeed ; but it was with 



The ANGLO-IRISH. 29 

an obvious motion towards laying it on hers — 
she stepped back, reddened, frowned slightly, 
and added, in tones of real command ; " Sir ! 
no freedom of that kind, or we part at the in- 
stant ; put down your hand as I have bid you, 
or keep it at your side." 

He at last obeyed, and, peering upon his 
hand at some distance, she resumed, " Yes, I 
am right ; the lines are here ; a recent devotion 
at a forbidden shrine, at the very moment you 
seemed to kneel to Heaven ; then a duel and a 
death — Start not, Sir !'' he did not merely 
start, he trembled — " a death .'* ay, two ; and 
then a more recent evil — sickness, I believe ; 
but here winds the future — does death run in it 
also .'* — yes, death, grinning under a coronet." 

" Gracious powers !'' exclaimed Gerald, not 
able to repress his sudden and various feelings ; 
" beautiful and surprising creature, you have 
indeed spelled my recent fortunes ; but what 
terrible prophecy do you make .'' Come, lady, 
come," he continued, smiling, after an instant's 
thought, as he got ashamed of his own ecstasy ; 
" I will give full credit to your skill on what 
has gone by, because, by some means I cannot 
guess, you know all about me ; and since I am. 



30 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

as well known to you, I swear we do not part 
till—" 

" Keep your ground, Sir," she exclaimed 
again, in a voice and manner that would not be 
denied ; " or," changing into her other kind of 
seriousness, when she saw he stood checked, — 
" or, recollect where we are — this," pointing 
down to it, " this is the grave of lajeune et belle 
Justine y and perhaps I am nearer to my friends 
than you think of." 

" Well, well. Madam ; or, if I choose, I may 
now imagine that shrewd conjecture has helped 
you by chance to your hints of my past life." 

*' I know it better than yourself," she said, 
nodding impressively towards him. 

" Ml/ name, then, you can at least disclose ?" 

*' For the present, I call you by no name ; 
I only ask you, instead, to peruse this;" she 
handed a paper folded like a letter, blank on 
the outside, and as he took and glanced at it, 
added, " but, at our next meeting, I may, per- 
haps, call you Lord Clangore"" — and when Ge- 
rald raised up his eyes in surprised and confused 
inquiry, he only saw her flounce whisking 
round the corner of the alley where they had 
stood so long together. He hastened after her. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. SI 

She was not visible. He ran up and down se- 
veral of the green and silent avenues of the 
cemetery. They showed no objects but the urns 
and monuments of the dead. At last, exhausted 
with efforts beyond his present state of health, 
he sat down on some steps that led from the 
high grounds towards the first little valley of 
the picturesque as well as most awful soli- 
tude. 

And here his immediate impulse was to ex- 
amine the paper that had been placed in his 
hands. Taking off the blank envelope, he ar- 
rived at a curiously folded letter, partly com- 
posed of coarse, bluish paper, secured with two 
large wafers, and directed, in a bold, though un- 
practised hand, to himself. He opened it, and 
read as follows : 

" To his honor, the Right Hon. Gerald 

Blount, Esq. London, England. 

" Pleas your honor, 

" I am a tenant to your honor's brother, the 

young Lord, lately living on his estate in Ireland, 

but had the little holding from Mr. Bignell, 

his Lordship's Stewart, a bad and a hard man as 

ever a poor boy — and I am no more, pleas your 



32 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

honor, than a boy, though the young wife and 
a child is depending on me — but what I make 
bold to ask of your honor is to speak to the 
young Lord to speak to Mr. Bignell to give me 
a little time for the last gale, and the one that 's 
rising, and let us back into the decent cabin that 
the father before me had many a long day's 
work to build, when the ground, that was a 
desert of a place the time he got it, began to be 
fit for a Christian to live on ; I 'd write this to 
the young Lord himself, only I wrote twice 
before, and got no answer ; and Mr. Bignell, 
that knew I wrote the last time, is more hard 
than ever against us. God soften his heart ! — for 
he 's nothing but a cruel man to us, and every 
one around him, as I said before ; and he 
threatens to let the place taa crony of his, and a 
stranger to us, your honor; and if I 'm served in 
this way, banished from the old house entirely, 
and the young wife and the child on my back, 
and the wide world before me, what can I do but 
come to no good in the long run ? I often was in 
arrear as much as I am now, and cleared it, and 
would this time, only for the bad season ; but 
will, pleas God and your honor, by next winter 
again. And so, as the word goes here, that your 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 39 

honor has the kind heart and the just mind, 
towards all the people you know, at least, if 
not towards us in Ireland, the Lord in Heaven 
will give you a reward for helping the misfor- 
tunate, that 's left in the hands of a hard man, 
and the blessings and prayers of the young 
family will be in store for you, and maybe 
you '11 save from an ill turn the man that makes 
bold to send you this, and is your honor's 
brother's tenant and well-wisher to death, 

" Michael Farrell." 



c 5 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER II. 

The letter Gerald read did not at all interest 
him on its own account. Lord Clangore had often 
told him of such applications from many of his 
humbler tenantry, which, while they seemed to 
breathe the very spirit of sincerity, and a wish 
to act honestly and punctually, were, as his 
Lordship was well advised by Mr. Bignell, his 
land-steward, or else by his agent, nothing more 
than shameless efforts to create continued oppor- 
tunity for living indolently upon spots of ground 
they would scarcely culture, and of which they 
never intended to pay a gale's rent. Indeed, 
Gerald thought, that the name " Michael Far- 
rell," signed to the petition now in his hand, 
had before come under his observation ; when, 
perhaps, after receiving the former letters allud- 
ed to by the writer, Lord Clangore had wished 
him to mark how adroitly an Irish knave could 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 35 

represent himself as the injured party, at the 
very moment he was cajoling and injuring 
others. The pitiful story of the " young wife 
and child," had, thei-efore, no effect upon Gerald's 
sympathy; and he at once dismissed from his 
mind the ingenious Mr. Michael Farrell, and all 
that concerned him. It was a question of much 
greater interest to ask how such a document 
came into the hands of the strange and lovely 
person by whom it had been presented. What 
connexion could exist between a fashionable 
Parisian lady, and a small farmer in the wilds 
of Ireland, seemed suiRciently surprising; as 
much so, indeed, as did every thing else Gerald 
recollected of his new acquaintance; as her 
knowledge of him, and of his recent adventures, 
and, above all, the prophecy contained in her 
words at parting. 

Was his brother. Lord Clangore, really ill ? 
and had this lady learned the fact, while it was 
studiously concealed, out of motives of delicacy, 
perhaps, to his own state of health, from 
Gerald's ears ? and was his Lordship indisposed 
to the serious extent upon which she seemed to 
build her augury ? 

In good time, his friend Flood ascended. 



86 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

from the lower grounds of the cemetery to 
the place where he sat. The military cox- 
comb toiled slowly up the height, with an 
unelastic step and half bent back, as if he suf- 
fered from fatigue of mind and body. At a 
nearer approach it was, indeed, easy to perceive 
that his limbs were weary, and his temper as 
much discomposed as his affected indifference to 
agitation of any kind would allow to become 
visible. 

" Diavolo, old schoolfellow !"*' he began, as 
soon as he was able to reach the last of the steps 
upon which Gerald rested, at the same time 
drawing out a thin cambric handkerchief, sur- 
charged with an essence that sent perfume 
among the dwellings of the sleepers around, 
and then, after many deHcate efforts, seating 
himself, his back turned to his friend — " Dia- 
volo, good Blount ! and that is one of the un- 
nameable words disguised in a foreign tongue, 
else had mine never uttered it; but, Diavolo, 
and Diable, and Der Deyvil — the same, thrice 
disguised — may it be remotely demanded or 
solicited, why you did not keep your post 
till I came back on the relief.'' Let me be 
dissolved in an exceedingly subtile preparation 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 87 

of aromatic fluid, if I do not incline to be ha- 
rassed, at the present moment, with the mon- 
strously unusual forced march of trying to 
make you out, among this very absurd accumu- 
lation of labyrinths, and all the while encumber- 
ed with boots, the shade of a delicate thought 
too tight ; spurs, such as one must wear ; an in- 
verted cone for a cap ; and belts, sash, swinging 
sabre, and cossacks." 

" How did you bear the long marches in the 
Peninsula, Flood ?" asked Gerald, amused for a 
moment out of his serious mood, and intended 
serious question. 

*' We never bore them." 

" Who then .?'' 

" Mules, mules always — them and us toge- 
ther. But pray, now, too well-esteemed Blount, 
shatter me not with questions, after permitting 
me to approach the utmost verge of exhaustion, 
very superfluously, in your service." 

" All in mi/ service, Flood ^ but no matter,^' 
curbing his slight inclination to smile ; " of that 
presently, if circumstances, or rather the infor- 
mation I expect from you, permit our recur- 
rence to a playful subject." 

" He continues — " interrupted Flood — " he 



38 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

puts to death, slowly — I will not listen, very 
positively — " raising his hands to his ears. 

" Flood," controlling his action, and seiz- 
ing his arm, " you do not suspect my question 
— my brother has been ill .?" 

*' And who gave you that intimation ?" asked 
Flood, surprised out of his languor. 

" Perhaps I may tell you ; but first " 

** When did you receive it ?" 

" To-day ; within half an hour." 

" Since we parted .'' In this French place ?" 

" In this cemetery, since we parted," 

Flood looked posed; then interested, as if 
with a new thought; then suspicious; and at 
length resumed. 

" The kind of informant ?'' 

" You break, or rather reject, the covenant I 
would impose ; I am not to answer you, if at all, 
until you answer me." 

" By an incalculably remote possibility, good 
Blount, and in vague recollection of the manner 
in which Winyard happened to get his intima- 
tion, the informant may have been— this is so pe- 
culiarly the place for it — may have been — your 
brother himself.?"" 

" What !" cried Gerald, remembering the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 3& 

extraordinary, if not fearful anecdote ; *' has 
Lord Clangore been indeed so indisposed as to 
warrant your allusion ? — and to that extent, in- 
deed, have I been instructed." 

" It may be insinuated, then, that yours was, 
in a degree, a 'juggling fiend,' fellow-student, 
inasmuch as Lord Clangore — (I have a notion, 
but all this is so egregiously tiresome) — though 
an invalid, during, I venture to say, the very 
period of your absurd relapse, now enjoys, or 
progresses towards the enjoyment of exceedingly 
robust health." 

Flood languidly, and, owing to the braced 
condition of his body and limbs, with much 
difficulty, conveyed his hand into his pocket and 
produced a letter, of which the superscription, 
directed to Gerald, was in the handwriting of 
Lord Clangore ; and he carelessly added that, 
having received it that morning, he forbore 
giving it to his friend, until, after prescribed lo- 
comotion in the open air, Gerald should attain a 
sufficient strength of nerve to receive, like a 
person of his usual good sense, a little historical 
intimation of the whole matter. 

The letter contained assurances from Lord 
Clangore that his late attack had almost wholly 



40 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

subsided ; it was dated but three days back ; the 
lady-prophetess, unless, indeed, she obtained her 
knowledge of events by some of the means to 
which she had pretended, could not have re- 
ceived later advices from London ; consequently 
her augury was only founded upon his Lord- 
ship's first indisposition, and, to Gerald's great 
relief, went for nothing. 

" And, well," he resumed, " this enables me 
to gratify you. Flood, as to the kind of fami- 
liar who anticipated your tardy post-delivery. 
She " 

" It was a she ?" questioned Flood, staring 
up into Gerald's face. 

" Ay, and one of the divinest she's." 
. " Long on the list of your acquaintances ?" 

" Not there yet : for tho\igh she knows every 
thing about me, I am to this moment ignorant 
of her name." 

" But you have passingly regarded her be- 
fore ?" 

" Never, before." 

" Indicate her appearance, excellent Blount." 

" Young, lovely, blooming, tall, graceful, 
French " 

" Originate, rather, some faint notion of her 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 41 

costume; that's the touchstone of female iden- 
tity." 

" I really never took notice." 
" Very like you, fellow-student. Suffer your 
tired friend to attempt a sketch. Chapeau a la 
casque; robe, couleur de rose; flounces en re- 
viere ; in hand a parasol, sea-green ; fringe much 
darker, and lined with French white ; on neck 
a double gold chain ; gloves, carnation ; stock- 
ings, open- wrought ; shoes, crimson — (an over- 
sight — only weigh the robe) — and pendants — ^" 
" Enough. That's my Ariel." 
" It is, is it ? Then it 's mine, too." 
" Indeed ! perhaps the lady you spoke of, 
before we parted to-day ?" 

" Convincingly the same. And the same who 
remotely caused us to part." 

" Did you, immediately after, meet her ?" 
" Not very immediately. Not, I have a 
notion, even contingently. To approach posi- 
tive statement — not at all. You may, it seems 
to me, call to mind, that three ladies stood at 
the top of the path, as your admirer and well- 
wisher left your side. Of those three, she was 
one. When, about the middle of my progress 
up the path, I stooped my head to assist my 



42 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

hand in disengaging, as I fancy, my sabre point 
from my spurs, and raised it up again, all were 
in rather precipitate motion onward. I may as- 
sert, that I proportionately quickened my pace ; 
but before I gained the point where the alley 
branched off in two or three directions, her 
friends took one way, and herself another ; and 
she, I am rather confident, might be said to 
have tripped off, very fleetly, and slightly laugh- 
ing as she did so. Notwithstanding the laugh, 
or, as it may be translated, titter, I ventured to 
flatter myself that I had received a vastly pretty 
invitation to pursue and overtake her alone. 
Accordingly, I summed up the utmost speed of 
man, along the path it did seem to me she had 
adopted. You know the rather mortifying and 
inconvenient result ; for "though, from that mo- 
ment to the present one, I might be permitted 
safely to suppose, that I have twice traversed 
every nook of this rather unseemly scene for 
gentle or sportive exercise, it is insufferably 
true, I might as well have been taking my ease 
(I do wish for my raeershaum) upon the very 
obdurate surface of these steps." 

" So, Flood, so much for your hard cam- 
paigning in my service ; but let that pass : — 



THE ANGLO-IRISH, 43 

I shall only observe, that while you were vainly 
seeking her, I was conversing with her." 

" A passing word, in which, by some very 
unhallowed agency, we venture to conclude, 
she merely tiinted the late indisposition of your 
brother ?" 

" A volume, from which I learned much 
more than that." 

" For how long a period of my absence, wor- 
thy fellow, did you in reality hold her in dis- 
course ?"" 

" During the whole of it, at least to within a 
minute of your re-appearance here." 

"In good earnest .'' Diavolo. How near to 
her all the time .P" 

" Generally speaking, we stood side by side.*" 

*' ' I prithee do not mock me, fellow-student.'" 

" Ay ; and once she insisted on my extending 
my hand." 

« Der deyvil." 

" And when at last she was compelled to 
part, left me a letter directed to myself to con- 
sole me in her absence." 

" Touching what ?'"' 

*' Excuse me." 

" Worthy person, I esteem you well; for 



44 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

your veracious habits of speech, as well as for 
many other qualities, do I esteem you : =».but, 
oldest friend, that interesting individual is rather 
exclusively my property, at least in reversion, 
hope, and prospects ; I saw her first ; I con- 
descend to allow her some merit first ; she was 
even my theme to yourself before your very 
astounding interview with her; therefore, be- 
ware. Reflect and reason, thou soul of honour : 
wrong not your Damon, your Orestes, your 
Nisus, your Jonathan ; touch him not in the 
rather tender point of this passing fancy ; tempt 
him not ; wrath him not ; else will it rather 
undoubtedly come to pass, that he must engage 
in the taking away of your precious and, partly 
by his ministry, lately preserved life." 

Gerald laughed, as it was intended he should ; 
but still indulged himself in keeping up the 
rare occurrence of curiosity and piqued inter- 
est in his amusing rival; indeed, were it but 
for the sake of exercise to his natural feelings, 
and the good it was like to do them, Gerald 
thought he ought not to abate the excitement ; 
and supposing him even to give pain, why, 
after all, it was only breaking the butterfly on 
the wheel. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 45 

He would therefore enter into no detail of 
his conversation with the object of their mutual 
iiterest, beyond what he had already supplied ; 
namely, her knowledge of who and what he 
was; her allusion — (for Gerald suppressed her 
prophecy) — to Lord Clangore's illness ; and her 
delivery of the latter at parting. 

Yet, economical as Gerald was in communicat- 
ing information to his friend, it became equally 
his policy to get from that friend as much as 
he could upon a certain point. Nothing con- 
nected with the whole adventure seemed of 
such importance as to ascertain the name and 
connexions of the lovely lady; and on these 
matters, Flood must, of course, be enlightened. 
Some tact was required to secure Gerald suc- 
cess. The strange compound of coxcombry, 
good-nature, and good-sense, was as shrewd as 
he was laughable ; and if he suspected Gerald's 
anxiety, or was presented with it in but one 
little word, would undoubtedly take revenge, 
by repaying caution for caution, or, perhaps, 
even not hesitate to puzzle him by a fanciful 
representation. 

Watching his opportunity, however, and, 
indeed, partly forming it, Gerald did succeed 



46 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

in obtaining all that Flood could say on this 
head; and he was not a little surprised that 
that *' all" just amounted to nothing. In fact, 
the hero had never been presented to the lady ; 
had never met her in society ; did not know 
any one that knew her ; and, much inferior in 
experience to his rival, had never even heard 
the sound of her voice, unless in the laugh or 
titter with which he had an hour before been 
honoured. 

" What, then ?'' Gerald asked, in much ad- 
miration. 

" Naught : except that at St. Cloud, upon 
one of those tiresome fete days, while the 
very stupid water-works were spouting and 
splashing about, he had, if he distinctly re- 
collected, originally seen the individual, in a 
great crowd, and a great way off; and then, 
for that time, lost sight of her. Her next 
revelation of her person to his eyes might 
have taken place amid the very vulgar throngs 
of Le Jardin des Plantes, when, supposing 
his memory still to bear him out, he encoun- 
tered her, in a somewhat agitated condition, 
stepping back from a previously-unseen-too- 
close-proximity to one of the unmeaning wild 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 47 

beasts the people cage up there, and went to 
the trouble of offering his hand, and saying, 
* permit me,' with a view of conducting her 
to a less disagreeable and more retired portion 
of the gardens ; but she stepped back on the 
Avild beast from him, looking scarlet and angry, 
and seemed to join some friends, and, after 
she and they had surveyed him all over, and, 
as he was about to saunter away, very tired of 
the whole thing, she smiled. And his third 
and, until the re-encounter of to-day, last view 
of her, was in the church of St. Roch, into 
which he had sauntered, of a Sunday, as if to 
look for some of the balls Buonaparte had shot 
at it from the Pont Neuf ; and there she ap- 
peared, near the grand altar, and caught his eye, 
and whispered aside to her perpetual friends, 
the moment he came in ; and when an exceed- 
ingly officious person, habited somewhat like 
an English Sunday beadle, walked up to him, 
and intimated a desire that he would be unco- 
vered, " dans la Maison de Dieu" he could 
perceive her smile again, and her good-humour 
was especially visible, when, in consequence of 
his very sensible inattention to the beadle's 
impertinence, he was rather compelled, by that 



48 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

foolish person, and others, to withdraw from 
the church. Then he watched at the entrance 
till the people came out; but the amazingly 
interesting young woman escaped him." 

And, from the downright sincerity of manner 
with which Flood spoke, Gerald became con- 
vinced that he could yield no farther infor- 
mation. 

They left P^re la Chaise. 



THB ANGLO-IRISH. 49 



CHAPTER III. 

Upon their return into Paris, the friends 
found that the rumours, to which Gerald had 
in the morning alluded, were now more ge- 
nerally afloat ; and though people did not speak 
openly or loudly, their countenances told their 
wonder and anxiety. 

Flood took leave of Gerald next day, to meet 
his father. Sir Robert, in London. He could 
with difficulty obtain a place in a public con- 
veyance for Calais or Boulogne; so ardent, al- 
ready, were the more sensitive English, in run- 
ning from the threatened danger. Gerald, now 
almost alone, soon left Paris, too ; but it was 
merely in an impulse for change of place, 
and in the hope of diverting his continued 
melancholy. 

As he passed the Place du Carousel for the 
last time, part of the expected event occurred. 

VOL. II. D 



60 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Royal carriages dashed out of the Thuilleries, 
and in one of them he caught a glance of the 
features of Louis, relaxed and livid with agi- 
tation. His eyes fell upon the two sentinels at 
cither side of the great archway. He had al- 
ways thought that there was some bad arrange- 
ment in mounting together, upon all the posts 
of Royal guard, a red and a blue jacket : it seem- 
ed to augur doubt as well as gratitude, on the 
part of the restored race; and neither of the 
sentinels could recollect much, Gerald thought, 
to make him friendly with his comrade. Now, 
as, after their " present arms," he observed the 
Swiss and the Frenchman, he believed that the 
one looked dubious and alarmed, and the other 
excited and threatening. 

Continuing his route, Gerald, to hold himself 
in readiness for an expected result, proceeded 
southward, along the Coast, and arrived at Brest. 
But few days elapsed till it was known that the 
Eagle of Elba had, indeed, winged his unob- 
structed way back again to his metropolitan 
eyrie, and once more perched upon his pillar in 
the Place Vendome. It became necessary for 
all the English in France to return to their own 
country; and, with crowds of others, Gerald 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 51 

engaged his passage in a merchantman at Brest, 
intending to make Bristol from that port. 

Amid the confusion and rejoicings that reign- 
ed around him, before his embarlcation, a mat- 
ter of a different kind interested Gerald. A 
procession, displaying the tri-color, passed 
through the streets, attended by bands of mu- 
sic. The windows were crowded with ladies, 
waving their handkerchiefs, and decorated with 
the revived badge of the chieftain Emperor. 
In one window, a group of fair enthusiasts were 
particularly vivacious in evincing their good 
will ; and Gerald started to recognize among 
them his strange acquaintance of Pere la 
Chaise. As his eyes fixed on her face, from a 
point almost under her, she looked down, and in 
turn recognized him. He ventured to bow ; 
she returned his salutation, smiled archly, and 
unpinning a Napoleon knot from her shoulder, 
dropped it upon his head. The crowd pushed 
him aside ; he was obliged to change his place, 
and when he next looked towards the window, it 
was closed, and none of its former occupants to 
be seen. 

He had received notice that the merchantman 
would leave Brest at an early hour next morn- 
D 2 



52 tHE ANGLO-IRISH. 

ing. Gerald overslept himself, as also did his 
valet, and both arrived at the water''s edge only 
to witness the vessel on her way, in full sail, 
about a mile and a half out. Boatmen offered 
to row him to her side ; he accepted the pro- 
posal ; his luggage was tumbled into a six-oared 
boat, and in less than half an hour he was within 
talking distance of the merchantman. But she 
would not, or could not abate one knot for him, 
nor furl an inch of canvass ; he might clamber 
up the gangway if he was able, and that was all. 
Mortified and vexed, and a little put out of 
countenance at finding himself an evident object 
of merriment to the deck full of passengers, 
Gerald stood a moment silent and inactive, and 
his men rested on their^oars. The packet was 
again ploughing away, ere the boat made a re- 
newed effort to get alongside of her. At last, 
however, his six stout rowers accomplished their 
task, as well as they were able, for it blew very 
fresh, and the waves were high and quick, and 
they durst not, for some time, shoot under the 
gangway. But by the aid of a rope flung to 
them, they finally were so situated as to com- 
mence throwing Gerald's luggage on board. 
He paid them, and tried to ascend himself. 



THE ANGLO IRISH. 53 

Not being much inured to exertions of the kind, 
he was awkward, perhaps timid. The hands on 
the deck of the merchantman spoke roughly to 
him ; his own rowers exhorted in no gentler 
voice and manner ; the passengers smiled, nay, 
some laughed ; he lost his presence of mind, a 
high swell took hig boat, he let go the rope 
from the gangway; there was a titter even 
among the ladies, and one of the ladies Gerald 
thought he knew ; he fell back ; that lady's 
smile changed into a shriek of terror; his head, 
coming against the side of the boat, lost, for a 
moment, its powers for farther observation ; and 
when he fully regained his senses, he was on his 
way to shore, the ship gone off beyond present 
hope, and part of his luggage with it. 

Not quite tranquillized from the effects of this 
petty annoyance, Gerald really embarked for 
England the next day, in another vessel, that 
also proposed to make Bristol. 

Though compelled to return to English 
ground, it was not Gerald's intention to proceed 
to London. He rather planned to penetrate 
into the magnificent solitudes of North Wales, 
and there, still separated from all former scenes 
and associates, wear out, gradually and natu- 



S4 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

rally, the terrible impressions both were calcu- 
lated to keep up. He had thought of Ireland, 
as, from its remoteness, even better suited to his 
design, but he could not bring his mind to con- 
template a visit to that country. His early 
prejudices to such a step remained in all their 
force, and recent events added to them. The 
reader has seen him attribute to Lady Cox*s 
Irish feeling and education, much of her first 
vehemence; and although, since the miserable 
results of that vehemence, he had not as directly 
scrutinized her conduct, he irresistibly assured 
himself, now and then, that if her Irish relation, 
young Captain Stanhope, and her Irish hus- 
band. Sir Richard, had only been a little less 
national, the one in his precipitancy, and the 
other in his monstrous notions of vengeance, the 
whole of the tragedy in which he had acted a 
part never to be forgotten, might have been 
spared to him and to the world. 

He shrunk, therefore, even from the English- 
Irish, who, living in Ireland, could present such 
untameable characteristics. Nor would he run 
the risk of meeting, in that country, any of 
the unfortunate lady's friends. And there 
were other reasons still to confirm his objections. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 55 

Within the last few days, he had received a 
letter from Lord Clangore, which advised him, 
that the whole district of Ireland in which lay 
their different estates, was in a flame of Rockite 
insurrection, marked by the most ferocious out- 
rage. If Gerald went to Ireland at all, he 
must visit his estate, or at least become closely 
and disagreeably connected with the occui'rences 
that took place upon it ; and in some personal 
misgiving, as well as in utter disgust, this he 
would not venture to do. Indeed, it did not 
seem probable, particularly after the neglect 
shown by his noble brother and himself to the 
idle applications of their humbler tenantry, — 
now, he concluded, swelling the ranks of Cap- 
tain Hock, — that his person could be safe in 
such an experiment. 

To Wales, then, since he could not stay in 
France, Gerald determined to repair. 

The little vessel in which he had embarked 
began her voyage under a fair wind for cutting 
across the mouth of the Channel towards the 
Land's End. Though a fair wind, it was how- 
ever, like that experienced by the merchantman 
of the day before, a high one. And after coming 
in sight of the English shore, and when her 



56 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

tack was now to double the Land's End, and 
then coast along to the Bristol Channel, the 
breeze proved less favourable, of course, though 
still holding steady in its point. 

In a few hours it began to blow a gale, and 
from the most contrary quarter too. They 
made little way, against a surfy tide, just as 
they strove to double the promontory, and night 
fell, to increase the difficulty and probable dan- 
ger of their situation. The gale grew furious, 
but now, fortunately as the seamen deemed, 
blew them out from the Cornish coast, and up 
the Channel, In the pitch darkness of such a 
night, the captain would not think of running 
into shore, and his only or best hope was to 
trust to as much open sea as he could find. It 
soon became a question, however, if his vessel 
could live out the night. Masts were cut away, 
and the hold lightened. Gerald, so lately 
escaped from death, in more than one shape, 
and in more than one kind of situation, again 
contemplated the grim despot, in perhaps his 
most horrible approach. Holding by the re- 
mains of cordage on deck, while female passen- 
gers screamed aloud, and the bravest men wept, 
thinking of their homes ; and while the rain 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 57 

drenched him, and the gale seemed to tug at his 
grasp on the cordage, as if to hurl him over- 
board ; and while dreary glimpses of the lights 
from either shore, as the almost helpless hulk 
was now driven leagues in one direction, now 
in another, mocked the eyes and hopes of the 
agonized passengers ; thus standing, Gerald felt 
that death in the field, or on the raving bed, or 
by any hap which, so far as he knew or recol- 
lected, poor " flesh is heir to," would be mercy 
to the bleak and desolate destruction which a^ 
last seemed his doom. 

Many were swept into the raging sea; his 
valet, among the number, from Gerald's side. 
His own desperate impulse to plunge headlong 
after, and so lessen the period of, he concluded, 
useless suffering, was checked by a superior 
horror. A score of tongues roared out, " A 
light, ahead !" and the cry had scarcely escaped, 
to be smothered by the gale, when the vessel 
struck against another. Voice and breath were 
now held in, for an instant, to enable the crew 
and passengers to note the result. From the tre- 
mendous burst of shriek and groan that was heard 
under their prow, then the as tremendous si- 
lence, and then the strange motion of their hulk, 
d5 



58 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

as the annihilated vessel passed grating under 
the bottom of her destroyer, with all her souls, 
into the depths of the sea ; from all these sounds, 
it was quickly known that one cargo of human 
beings had escaped immediate death only by 
causing the destruction of another — from these 
sounds, I say ; for nothing but a glimpse of the 
light ahead had been seen ; no ship, no mast, 
not a human being. Within the little space of 
half a minute the whole appalling event had oc- 
curred, and passed away, from darkness and 
tempest, into mystery, silence, and eternity. 

Gerald and his companions had not time to 
know whether they should most indulge a self- 
ish joy at such a hair-breadth escape, or a more 
magnanimous commiseration for the wretches 
they had unconsciously destroyed, when it was 
ascertained that their own keel had not escaped 
injury from the accident. In fact, the cabins ra- 
pidly filled with water, and the few females, whom 
terror or force had compelled to remain below, 
ran up to deck, wringing their hands, and utter- 
ing the most heart-rending prayers and lamenta- 
tions. The horror of that blackened and despair- 
ing deck grew too great and confused for observa- 
tion. Yet, in this climax of danger, Gerald was 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 89 

awake, more than at any former period of his peril, 
to the hope for hfe, and to the efforts suggested 
by it. The seamen let down a boat, without 
advising the passengers of their proceeding. He 
watched them, however, and as it tossed, over- 
loaded, under the spot where he stood, Gerald, 
grasping a pistol in his hand, the better to en- 
force his claim, jumped in amongst them. In 
a few minutes afterwards, the wreck he had left 
disappeared, with another blood-curdling cry 
from its deck, into the dark and cold depths of 
the ocean. 

The men amongst whom he found himself 
pulled for life and death ; though, as was evi- 
dent from their few and hurried words, they 
did not know in what direction. Many a sea 
went over them, to diminish their still des- 
pairing numbers ; but the good little boat 
lived on for more than an hour amid unabated 
tempest. Then the gale began to sink ; the 
■waves to grow less; the clouds to break, and 
the white stars to peep out between their 
racking masses. In another hour, the water 
promised to grow comparatively calm, and 
the moon rose over a distant inequality of line, 
that the seamen knew must be land. 



60 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Gerald, asked what land ? they could not 
positively inform him, but some part of the 
Welsh coast it must be; and they resolved 
not to make for it till broad dayhght. In 
fact, none of the crew, whose duty and habits 
should have enabled them more certainly to 
determine the question, had escaped in the 
boat ; and though aware of this, and also 
aware that their terror and confusion had de- 
prived them of all ordinary power of calcula- 
tion, Gerald was obliged to content himself 
with the vague and even hesitating informa- 
tion supplied by his companions. 

Almost a perfect calm succeeded to the 
horrors of the night, and he urged them to 
give up their former resojution, and pull to- 
wards the distant shore; but having ascertained 
that a strong tide would accompany them, the 
men continued positive in not taking their 
chance, perhaps among the breakers of a rocky 
coast, where, even without much wind, their 
little craft might be dashed to pieces. So, 
while the moon now shone out gloriously on 
the broad stilled sea, they would do no more 
than keep the land in view, rowing up and 
down, with slackened oars, and at length 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 61 

finding breath and heart to converse freely 
upon the perils they had escaped, and that so 
many others had perished in. 

But, alas ! what appearance or promise of 
human safety is most to be trusted to ? There 
sometimes lurks in the calm moonshine as 
much of doom, as roars and blusters through 
a hurricane sky. While their conversation 
went on, Gerald saw something white, straight 
ahead ; and when the men more firmly grasped 
their oars to avoid what obviously to them 
was a rock, with breakers bounding over it, 
they found that, for some time, the strong tide 
had been urging them in that very direction, 
and that they had now to contend, not only 
with the tide, but with a kind of whirlpool- 
influence, which this partial agitation of the 
sea created, and which was also tempting them 
to their fate. They strained and tugged ; one 
oar, out of four, snapped across, and its man, 
propelled by the sudden reaction, fell among 
the first of the surf. The remainder, after 
some useless repetitions of strength — they could 
exert little skill, for their rudder had been 
lost — stripped, and prepared to swim. Gerald, 
as good a swimmer as any among them, follow- 



OB THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

ed their example. But he had but half pro- 
ceeded in his task, when the whirling boat 
approached the very point of danger, and he 
unconsciously held fast by its sides, and kept in 
his breath to await the issue. It struck once, 
and, jumping out of the water, receded from 
the rock. It spun round again, struck a 
second time, and Gerald was buffeting the 
breakers. He retained, in a degree, his pre- 
sence of mind, and, keeping his eye fixed on 
land, swam, though not full of hopes, towards it. 
He feared the distance ; or that, from his 
late illness, if from no other cause, he must be- 
come exhausted and sink, ere he could feel a 
strand under his feet. But the distance was 
less than he thought ; the indistinctness of the 
land, produced by night, even though the moon 
shone clear, deceived his inexperienced eye ; 
and he was not yet sufficiently aware what 
efforts for preservation nature will make in the 
heart and through the nerves of a drowning 
man, even supposing that man not to enjoy his 
wonted vigour. Gerald swam more than two 
miles, sometimes relieving himself, as good 
swimmers can do, by floating idly on his back, 
ere he felt any, or much relaxation of muscle. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 63 

Then, however, when he reckoned that he had 
at least as far again to struggle, he began, with 
some reason, to doubt and fear in good earnest. 
Yet he held on, still relieving himself as be- 
fore ; and another mile might have been mas- 
tered, when he felt his heart tell him that he 
was unequal to the remaining exertion, and 
must sink. He shouted loud, in the hope that 
some one might by chance hear him from the 
shore. He thought that, after a pause, shrill 
voices answered him. He summed up a last 
attempt. It was just spent, when some planks 
of the boat drifted past him. He was able to 
throw his breast upon them, and grasp them 
hard. The tide now stood his friend. By 
little and little he neared the land ; the shrill 
ci'ies became more distinct, still in reply to his 
hoarse ones. At length he thought he could 
discern a group of persons on a shingly beach : 
but at this moment a swell bore him rapidly 
forv/ard ; his head struck smartly against a 
stone that pushed out of the water ; he allowed 
his feet to drop, and felt ground ; and joy, and 
another little buffet, deprived him of percep- 
tion. 

He recovered his senses at the edge of the 



^ THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

sea, upon the shingles he had before observed, 
among a crowd of women, one of whom knelt 
and supported his head on her knee, while two 
or three bent over him, and the rest stood 
around, conversing in whispers, which seemed 
breathed in a frightened cadence. To the 
latest hour of his life, Gerald never forgot the 
impression made by his wild and peculiar situa- 
tion at that moment : the mighty sea before 
him, from which he had just been rescued, the 
spreading shore, the silent moonlight, and those 
strange women. 

Great exhaustion succeeded to his recent ex- 
traordinary efforts for life, and a minute elapsed, 
ere he could stir even his head to look up into 
the faces that watched bim. The moment his 
eye fixed on the nearest to its vision, Gerald 
started throughout his whole languid frame, 
and the sudden agitation overpowered him. 
When he again could make an observation, 
female features still appeared, indeed, in the 
same proximity to his, but now produced no 
astonishment. In fact, they were not the same 
features ; or, if they were, his enfeebled eye 
had shaped them, in the first instance, into a 
likeness to those which, during the last fayr 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 65 

days, possessed his thoughts with an interest at 
once pleasurable and irritating. 

He peered closer into the attentive face, 
then looked all around, and became assured 
that he must have been mistaken. Even when 
he imagined that the genius of Pere la Chaise 
had been bending over him, the vision wore 
the same ample-hooded, scarlet cloak as that 
worn by the other females of the group ; and as 
(although it was a mode of costume quite new 
to Gerald's eye) this diess appeared to denote 
vulgar or common rank in the wearers, he 
could not, for an instant, suppose that the fa- 
shionably-attired lady, of whom he had been 
raving, would, under any circumstances, adopt it. 

His quick reasonings on the subject having 
been concluded, Gerald next demanded, in a 
feeble tone, of one of his seemingly anxious 
nurses, upon what part of the Welsh coast he 
then was.-^ 

Two or three voices sounded as if in answer, 
but of the language spoken Gerald did not com- 
prehend a word. From all he had previously 
heard, however, it was Welsh : and at all 
events, though abounding in gutturals, its ca- 
dences fell kindly on his ear. 



66 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Does no person about me understand Eng- 
lish ?'* again demanded Gerald. 

And again more than one of the women re- 
plied in their unknown tongue ; and then they 
all conversed fluently with each other, while 
the female who supported his head on her knee, 
and the two nearest to her, wrapped more care- 
fully around him the large scarlet mantle in 
which, it would seem, he had regained his con- 
sciousness among them, and which must have 
been supplied by one of their party. 

Weak and overpowered as he was, he could 
not help wondering what all this was to end in. 
But he was not long permitted to wonder in 
inaction. Of the whole group of females, all 
seemed tall or robust. Four of the strongest 
approached him, preparing for some feat of 
bodily exertion by winding, so as to leave them 
bare and at freedom, the skirts of their flowing 
cloaks round their arms. Then, amid continued 
loud talking, that — (as if at liberty to do so, 
when he seemed out of danger) — now sounded 
rather mirthfully, they proceeded to support him 
to his feet, and, finally, crossing each other'sarms, 
and clasping each other's hands, two at a side, 
formed a kind of litter, palanquin, or arm-chair, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 67 

into which their companions lifted him ; and 
thus, not unpleasantly, though so curiously seat- 
ed, while his own feeble arms were carefully ad- 
justed round the young and soft necks of two of 
his zealous porters, Gerald soon found himself 
in motion from the shingly beach, surrounded 
by all his new friends, one excepted, who, dur- 
ing the entire previous scene, had stood aside, 
and now, at some distance in the moonshine, 
seemed to lead the way, in whatever direction it 
had been agreed should be taken. 

A very humble and lonely cottage appeared 
in view, into which this female entered, making 
a signal at the threshold to those behind: and 
Gerald, still borne by his robust maidens, found 
himself, in a few minutes, beneath an unceiled, 
smoky roof, which overhung a broken earthen 
floor, and was supported by bare and rude 
walls, against which, or along which, few arti- 
cles of the commonest domestic furniture could 
be discovered. A fire seemed to have just been 
kindled on the bleak though ample hearth, and 
a single rushlight, literally a rush greased over, 
added its tributary ray to illuminate the apart- 
ment. Looking closer by the walls, Gerald saw 
two lowly couches, made up on the floor, from 



68 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

beneath the rugs of which peeped the eyes and 
noses of four or five children, of different ages, 
and one or two grown girls. A middle-aged 
woman, another girl of about eighteen, and an 
old grandame, were up to receive him, the 
female who had led the party to the hovel, not 
now appearing, however ; and this surprised 
Gerald. 

But he was most surprised to recollect and 
observe that, from the moment he regained his 
senses on the shingles, no male person had met 
his view, either there, or on the path to this 
place of shelter, or now, even under its roof. 
Perhaps, however, the men of the establishment 
might be asleep in a kind of inner-room, formed 
by a wicker-work partition, cutting off part of 
this one, and leaving, for'ingress, an open space, 
in lieu of door. He was soon enabled to de- 
cide : for his porters scarcely paused an instant 
to exchange a few words, still in their strange 
language, with the woman of the house, when 
they conveyed him into that same confined 
nook, and placing him upon a bed, also stretched 
upon the bare floor, left him to the care of the 
old grandame, and, with many sly glances and 
titters, disappeared. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 69 

Still he vainly looked round him in the hope 
of discovering a person of his own sex. He 
had read, in a fanciful story, of an island or 
country possessed and governed exclusively by 
women, and now he seemed to be the hero of a 
sequel to that curious romance. 

The old crone who had been left with him 
motioned that he should divest himself of the 
few drenched articles of dress with which he 
had escaped from the sea. He hesitated, per- 
haps not half understanding her. She advanced 
to his lowly couch, and carefully covering him 
with its coarse blue rug, proceeded to possess 
herself of those matters with her own hands. 
Then she gave him a dry mantle, of the same 
description as that in which he had been borne 
from the beach, and again intimating, by signs, 
that he should wrap himself closely in it, with- 
drew. 

While endeavouring to obey her commands, 
Gerald's exhaustion, hitherto diverted in an 
effort to observe the persons and occurrences by 
which he found himself surrounded, once more 
overcame him, and he sank, senseless, on his 
straw pallet. 

When again able to recollect himself, he saw 



70 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

his arbitrary old nurse by his side, holding a 
bottle and a glass, and the not disagreeable sen- 
sations of his body told him that some strong 
stimulant had been administered, in order to 
call him back to life. Again she filled the 
glass, and offered it to him. He took it, and at 
a glance ascertaining that it was red wine, did 
not hesitate to pledge her. How such wretch- 
ed people could, in a district so seemingly lone- 
ly, comm.and, for his use, the good beverage, 
appeared surprising ; but Gerald did not long 
allow the thought to embarrass his mind. A 
stronger sentiment absorbed it. 

In fact, he felt very hungry, and by the sim- 
ple gesticulation of pointing his finger to his 
mouth, gave the old wpman to understand as 
much. She quitted him, and soon returned 
with an ample supply of food, such, it again 
seemed, as the circumstances of the people of 
the house could not have warranted him to ex- 
pect. But Gerald proved no more curious on 
this point than he had upon the question of the 
good glass of old port a few minutes before ; 
he only made a hearty supper, helped himself 
to one or two additional bumpers from the mys- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 71 

terious bottle, and then, feeling comfortably 
drowsy, prepared to fall asleep. 

His nurse over-ruled him, and called into the 
outer room. The woman of the house entered; 
both raised him, well wrapped in his cloak ; 
walked him to the kitchen hearth ; placed him, 
sitting upon a low stool, at a blazing wood-fire ; 
retired into his chamber ; after some time re- 
appeared ; helped him back again ; and Gerald 
now found his straw covered with good white 
blankets, to which were added white sheets, 
also of a fine texture ; and when, after many 
curtsies, and, he supposed, hearty prayers, in 
their unknown language, for his good repose, 
and good health in the morning, the two grooms 
of the chamber seemed finally to bid him adieu 
for the short remainder of the night — Gerald, to 
his increased surprise, found a respectable suit 
of clothes, including boots, a hat, and even 
gloves, deposited upon an old chair, by his bed- 
side ; and an under garment, still of a texture 
and cut such as a gentleman might wear, spread 
out, ready for his adoption, on the bolster. 

" Generous, though despotic, and most un- 
accountable women !" thought Gerald, as he 



72 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

prepared to habit himself comfortably for re- 
pose, but his curiosity and surprise were yet to 
be fully aroused. 

As he touched the article of dress which lay 
at the head of his couch, a sealed note fell from 
it on the ground. Gerald, first hastening to lie 
down, brought the note with him, and by the 
glimmer of his rushlight read as follows : — 

** You have friends near you ; though, if you 
imprudently discover your name, perhaps none 
among the poor people, who, for the present, 
immediately surround you. Therefore you are 
called upon to act prudently. Let no one know 
you are the Honourable Gerald Blount. During 
the night you will stand little chance of being 
questioned ; the write^ of this billet can influ- 
ence all who now are near you ; but new 
faces may appear in the morning, and then you 
have to hold your own. It will, however, only 
be necessary to disguise your name and quality, 
and speak civilly to every one, and you can be 
in no danger. Meantime, whatever you may 
suspect, do not stir from your present retreat 
before three ©""clock to-morrow, or rather three 
o'clock this day, for the winter morning will 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 73 

soon break, and by that hour a sincere friend 
may appear." 

This note was written in a kind of hand that 
left in doubt the rank of the writer. It was 
elaborately penned, every letter fully shaped, 
and the down-strokes long and almost perpen- 
dicular. One can generally decide whether a 
billet comes from a man or a woman, a gentle- 
man or a lady ; but, in the present instance, 
Gerald was farther at a loss to determine this 
important question. 

In very natural astonishment, and some mis- 
givings, he resolved, however, literally to follow 
the advice of the unknown writer. After the 
warning received, he certainly would be in no 
hurry to trumpet out his own name and quality ; 
and, as a first precaution against discovery, he 
tore the note into little bits, and burned them 
separately at the feeble flame of his rushlight. 

What were "the new faces that might appear 
in the morning ?" Conjecture ran wild. Gerald, 
at all events, would be on the watch for them. 
Much as he wanted repose, he would not close 
his eyes, and for some time he succeeded in 
keeping this resolution ; but the grateful glow 

VOL. II. E 



74 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

sent through his frame by the active and com- 
bined operation of all his late accession of com- 
forts, aided the cravings of still exhausted na- 
ture, in taking him by surprise, and, in less than 
half an hour, he slept profoundly . 

A brisk wintry sunbeam, darting through a 
small open hole, in one side of his bed-chamber, 
straight upon his closed lids, suddenly awoke 
him, at he could not tell what hour ; but 
the short, quick steps of women in the outer 
room, and the crying of children, told him it 
must be far advanced in the morning. 

He started, on his straw-couch, as a glancing 
combination of mind informed him of a crowd 
of late and terrible events, and of his present 
strange situation. Next, he remembered the 
note he had read before he fell asleep. The 
promised " new faces" again occurred ; his eye 
involuntarily strayed round in quest of them, 
and, somewhat to Gerald's consternation, it did 
not stray round in vain. 

At the end of the nook in which he lay, ex- 
actly opposite his bed ,was a very large chest, 
rudely constructed, even when it had been new, 
and now showing chinks and other marks of de- 
cay; its Hd measured, at least, six feet in length. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 75 

and three in breadth ; and upon this lid, seem- 
ingly in deep sleep, were stretched two men, 
one about fifty-five, the other a youth about 
twenty ; but his exact years could not be so 
accurately guessed at by Gerald, for the follow- 
ing reasons: — 

While the elderly man lay, almost crushed, 
against the rough wall, at the far verge of the 
chest-lid, his features fully visible, the junior 
faced him, of course with his back to Gerald — so 
that, except his roundish and smooth cheek, no 
part of his visage could be studied. And while 
they thus slept on, face to face, Gerald observed 
that the arms of the former encircled the body 
of the latter, perhaps in a precaution, before 
they sunk into sleep, to keep him from rolling 
off the chest upon the floor. Nay, even their 
nether limbs intertwined, as if for the same 
purpose. 

Gerald fixed his regards on the countenance 
perfectly exposed to his criticism. It was spare, 
strongly-marked, care-worn, haggard. The 
bushy brows were bent, the greyish hair in dis- 
order, the chin unshorn, and he thought that 
it seemed to have subsided into repose, at an 
imlawful hour, freshly agitated with effort and 
E 2 



76 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

passion. This idea became strengthened when 
he saw that the rude peasant clothes of both 
sleepers, and particularly their stockings and 
shoes, were covered with, it would seem, the 
wet soil of the fields, not yet allowed time to 
dry and harden. 

As he continued, in breathless interest, to 
make his observations, two new discoveries 
brought conviction on the point. From the 
bosom of the elderly man peeped the brass- 
mounted handle of a large pistol ; and Gerald 
had not recovered from the start its appearance 
occasioned, ere he saw that one of the arms of 
the younger peasant hung, disengaged from the 
loose coat that covered the rest of his person, 
drooping over the chest ; that it was bandaged ; 
and that the bandage, as well as the shirt-sleeve, 
still oozed blood. 

" And here," thought Gerald, " are speci- 
mens of the new faces I was so anxious about ;" 
nor did he fail to remember his other anxiety to 
see one of his own sex near him, the night be- 
fore, nor to conclude that, after all, he might 
have contented himself with his gentler pro- 
tectors, and given such solicitude to the winds. 
It was plain, he argued, that he had fallen 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 77 

under the care of the females of part of a band 
of plunderers — smugglers, perhaps^-during the 
absence of the principals from home upon busi- 
ness of their vocation. The readiness with 
which he had received, at the hands of the wo- 
men of the house, costly refreshments, much 
beyond their visible means to procure, now 
seemed explained. And having formerly un- 
derstood that, on smuggling coasts, upon occa- 
sions when a contraband cargo is, as the phrase 
goes, to be " worked," the women of the dis- 
trict crowd down to bear a hand, Gerald readily 
accounted for the appearance of his preservers 
on the shingly beach. As to the note, his dis- 
tress had interested, no doubt, some female of 
consideration among them ; and she, calculating 
the circumstances that the morning must pro- 
duce, had written it to put him on his guard. 

He would most certainly persevere in his re- 
solution to observe the first caution it contained ; 
additional good reasons for such a course staring 
him in the face. But, regarding the second 
admonition, Gerald hesitated. Provided he 
would tarry where he was till three o'clock, the 
writer promised that " a sincere friend"" should 
appear before him. What friend ? — in a place 



78 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

and situation where he must be totally unknown 
and unconnected, this sounded foolishly; and 
prudence forbade him to waive, in hopes of the 
occurrence of a great improbability, any fair 
chance of removing himself to a safer or more 
congenial asylum, which, between the present 
time and three o'clock, might fortunately occur. 
And yet here he started and wavered once 
again. Was he " totally unknown" in his pre- 
sent neighbourhood, whatever it might be ? — 
no ; not " totally ;" the writer of the note knew 
him well : and how could he say but others were 
in the secret, no matter how it had been ob- 
tained ? And how had even the writer obtain- 
ed it ? This was a question that, at the mo- 
ment he perused the billet, certainly occurred 
to Gerald, but he had allowed it to become ab- 
sorbed in others of greater interest. Now, how- 
ever, it re-produced itself, as the most interest- 
ing one he could agitate. What ! was the face 
that, at the moment of his resuscitation on the 
sliingles, had floated before his eyes or his fancy, 
no vision, after all ? — Was the writer, and the 
prophetess of Pfere la Chaise, one and the same 
individual.'' — Impossible: he was again but sport- 
ing with the difficult realities of his situation ; 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 79 

and, in order to enable himself rationally to 
meet whatever awaited him, he would dismiss 
the illusion from his mind. 

So sound and unbroken was the sleep of 
his two fearful and unconscious companions 
on the chest, that, during more than the lapse 
of half an hour, Gerald had full time to con- 
nect, after the subsiding of his first agitation, 
the reasonings here attributed to him. 

But, as he continued to gaze on them, while 
his thoughts still went busily on, the youth 
groaned, moved his wounded arm, and again 
groaned louder; and, roused by the sounds, 
the elder got into such motion as betokened 
that he would quickly awake. At this Gerald 
closed his eyes, prepared to be watchful, and 
fully on his guard. 

The continued motions of the elder peasa^^t 
came intelligibly to his ear. The man seemed 
to sit up, cautiously, as if disinclined to waken 
him, or perhaps, to disturb the repose of his 
wounded comrade. In a few seconds Gerald 
heard him call, in a low, husky whisper, upon 
some one in the next apartment, pronouncing 
a christian-name that sounded strangely and 
wildly to our listener. In as low a tone he 



80 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

was answered ; then steps that entered seemed 
intended to be stealthy, though the ponderous 
foot-gear of the new-comer scarce allowed him to 
tread as cautiously as he might propose to do. 

Gerald durst not open his eyes, but he soon 
became assured that the two men were now 
present in his chamber. They began to con- 
verse, still in whispers ; he grew less interest- 
ed, because he brought to mind the unin- 
telligible language of all the women he had 
met, and concluded that their male connexions 
would interchange their thoughts through the 
same medium : and the commencement of 
their dialogue bore him out in his inference ; 
yet, after three or four sentences, either his 
ear deceived him, or a half- understood phrase 
did reach Gerald. He breathed short ; stretch- 
ed his sense of hearing to its utmost ; and now 
became certain that the men spoke, indeed, in 
alternate snatches of what Gerald believed to 
be Welsh, and of a rude patois of the English 
language. 

The armed marauder on the chest had been 
answering, at some length, in his unknown 
tongue, a question proposed to him, when the 
first words that Gerald indistinctly caught, con- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 81 

sisted of a question from his morning visitor, to 
the effect — " Are you sure of it ?" 

The other replied that " he was quite sure ; 
for he had watched him" (Gerald) " some time 
before he ventured to call into the next apart- 
ment, and a top couldn't sleep sounder." 

" It was likely," his friend observed, " taking 
into account the hardship the young man" (still 
meaning Gerald) " had suffered before he lay 
down." 

" Who do you think he is ?" was the next 
inquiry; and the answer changed into their 
strange tongue, and for some time their dis- 
course fell unintelligibly on Gerald's ear. 

" We 're sorry you hadn't a better rest after 
the night," was the next remark uttered by the 
visitor; — " the children could not be turned out 
of bed, late as it was," he continued ; " and he 
must himself have gone to repose with the 
poor mother of them." 

" So,"*' concluded Gerald, " my gentlemen on 
the chest have, like myself, been but the guests 
of the present speaker." 

" He did not care on his own account," ob- 
served the person to whom the apology had 

been made ; " but it was too bad that poor " 

E 5 



82 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

(a name was uttered which Gerald could not 
catch) — " with his hurt arm, should be obliged 
to sleep on a hard board, to give room to a 
stranger to them all/' 

Again Gerald recognized an allusion to him- 
self; but though its evident disposition to hos- 
tility might, in a degree, have alarmed him, he 
derived superior comfort from the admission 
contained in the last sentence ; the admission 
that he was " a stranger to them all." 

*' Even that could not be helped, when com- 
mands had been given on the subject," was the 
purport of the answer of the host. And, con- 
tinuing in English patois, he proceeded to hint 
that, to guard against Gerald's observation, 
should he suddenly awake, they had better at 
once remove the wounded youth out of the 
chamber. 

Gerald now seemed to sleep sounder than 
ever, and with as little noise as was possible 
they bore off the groaning lad. He listened to 
hear him deposited in one of the beds abroad ; 
but it seemed that his friends conveyed him quite 
out of the house ; and then, the steps of the 
good woman, hurrying about her kitchen, and 
her voice, scolding her children, and the gab- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 8B 

bling or crying of the children themselves, mix- 
ed with the humming of the old grandame, as, 
perhaps, she tried to lull one of them asleep, 
were the only sounds he could catch. 

After remaining some time in solitude, he 
agreed to vote himself awake, and call out for 
an attendant. His ancient nurse tottered in : 
he made signs for his own pair of trowsers, 
which had been taken away before he slept, 
and, he argued, must now be dried, and ready 
for putting on again ; and it was not quite 
for the sake of the article of dress that Gerald 
proposed his request. 

The crone re-entered with it, and again left 
him alone. He put his hand into one pocket, 
and found his purse, undiminished, as well as 
he could calculate, since he had last used it. 
His valuable watch also remained in its proper 
fob. But on examining the second pocket for 
the small pistol with which he had armed him- 
self, when about to spring into the boat from the 
sinking vessel, and which he distinctly recollected 
to have afterwards buttoned up where he now 
sought it, no such article was forth-coming. 

This was strange : the desperate men amongst 
whom he found himself would seem, then, to 



84 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

prize more the weapons for outrage, than the 
most desirable result outrage could seek to 
attain. He thought, over and over, what de- 
scription of desperadoes they might be ; but, 
notwithstanding his former smuggling theory, 
Gerald could not make them out. 

He rose and dressed ; appropriating his own 
trowsers, but necessarily obliged to avail him- 
self of the coat, stockings, vest, hat, and boots, 
which lay by his bedside. They fitted him 
very well, and were fashionably cut. 

His toilet was not quite completed when the 
two women came in with a substantial break- 
fast, of which he heartily partook. He passed 
into the kitchen, and with words and signs of 
much gratitude for all their attention, offered 
them money. They refused it, not sulkily, 
though firmly. 

" Now am I at liberty to go about ?" 
thought Gerald. He paced to the door; they 
did not interrupt him: he walked from it, 
along a neglected path, on each side of which 
lay neglected land, with an idle spade, and 
other implements of husbandry, buried in it. 
The path led him into a wild bridle road. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. BS 

Still he was not molested; and no one ap- 
peared in view but two shy children of the 
house, lurking about some near hedges, or 
rather rude fences, as if to get a wondering 
look at him. At a turn in the bridle road, the 
sea burst on his view, about a mile distant. He 
looked observantly around him. The hovel he 
had just left struck him as the most wretched 
human habitation he had ever seen. Others, 
as wretched, appeared scattered around : some, 
by the nets hung out before them, evidently 
the abodes of fishers ; some, as evidently in- 
habited by the more regular agricultural pea- 
santry of the wild district. No trees caught 
Gerald's eye ; no well-fenced fields ; no com- 
fortable houses of the middle class. 

" Where am I ?" thought Gerald, with cer- 
tain misgivings, from which, during the last 
few hours he had not been free. 

A groan reached him. He listened. It was 
repeated, from the other side of the bridle-road 
fence at which he stood. He passed over ; and 
upon a couch of fresh straw lay the wounded 
peasant-lad, who had been his chamber com- 
panion for a part of the morning. 



86 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Both stared at each other, the moment Ge- 
rald jumped from the fence; the youth evi- 
dently in much alarm. 

"Who is your honor?" he questioned, in 
continued agitation. Gerald remained silent. 

" Does your honor want to have any thing 
to say to me, Sir V 

Still Gerald gave no answer. 

" Murther !" cried the conscience-smitten 
young brigand, rising, with difficulty, on his 
unhurt elbow. '' Paudge ! — Father ! where are 
ye ? to be going and laving me here, when it 's 
your company I want more than the victuals ! 
an' a sthrange magistrate come here upon me, 
and going to whip me off with him ! — Father ! — 
Paudge !" 

Gerald's blood absolutely curdled at the cer- 
tainty which the peculiar tone and cadence of 
the speaker brought to his mind. He was able, 
however, to say, 

" Hush, man, hush ! — I am no magistrate, 
and mean you no harm. But, tell me, where am 
I .?— this is not Wales ?" 

" Wales ? what Wales .? to the devil with 
Wales, taffies, and innions and all ! what do you 
mean by that sort of talk.? — Keep oiF!" as 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 87 

Gerald unconsciously stepped closer. "It's want- 
ing to coax yourself on me you'd be. Keep off, 
I say ! or, maybe, the bould boy you fear most 
is nearer than you think — Arragh, Daddy ! — 
Gossip ! where are ye, I say ?" 

" So," thought Gerald — " so; — I am in the 
Emerald Isle, after all ; and, if I rightly trans- 
late the elegant turn, ' bould boy,' one of my 
first chamber-mates may turn out to be no 
other than Captain Rock himself." 



"jSl THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER IV. 

While Gerald made the last reflections, he 
was in rapid motion from the young peasant. 
The cries of the lad had succeeded in bringing 
in view, about two fields off, his gruff fellow 
slumberer on the chest, and the man, Gerald 
concluded, whose hospitality they had expe- 
rienced. One carried a platter of food, the 
other a bottle, for which, it would seem, they 
had momentarily left their young associate. 

Gerald became visible to them as soon as he 
hastily re-crossed the fence into the wild bridle- 
road. They instantly laid down their hos- 
pitable burdens, and quickened into a run the 
pace that the youth's cries had previously made 
brisk enough. My hero also ran, pursuing the 
course of the bridle-road. It conducted him to 
a high-road. Steps sounded in his rear. He 
gazed around, undecided, for an instant, which 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 89 

way to take, to the right hand or to the left. 
About forty yards, in the former-mentioned di- 
rection, appeared a stage-coach, standing still. 
The driver had dismounted to help in a respect- 
able-looking passenger. Notwithstanding all 
he had heard of the badly-appointed condition 
of Irish stages, Gerald gained the man's side 
just as his office was got through; demanded 
to be admitted in, also ; was desired to observe 
that no " inside" was vacant ; and finally mount- 
ed to a seat beside the driver. 

As they whirled on, two men appeared stand- 
ing at a gap in the side of the road. Gerald 
knew them well : nor were they slow in ac- 
knowledging their recognition of him. With 
faces of baffled anger, and eyes that shot no 
good intent, they seemed to take advantage of 
a moment, when no one but he glanced at them, 
to clench and raise their hands, and mutter in- 
distinct threats. 

" Are those people peasants or fishers of the 
district ?''"' asked Gerald of his present compa- 
nion, coachee, as he turned his regards away. 

" Neither one nor the other. Sir," answered 
coachee, after a short glance, which, for a mo- 
ment, betokened a lively interest : " but stop, 



90 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

one of 'em may be ; the other, the elder of the 
two, is a stranger, come one or two counties off; 
I know it by the colour of his wrap-rascal, waist- 
coat, and stockings — and more of his kind, I 'm 
afeard, is near him, this morning — divvle"'s luck 
to their visit to this quiet part of the world ! 
^Go home, daddy !" continued coachee, good- 
humouredly, as he flourishingly whipped by the 
men, addressing himself to the individual of 
whom he had last spoken — " go home, and mind 
your ould thrade among your own nate hills an' 
bogs, an' lave honest people here, on the say- 
side, to fry their own fish without you lighting 
the fire for 'em." 

" Whoo !" shouted both the men, prancing 
upward, where they stood, in full return of good 
humour to coachee's remonstrance, and without 
a trait of their late ferocity of expression to- 
wards Gerald. " And," continued the person 
particularly concerned in the address, " just 
whip your lane cattle, for the pinny the mile, 
my chap, from Dublin town, and make your 
scrape to the genteels for the same, when you 
get it." 

" Come here," requested coachee, half pull- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 91 

ing up, ^* come here, I tell you ; now that I 
think of it, I want you." 

The man ran, laughingly, inside the road 
fence, until he again came abreast with the 
coach. 

" An' well," he resumed, " what 's the thrick 
you think you can put on a poor countryman, 
now.?" 

" Are you a judge of a swellin'.?" demanded 
coachee, staffing out his cheek with his tongue. 

" No ; but you are, maybe," replied the 
man, puffing out both his cheeks ; and immedi- 
ately there was a shout of gleeish triumph for 
him from the friend he had left behind, as well 
as from others who had just joined that person. 

Gerald not comprehending this specimen of 
Irish roadside humour, only felt much astonish- 
ment at the ease with which an armed marauder, 
evidently hardened in his courses, could sud- 
denly change from the alarming savageness of 
temper in which he had, a moment before, held 
up his clenched hand, and set his teeth, into 
a seemingly light-hearted mood, capable of giv- 
ing and taking, in his own way, any joke that 
might turn up for the instant. Indeed the 



9» THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

maii''s years, if nothing else, made this vivacity 
appear out of usual character. 

"May I ask what you meant, just now,'" re- 
sumed Gerald, again addressing the driver, as 
at last they got out of view of the disagreeable 
jesters, " when you seemed to intimate that this 
part of the country would be nothing the better 
of the visit of that stranger ?" 

His companion quickly turned upon him an 
observant look, though not an impertinent one, 
and then drawing a round cut at his off-leader, 
answered, in a way Irish enough, " You 're a 
stranger yourself. Sir, in these parts o"* the 
world, or you needn't be putting that ques- 
tion." 

" I am quite a stranger in Ireland." 

*' So I thought by ybur tongue. Sir, from 
the first. — Get out o' that, lazy horse!" continued 
the man of whipcord, gently flogging his near 
wheeler ; " get out o' that, an' I told you so 
before ;" but no farther notice was taken of 
Gerald's question. 

" He pulls well, though," remarked Gerald, 
*' or else you have a knack of coaxing him ;" 
willing to pave his way to the increased con- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 93 

fidence of coachee, by administering to his pro- 
fessional vanity. 

" Kindly enough, Sir ; he 's not a bad horse 
in good hands, though I know some people 
that would unharness him, and lave him by the 
roadside, sooner than put their mind to it, and 
try to get him on. I 'd rather him than the 
grey, the near-leader, as willing as he is, if ray 
poor DanelJy (the horse's name) had a good 
sieve, before starting, and rasonable time to 
ate it." 

" All your horses seem good ones, indeed," 
continued Gerald, admitting to himself, as he 
made the remark, that, after much he had 
heard, and read too, in newspaper communica- 
tions, the whole concern with which, as a pas- 
senger, he was now identified, might nearly 
stand a comparison with one of the same kind in 
his adopted country. 

" Just as well as poor Ireland can afford. 
Sir ; I ""m glad they plaize you. What do you 
think of the harness, Sir ?"" 

" Why," answered Gerald, surveying it in 
detail, quite seriously, and quite unconscious 
that he was quizzed — '* as far as I can see, it 



9^ THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

only wants to shine a little more in the brass 
parts, to be perfect in its way." 

** God be praised !" continued coachee. "But, 
Sir, here's myself now ; I don't look much like 
one of your English whips, do I, Sir ?" 

" You certainly understand your business as 
well as any of them ; but, then, your attire is 
not so gay ; you ought to have on a new super- 
fine hat, smart neckcloth, as good clothes, in 
fact, as any of your company, and a nosegay 
stuck in your bosom." 

" And the nosegay, and all, this time of the 
year. Sir ?" seemingly with much respect and 
interest : " bud, no wonder ! ye have the green 
pays at Christmas in England, we hear, an' the 
strawberries after 'em, when the cloth is gone." 

Gerald now began to suspect. 

" It's a shame for you, ma'am," resumed 
coachee, addressing a poor soldier's wife who 
trudged by the roadside patiently after her 
husband ; " bid her walk before you. Sir," he 
continued to the soldier; " she's putting out her 
tongue at you :" no such occurrence had taken 
place, and Gerald's comprehension of his com- 
panion still improved. 

" What good roads these are !" he said, anx- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 95 

ious to make the man serious by continuing to 
compliment, sincerely, his national pride. 

" Ah, then, and arn't they, Sir, considering 
the poor country ? — and sure the wonder is that 
there is a load of stones or gravel in it, to make 
any kind of a road at all." 

" You change horses yonder, do you not ?" 
again tried Gerald, observing that horses, har- 
nessed and attended, stood a little way on. 

" If you plaize, Sir ; only I 'm afeai'd you '11 
think it so long to be kept waiting." 

*' Why, what time does the matter usually 
occupy ?" now caught tripping. 

" Glory to me, Sir, if I know to the minute; 
but, sometimes ten o' them, sometimes the thir- 
teen ; more or less ; I' 11 not say sartain." 

*' Ten of them ? ten of what ?" 

" The minutes, Sir, sure." 

" Indeed ! ten or thirteen minutes to change 
horses ! Well,"' continued Gerald, meditating- 
ly, '* that's worse than I have even heard on 
the subject." 

" Cuckoo !" cried coachee, imitating the 
voice of the bird, as he drove up and pulled 
in his steaming horses at the appointed spot. 
And Gerald curiously drew out his watch ; and 



96 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

SO, also nimbly jumping down, did young 
coachee ; and, to Gerald's annoyance, a second 
beyond the time allowed in England to the 
operation of changing horses did not elapse, 
when he was again throned on his box, and 
the fresh cattle spanking away. 

Now, quite assured that he had been very 
impertinently hoaxed, Gerald, with a lowered 
brow, and a curled lip, sat silent. Indeed, 
could he have conveniently made his election, 
he would have descended from the vehicle. 
But no town was in view where he might ex- 
pect to procure a post-chaise ; and so, his pre- 
sent mode of self-assertion was the only one he 
had it in his power to adopt. 

Coachee, noticing, perhaps, the mood of his 
passenger, spoke in Irish whip-slang to his 
horses, or to men and women he met, or 
overtook upon the road, but did not address 
a word to Gerald. Many miles were trotted 
over in silence between them. At length, after 
a few quick side glances, he faced fully round, 
and — "By the powers! you're sick. Sir," said 
coachee. 

There was real interest in the remark, and 
the manner of the remark, which went a step 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 97 

towards extenuating, to Gerald, the young man's 
former levity. 

" A little ill, — it will pass away; — though I 
have, within the last twelve hours, suffered 
much.'' 

" T'under-an'-'ounds, Sir, it's very sick you are, 
not to talk of a little !" — and, while Gerald cer- 
tainly evinced every symptom of the faintness, 
shivering, and throbbing head that preface fe- 
verish indisposition, the young man pulled up 
his horses, and continued : — 

" The last twelve hours. Sir ! and the hard- 
ship ! murther. Sir, maybe it was the wrack of 
last night.?" 

" Hush, " cried Gerald, " I wish to remain 
quite unobserved in Ireland, until I gain 
Dublin, whither, as I perceive by the letters 
on its side, your coach travels; and, the 
better to effect my purpose, it is necessary to 
disguise — what you have guessed — the unfortu- 
nate way in which, against my intention, I ar- 
rived in the country." 

" To be sure — honour bright — murther, again ! 
and I making fun o' you. Sir, when, my soul 
from the divvle ! if I thought, or knew, or 
could guess how it was with you, I 'd sooner 

VOL. II. F 



98 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

jump down under the wheels than say a word o' 
the kind. Will you taste any thing, Sir ?" 

*' No, I think I grow better ; and you must 
not break in on your time, for me ; let us go 
on. I suppose I can reach Dublin, by your 
side, as quickly as by taking a post-chaise." 

" We '11 bate the best of 'em, three hours," 
promised coachee. 

" Start, then ; the air will do me good.'"* 

And on the coach rolled at the reasonable rate 
of nine English miles an hour. 

" Lord save us. Sir," resumed coachee, as, 
with increased zeal, he exhorted his horses to 
the road, " and you so young, and all by your- 
self, too ; there 's no friend o' yours in it, we 
hope ?" 

" Not exactly a friend of mine," answered 
Gerald, yet with a sigh for the fate of his 
faithful valet. 

" You swum your way out, bouldly, I '11 en- 
gage. Sir ?" coachee's curiosity now began to go 
hand in hand with his good-nature. 

" I swam to shore, as well as I could." 

" And fellow me better, when here you are, 
by the side 6' me, and, the Lord knows how 
many poor souls that couldn't keep at i/our side, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 99 

sarved up, for breakfast, to the young sharks, 
by this time. By the powers. Sir, 'twas a great 
thing, for a boy, like you, Englishman and all ; 
but musha, Sir," a smile, as with his rising re- 
spect for Gerald — recent misfortune is almost 
always respected — came a qualm of conscience at 
lavishing his feelings upon claims that were not 
strictly national ; " maybe. Sir, you keep in 
your own joke for me, this time ; maybe you 're 
not an Irish boy, every inch o' you ? one o' the 
Trinity lads, from poor ould Dublin, God bless 
her face, every shining morning, that took a 
scamper across the water, and had this done to 
you for your neighbourly intentions, when you 
thought of coming back to us all again ?"" 

" You mistake ; I have never before been 
upon Irish ground." 

" Well ; and that 's a pity ; and if there 's 
more o"" your sort in the place you come from, 
salvation to my soul but I could find it in my 
heart to like them a bit better than they '11 let 
me do." 

" How, let you?" 

" You see. Sir, it's not the best o' you, I'lii 
thinking, ye send over here to us, for samples, 
to agent us, and steward us, and lawyer us, and 
F 2 



100 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

then make little of us, after making nothing at 
all of us." 

" Excuse me again ; I do not understand."" 
" Running us down, you persave, Sir, all 
the time they're thrashing us into chaff, and 
grinding us into powder — ay, and when it's all 
over too, and maybe then more than ever ; 
and axing ye^ Sir, — the Englishmen that never 
come here, I mane, — to believe us the divvies 
entirely, in regard o' good manners and good 
behavor, and not knowing how to mind our 
own business. Sure that's the rason, when we 
meet one o' your country on the road, we takes 
the whip-hand of him, in one o** the ways we're 
your equals, at laste. Sir — by the gift o' gab. Sir, 
and the gibe and the fun that often hides our 
hearts, and the little cran we have, — Lord be 
praised, that laves us any thing, these times, — of 
keeping our minds to ourselves now and then." 
" You are not a country-born man, are you ?" 
asked Gerald, tiring of coachee's Irish egotism, 
and willing to change the topic. But he only 
involved himself farther in it. 

" Ay, your honor, country-born, and coun- 
try-bred, too ; and the father before me, and 
my father's son himself, until of late, used to 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 101 

better than whipping these horses up and down 
the road, in all sorts o' weathers. Sure that 
has something to do with what you and I were 
spaking of, Sir. My father took a waste of three 
hundred acres, or thereaway, from the Irish lord, 
— he was Irish then, — that owned 'em ; and by 
dint of hard work and careful looking- after, 
made 'em a good farum at the end o*" twenty-five 
or thirty years. By course, he got 'em at a low 
rent ; but at a short lase too; and he knew that 
when the lase would drop, he wasn't to expect 
a new one, on the same terms. And to be sure, 
he was ready and willing to offer any terms in 
rason, considering that himself made the ground 
what it turned out to be, and that he looked to 
it as a manes o' living for them that would stay 
in this ugly world after him ; maning me, your 
honor. Well, the day came to make the trial 
any how, and he went up to the lord's house, 
to talk to the agent, — for, you see. Sir, the 
lord himself wasn't to the fore, but spending 
his days in your honor's country, England, ever 
since ye took our own parliament from us, and 
sent it across the water, — and no one lived in the 
fine ould place only him, a bit of a counsellor, 
from Lonon, that put a Scotch steward over us. 



102 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

one that was mighty fond o' bidding, under the 
rose, a trifle more than the ould tenant, and by 
that manes, many's the comfortable man he 
made poor. Well, Sir. We waited for my 
father to come back from the agent, my mother 
and the young wife, and I — for, you see, Sir, 
I got married on the strength o' the thing, and 

poor Moya's hanful o' money, Sir whut, 

whut, lazy horse ! go along out o' that, or I'll 
make you !" Coachee's digression was not per- 
haps quite necessary, for Gerald heard his voice 
change, and detected his eye glistening. 

*' Her hanful o' money. Sir, it helped our 
stock ; and, as I tould you, she, and I, and my 
mother — God rest the poor woman's soul — we 
were waiting for my father to come back to us 
with the good news we had no fears o' hearing, 
and the pleasant face on him that would tell it 
to us, before he opened his lips. But the 
divvle a pleasant face he had when he crossed 
the thrashold, Sir. His honor, the agent, 
asked just as much rent for the new take as we 
all knew wouldn't lave us a good mouthful o* 
praties after paying it, supposing a body able to 
do that same, a thing that seemed mighty un- 
likely. We made a poor mouth to him; but 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 103 

sorrow a use in talking ; the Scotch steward bid 
the money, because, you see. Sir, it was his 
plan to split the farum into little takes, and re- 
let it, to twenty or thirty poor divvies, at an- 
other rack-rent. Then, what were we to do ? 
We wrote to the ould lord, but he took it into 
his head, Christ save us, to die before the letter 
overtook him ; and then we wrote to the young 
lord, over and over again, and never got an 
answer, only maybe, of an odd turn, the agent 
resaved word to see about the matter ; and faith, 
that was little comfort when, to our sorrow, it 
was himself that saw too much into it already. 
What were we to do, your honor.'' Nothing, 
only make our endeavour to keep the poor ould 
ground from Sawny, and try if we could get a 
bit and a sup out of it, or no — ^no matter at 
what a rent. So we run the venture of a seven 
years' lase, at the rack-rent. 

" My father didn't live to see the trial out ; in 
troth, if I said the disappointment broke his 
heart, it's no lie I'd tell. And to spake the 
honest truth, if Moya, and my ould mother, 
and the childer, and myself, didn't stop a long 
while after him, little would be our loss in the 
end. For, to make a long story short, Sir, du- 



104 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

ring the whole seven years, I was never able, 
work, and pinch, and turn as 1 could, to pay 
my rent regular; and little law did our good 
steward give me, when I was behindhand ; until 
of late years, things grew worse and worse ; the 
stock went to make up what the crop wouldn't 
give ; and at last, within a few months o' the 
dropping o' my second lase, I owed nigh-hand 
a year and a half's rent, and the steward threat- 
ened to turn us out if it was not paid up to the 
farthing. Well, Sir. And what were we to do 
again ? Why, write again to the young lord, 
and get no ansv/er, to be sure ; and then, when 
we heard that his brother had the character of 
having a little more Irish blood in his heart 
than it plaised God to put into his, we wrote to 
him too "" ^' 

" And even he did not answer you better ?" 
asked Gerald, apprehending a denouement. 

" Musha, Sir, not he — who'd expect it.'' 
Bad cess to the bit. Very well, Sir. The day 
came. Sir, and so did Mr. Steward, Sir ; and 
turn out was the word. ' Oh, with all my 
heart, Sir,' says I ; ' only if your honor will 
Jave us in this one night, till my ould mother 
gets a little better, I '11 thank your honor. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 105 

She 's in bed, in the next room to us, not over 
well, as the doctor tells us.' * Where ?' says 
he, opening the dour, and going into her. She 
just saw his face, and heard Moya and the 
weenachs crying abroad, and she didn't give 
any of us much more trouble — the one look at 
him — killed her," continued coachee, his tones 
trembling, as he stooped to wind a long and 
gentle lash at one of his leaders ; " but I ask 
pardon ; there was the wake, and a merry wake 
it was," laughing ; " and early in the morning 
after it, our good steward came again, and staid 
to lock the house dour with his own hand, and 
then he wished us good by — the young wife, 
and her three childer, and another coming, 
and myself, as we stood in the bosheen, — the 
ould bosheen, Sir, that led up from the road to 
my father's house," 

"You have indeed been hardly treated," said- 
Gerald. 

" Does your honor think so?" again laughed 
coachee. 

" Certainly I do, but most by this steward. 
May I ask you the name of so cruel a man .''" 

•' Bignell," answered coachee quietly. Ge- 
rald recognized the name of Lord Clangore's 
F 5 



106 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

land steward, and now entertained no doubt 
that he sat beside an old correspondent. 

What immediately followed brought certainly 
on the point. 

*' Bignell," repeated coachee, in a tone less 
composed ; " ay, Bignell — " he continued, his 
voice growing vehement, while his features 
worked, and his hands trembled, and he wound 
his whip to make, as if unconsciously, a fierce 
cut at his horses, " Bignell, the cursed-above- 
ground villain !"" 

The lash violently smote the ofF-leader, who 
pranced high. The other horses got fright- 
ened, and all set off at a gallop. An old 
woman who had been picking fire-wood in the 
fields, came, crab-like, down a steep bank- 
through a gap in a fence at one side of the 
road. The scared and excited animals could 
make nothing of a figure presenting itself in 
such a questionable shape : observing her, at a 
distance, they suddenly swerved aside in their 
furious career ; the coach as suddenly upset, 
and Gerald was flung off, and momentarily de- 
prived of his senses. 

*' Here we lay last, your honor," said the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 107 

voice of Michael Farrell, close at Gerald's ear, 
as he regained his power of hearing. He turned 
his head and saw coachee stretched beside him 
on the clay floor of what seemed a very poor 
cabin. The young man's face was ghastly, 
though his words were light, and the dragging 
down of the corners of his mouth bespoke 
bodily pain. Gerald also lay at his length, and 
felt an acute pang in his arm. He motioned 
to rise. 

" Don't stir, Sir,— don't, and I'll be thankful 
to you. Your arum is hurted, and it's the best 
way not to flurry it till the doctor puts his two 
eyes on it for you." 

" 'Tis broken, indeed," said Gerald, obeying 
this command ; " you are hurt too, are you 
not.?" 

" The right thigh o' me is smashed. Sir ; I 
feel something like the bits o' bone sticking 
out." 

"And what's to be done for us both.? is 
there a surgeon at hand ? are we near a town ? 
why do the people leave us here alone ?" 

" We were the first lifted in, off o' the road, 
Sir, and then every body ran out to see after 



108 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

the rest o' the passengers, and to hurry for the 
doctor and po-chaises, and he'll soon be with 
us, Sir." 

" Then we are not the only sufferers ?" 

" Poor Jem Doyle, that used to mind the 
drag for me, he's dead, Sir." 

" Good Heavens !" 

" And three outsides more, I believe, only 
bruised and scratched a little. I wonder was it 
my fault, your honor ? Faith, I'm afeard it 
was, and that they'll turn me off, the laste 
they'll do. Well; the Lord be praised. Or 
sure, if they don't, here 's this brittle, good-for- 
nothing thigh o' mine that won't be able to 
mount a box this half-year." 

" And, meantime, what can you do with 
yourself ?"** 

*' Get some good bodies to take me home to 
the wife. Sir, and the childer, first and fore- 
most ; and a nate load they'll have, laid down 
before them, in the poor cabin, instead o* getting 
a letter with my week's earning inside of it ; and 
then, faith, we must all do just as well as we can." 

'* Have you been long practising your new 
trade? 'Twas a singular change from your old 
pursuits." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 109 

" Ah, then, and wasn't it, Sir ? — Sorrow 
a more curious change could be, and little I 
ever expected it. But, you persave, Sir, after 
losing the ould farum, maybe I didn't behave 
myself all out like a boy that would be in his 
right rason, and careful o' the good word o' 
some of his neighbours ; and, to tell the blessed 
truth, I beUeve I was getting myself into more 
and more trouble in the country ; and a friend 
whispered me that I might as well go take my 
pleasure in Dublin, for a start ; and so I did, 
Sir ; and it was there I larned the use o' the 
whip from a gossip o' my own that I met by 
good luck on the streets ; a comfortable man ; 
well liked on the road, for his civil word, 
and his joke, and his stories, with all the out- 
sides, high and low, to say nothing of his know- 
ing his business, and minding it." 

" We ought to be friends," resumed Gerald ; 
" fellow-sufferers generally become so, and in- 
deed, for other reasons, I wish you well. Per- 
haps, then, you will allow me to ask you a ques- 
tion. What was the nature of the * trouble' 
which made your visit to Dublin necessary ?" 

" I 'm beholden to you, Sir, for your kind 
word — ^but, to tell the truth, this thigh is losing 



110 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

its senses entirely — murther ! and cross o' Christ 
about us ! but that was a pain in earnest." 

It might be that coachee would have evaded 
Gerald's question, by feigning the agony he now 
complained of ; but his companion saw that he 
really suffered much. His face grew more pal- 
lid than it had been before, his features worked, 
and perspiration stood on his forehead. Faint- 
ness ensued, for he closed his eyes with a deep 
groan. 

Gerald called out, and some people entered 
in a hurried manner with a glass and jug. 
Coachee re-opened his eyes, and extended his 
hand. 

" If 'tis spirits, he must not touch it," said 
Gerald. 

" But I 'm burning with the drooth, your 
honor, and the heart is wake," remonstrated 
coachee. 

" Give him a glass of water then, and let me' 
have anotlier." Gerald's own pain was scarcely 
to be endured. 

" Water, your honor ?" asked his fellow- 
sufferer, in much amazement — " water, to rise 
the heart.?" 

" No other drink that we can at present get 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. Ill 

is fit for either of us, if we mean to take a 
chance for our lives ; but do as you wish.'' 

" Divvie have me, then, if I do ; give us 
that could comfort, in the name of God," he 
added, in a tone of such mournful resignation, 
that Gerald half smiled, notwithstanding his 
own pangs. 

But the poor fellow's torture increased, 
and, in the hope of procuring some opium for 
him, Gerald asked how near they were to an 
apothecary's shop. The people answered, that 
the nearest establishment of the kind was in the 
village to which they had sent for " the doctor," 
and that " the doctor himself" presided over 
it. This was bad news, for two reasons : first, 
because it doomed coachee to unmitigated suffer- 
ing for some hours ; next, because, from the inti- 
mation it gave of the professional rank of the ex- 
pected surgeon, Gerald felt doubts of the pro- 
priety of submitting coachee's thigh or his own 
arm to his skill. Venturing to inquire of the 
people around them as to the popular estima- 
tion in which their doctor was held, he became 
assured, however, that *' Mr. Gallaghan was 
the best bone-setter on Ireland's ground. — See 
here, your honor," continued the proprietor of 



112 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

the cabin, " here 's my own son's leg, that he 
bruck, lepping, last pattern-day, and, by the 
life, 'tis amost as good as ever, now, out of Mr, 
Gallaghan's hands. Walk across the floor, 
Mickle, and let his honor make sure with his 
own eyes.'' 

Mickle, a sheep-faced, lumpish lad of nine- 
teen, accordingly put himself in motion, and 
displayed to Gerald a confirmed halt, and a right 
leg that bowed out like a bent bar of iron. 

** Well ; I'll never run down Mr. Gallaghan," 
said a neighbour ; " that leg is a good job, sure 
enough ; only he hadn't the same luck with the 
leg he set for a crature of mine ; poor Sheela 
died the same night." 

" Your daughter?" asked Gerald. 

" No, your honor ; buV Sheela was as good a 
watch-dog as ever barked in a haggart." 

" How far are we from Dublin ?" was Gerald's 
next question. 

" Only fourteen miles, and a tilly," answered 
coachec ; " the fourteen mile stone is at the 
bottom o' the rise where we upset." 

" Then, I wish some of you would hasten the 
arrival of the post-chaise, and never mind the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 113 

doctor for me ; I will reward whoever follows 
the first messenger, and arrives first with it." 

They all disappeared. 

" You're afeard o' Mr. Gallaghan, Sir ?"" asked 
coachee. 

" I certainly prefer postponing the operation 
of getting my arm set till I shall have reached 
Dublin, and I wish you could safely accompany 
me in a post-chaise ; but that is impossible ; you 
should sit, and you cannot — must not : even 
though this apothecary may not be a very emi- 
nent practitioner, your only chance is waiting 
for him, then staying some time where you are, 
and then travelling home in a reclining pos- 
ture." 

"Murther," ejaculated coachee, with an almost 
despairing groan. 

" If you can conveniently use either of 
your hands, put one of them into the pocket of 
my trowsers, next to you, and take out my 
purse ; I cannot stir the arm that should do that 
office for me." 

Coachee contrived to draw forth the pursci 
Gerald continued : — 

" Hold it a moment. It contains, I believe. 



114 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

forty sovereigns ; take out about half of them, 
and put them in your own pocket if you can ; 
they may assist you to get through this untoward 
business ; and when I receive remittances from 
England, perhaps I may find you out, and have 
the gratification of affording you a little more 
help." 

Coachee, who could not divine Gerald's se- 
cret motive, though not his only one, for this 
liberality, stared at him with his red and glassy 
eyes, and holding the purse in his hand, remain- 
ed perfectly silent. Gerald renewed his instruc- 
tions. 

" And you 're in earnest, Sir ?"" 

" Pho, man, don't ask such a question. I 
shall be obliged by your doing as I bid you.*" 

« Obliged ? 1/ou '11 be obliged. Sir ? Well :" 
he counted from one hand to another, five so- 
vereigns, and stopt. 

" Go on," said Gerald, " they must be 
twenty." 

" Well," resumed coachee, as with a lip qui- 
vering now more from his moral than his physi- 
cal emotions, he proceeded in his task, — " well. 
Sir, I have them now ; twenty yellow boys, all in 
a lump ; the biggest handful o' money — that I 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 115 

could call my own — I ever had together, since 
my ould father died. Here, Sir ; I'm putting 
the purse into your pocket again ; and I '11 say 
nothing ; only — " his voice failed him, " the 
blessings o' the young father and the young 
husband — " He covered his face with his 
hands, and as if from a union of many feelings, 
as also from his weakened state of frame, wept 
convulsively. 

"You do a very foolish thing now," said 
Gerald, just able to controul his own gratified 
and sympathizing feelings : " in your present 
state, you should keep yourself as quiet as 
possible ; and if you wish really to please me, 
you will have done with all this." 

" I will Sir ; I will. Bad cess to the day I 
ever thought a hard thought about the place 
your honor comes from ; musha, if 'twas your 
likes we had in our own great people, and if 
they 'd only stay at home with us, I wouldn't 
be lying stretched here, this blessed day. And 
you were axing me what kind 'o trouble it was 
that sent me to hide, for a while, in Dublin 
town, Sir? Why, then, I wouldn't like you'd 
think worse o' me than I desarve, though maybe 
that 's bad enough ; but it was neither robbing 



116 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

nor staling, nor a thing o' that sort, let alone 
harming a fellow-creature ; only something that 
was thought as much of by some people, and I 
won't say it wasn't wrong, my own self ; how- 
somever, Sir, I had a sore heart, you persave, 
Sir, after being turned out of our ould home ; 
and no friend in the world wide to back us; 
and no notice taken of our complaints to the 
young lord and his young brother, and all ; 
and, faith, Sir, I was fool enough to have a 
hand in some o' the night-work, and the hill- 
law, that was going on in the place ; and when 
my enemies began to suspect me, sure that's 
what sent me out o"" harum's way, for a start." 

" I think I understand you, and I hope you 
regret your imprudence," said Gerald. 

" Maybe your honor will think it's to blind 
you, or to impose on you I 'm going to say 
what I '11 say ; but, may I never rise out o' my 
present misfortune, if I didn't get sorry for 
joining 'em amost as soon as it happened. 
Many an ignorant poor crature was among us, 
not half so well able to think of what he was 
about as myself was ; for the ould father of 
me. Sir, he was a dacent man, ay, and a quiet 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. ll? 

paceable man, too, Sir, by rason he had little 
to trouble him, his life long, till just before 
he left us ; and along with all that, you persave. 
Sir, he gave me a dacent boy's share of the 
schooling ; so that I had a right to have more 
sense than the poor divvies of turf-cutters that 
were in the same foolish business, by my side ; 
and no thanks to me not to like some o' their 
doings, or some o' what they wanted to do, for 
the like rason ; but though they looked up to me, 
and let me head 'em, after a manner, I couldn't 
stop 'em from running into more mischief 
than they ought ; and there 's why I grew sorry 
for joining 'em, your honor." 

Shortly after this explanation, coachee be- 
came again faint from pain. Gerald, too, lay 
exhausted ; and both were unable to restrain 
their groans. In about an hour, the woman 
of the cabin, who had been at work in the 
fields, entered in an anxious and alarmed 
bustle, eager to afford any assistance in her 
power. Gerald requested a linen bandage ; she 
procured it : with her assistance, he arose, 
wrapt it tightly, twice or thrice, round his 
right arm, which was the fractured one ; then 



118 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

contrived a sling with his pocket handkerchief; 
and sat in a chair, to await as patiently as he 
could the arrival of the post-chaise. 

In about another hour he heard several 
carriages rattle to the door of the cabin. 
People ran in to apprize him that his " Po- 
shay" was in readiness. He paid the messen- 
gers; offered money to the woman of the 
house, who refused it; spoke a parting word 
of consolation to coachee, who continued 
really unable to utter any sound save the low- 
cries that involuntarily escaped him ; and, as 
Mr. Gallaghan entered to take the poor fellow's 
limb in hand, Gerald, assisted by many anxious 
persons, at last sat in the chaise. 

He was about to desire the postboy to drive 
as fast as he could, and to get four horses at 
the next stage, when a deep hoarse voice bel- 
lowed forth, in a kind of frenzy, some little 
distance behind — " Mickle Farrell ! — Mickle 
Farrell, my darling ! where are you ! murther, 
where are you !" and Gerald, glancing out of 
the window of the chaise, saw running, or 
rather galloping, into the cabin, the elder of 
the dangerous persons who had shared his 
chamber that morning. In instinctive avoid- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 119 

ance of this man, he rapidly gave the word for 
starting, and the next instant was in motion 
towards Dublin. 

When he had time to reflect, Gerald called 
to mind that the re-appearance of the armed 
marauder, joined to the words he had spoken, 
argued but little in favour of the ingenuousness 
of the person he came in such a hurry to con- 
dole with. Upon his box, a few hours before, 
coachee had disclaimed all knowledge of such 
an acquaintance ; yet now it appeared evident 
that they were intimate friends. No doubt, 
before Gerald and Michael Farrell began to 
understand each other, it was fair that the 
disguised Rockite should keep his own secret ; 
that seemed a matter he could scarce be blamed 
for. But there was another point : the ten- 
dency of the half-confession that Michael had 
just made on the floor of the cabin, went to 
impress Gerald with a belief of his contrite 
self-divorcement long ago, from his former 
turbulent associates. If such were really the 
ease, would not they, one and all, have so far 
at least resented his secession as by this time to 
hold themselves estranged from him, and in- 
difflerent to his fortunes, whatever might befal 



laO THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

him ? and how did this agree with the violent 
anxiety now displayed by, as was evident, one 
of the most ferocious of the band? Had 
master coachee dealt sincerely with Gerald, 
even in his last declarations? Was he a 
reclaimed character, or still an insurgent 
outlaw captain, countenancing and abetting 
outrage, if not occasionally heading it? Ge- 
rald's interest in the man began to abate, 
in the suspicion of his duplicity. He en- 
tered Dublin, and was assisted into his hotel, 
before he suddenly felt a novel interest towards 
Michael Farrell. " That strange letter I re- 
ceived from him in Pere la Chaise !" thought 
Gerald — " how could I have forgotten to ques- 
tion him about it !" And after an eminent 
surgeon had set his arm, seen him put to bed, 
and commanded him to keep quiet, this re- 
flection, and the associations it produced, 
helped, as much as the pain he still suffered, 
to keep Gerald restless and waking. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 121 



CHAPTER V. 



Gerald had apprehended that all his late 
hardships, together with the irritation of his 
arm, would perhaps throw him into an illness 
as protracted, if not as dangerous, as that which 
he had suffered in France. But he awoke, next 
morning, with few symptoms of fever, and even 
the pain of the fracture little inconvenienced 
him. He indulged visions of getting up, indeed, 
so unexpectedly recruited did he find himself; 
but this his watchful surgeon at an early visit 
forbade, dooming him to many more days of 
perfect quiet in bed. 

Again left alone, Gerald began to think of 
the necessity of writing to London for a remit- 
tance. His liberality (thrown away, he feared) 
to his fellow-sufferer, made such a measure par- 
ticularly necessary. He had ordered the post* 
boy, the preceding day, to drive him to the best 

VOL. II. G 



122 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

hotel in Dublin ; and really expecting, from the 
low scale of every thing Irish in his mind, to 
find that *' best hotel " only a tolerable place, 
after all, it was with much surprise he entered 
Morrysson's establishment. Now he gave way to 
another foreboding. Doubtless, in proportion 
to what Gerald supposed the rarity of such 
accommodation in Ireland, his very magnificent 
landlord would make out his bill; and here 
again was a pressing necessity for despatching a 
letter to London. He wanted a wardrobe too, 
— wanted it, indeed, so urgently and literally, 
that the thought brought a smile to his lips. 
Heaven only knew how the clothes in which he 
entered Dublin had been procured. Perhaps 
they were plundered property ; and it was not 
out of the limits of possibility that his personal 
safety might be endangered by appearing abroad 
in them. 

Most anxious, therefore, Gerald was to write 
a line to his banker. But this could not be 
effected with his own hand, at least; for, as has 
been mentioned, it was his right arm which was 
broken. Nor would he call upon any other 
person near him to write from his dictation. 
He had landed in Ireland without his know- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



m 



ledge, and he continued in it against his will. 
None of his former objections to the country 
had abated; nay, since his foot touched its 
shore, he had experienced little that was not 
calculated to strengthen them. His interest 
towards Michael Farrell might, indeed, have at 
first told the other way ; nay, receiving the 
man^s story as true, Gerald's conscience, as well 
as his sense of justice, might have suggested a 
short residence in whatever part of Ireland (and 
he really scarce knew in what part) his own 
estate was situated ; but the strong doubt of 
Michael's ingenuousness in which they parted, 
made questionable all he had related of his suf- 
ferings, and of the cruelty of Lord Clangore's 
land-steward, and the insufficiency of the agent ; 
coachee had either much exaggerated, or was a 
person of such bad character as to deserve severe 
treatment ; if upon Gerald's own estate similar 
complaints were to be heard, they could, doubt- 
less, be similarl}' accounted for : and hence he 
only wished to return to England as fast as 
possible. But making himself known in his 
present situation might entail upon him endless 
remonstrances from his and Lord Clangore's 
tenantry, and visits from agents, and perhaps 
g2 



124 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

congratulatory calls from some of the great 
folk of Dublin, and contact with some friends 
of the unfortunate Lady Cox ; and all this 
would detain him in Ireland ; and he would 
not employ to write a letter to which must be 
subscribed his real signature, his landlord or 
his surgeon, the only individuals available for 
such a purpose ; because to do so without an 
injunction of secrecy were but trumpeting 
about who and what he was ; and to make a 
mystery of himself to either, were to run a 
chance of being suspected as a disreputable 
person, instead of being at once acknowledged 
as the Honourable Gerald Blount. 

He thought of endeavouring to scrawl a line 
or two with his left hand, and asked for pen 
and ink and paper. But his failure was posi- 
tive; the letters would face the wrong way, 
notwithstanding all his care, and run diago- 
nally in the page, so as to appear quite illegible 
even to his own eye ; and wondering why he 
could not effect what he had seen others do, 
when a boy, and what Dean Swift asserted he 
often did, in his facetious epistles to Dr. Sheri-. 
dai\, Gerald gave up the task in despair, flut-. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. l^S 

tered, and even fevered, by the petty agitation 
it had caused. 

What was to be done? funds he absolutely 
required. A happy reminiscence occurred. 
There was Mr. Gore, who, notwithstanding 
some promises to the contrary, still did him the 
honour of owing him three hundred and fifty 
pounds ; and as his official duties necessarily 
kept that gentleman in Dublin, a messenger 
would at once find him, and speedily bring 
back the needful answer to a direct request. 

But that direct request must reveal Gerald's 
arrival in Dublin as effectually as any other 
proceeding. He would not therefore make 
it. But he took a middle course. 

At his desire the head-waiter appeared. He 
caused the man to sit down and write as follows. 

" A friend of the Honourable Gerald Blount 
presents his compliments to Mr. Gore, and 
being confined by indisposition to his hotel, 
requests the honour of a call from Mr. Gore,- 
at Mr. G.'s earliest convenience." 

" Did the waiter know the private residence 
of Mr. Gore ?" 

The man knew it very well ; it was in Ste- 



126 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

phen's green : and a noble mansion Mr. Gore's 
was. The note was addressed and dispatched. 

Half an hour brought back the messenger 
with an answer, directed in a lady's hand. 

" Mrs. Gore presents her compliments to the 
Honourable Gerald Blount's friend, and in- 
forms him that Mr. Gore is absent from town, 
but Mrs. Gore entertains no doubt will call at 
Morrysson's hotel upon his return, the time of 
which is however uncertain, though it may be 
speedy." 

Gerald had intended to receive Mr. Gore 
when he should have repaired to the hotel, 
and while he told him the late circumstances 
which rendered necessary a replenished purse, 
communicate his wish to remain incognito in 
Dublin. This reply to his billet was pro- 
voking ; but in hopes that Mr. Gore would, 
as his lady seemed to promise, return speedily 
to town, and in the certainty that all his pre- 
sent wants would thereupon be met, Gerald 
took counsel with his impatience, and resolved 
to wait. 

His mind, now dismissing the question of 
pecuniary calculation, turned to a more poeti- 
cal subject. Once again he chided his own 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. IStt 

forgetfulness that could permit him to part 
from Michael Farrell without demanding an 
explanation of the letter, purporting to bear 
his signature, which Gerald had so unaccount- 
ably received in Paris. Not the most remote 
conjecture could he yet form of the manner in 
which it had come into the hands that present- 
ed it to him : or how its beautiful bearer had 
acquired a knowledge of his person, nay of his 
affairs. The vague prophecy, too — but that, 
Gerald continued to be assured, was empty 
nonsense. He had certainly seen her again in 
the window of the street through which passed 
the tri-colour procession ; and again on board 
the merchantman in which he thought to 
embark for Wales.'' he was not so sure: and 
again on the shingles ? — no ; that must have 
been mere delusion. 

Who could be the secret friend who wrote 
him the warning note, while he was in the sea- 
coast cabin, and, it was strongly presumable, 
provided him with his good cheer, and his 
tolerable couch, and his (perhaps) plundered 
suit of clothes .'' Gerald had before dismissed 
all idea of connecting this considerate person 
with the fascinating individual we have just 



128 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

found him thinking about ; but now that he 
lay somewhat at ease in bed, inert and mentally 
idle, and that the last gentle opiate prescribed 
by his surgeon began to mount imperceptibly 
into his brain, he seemed willing to deliver 
himself up to the most romantic visions on the 
subject. So subduing, indeed, became his fan- 
cies, that he sighed, in a kind of love-lorn way, 
ere the entrancing medicine fairly lulled him 
asleep, to complete under its delicious influence 
the dreams that, even with his eyes open, it 
had helped to inspire. 

He slumbered till towards evening, indis- 
tinctly conscious, now and then, that an at- 
tendant had entered the room. When he quite 
awoke, the head-waiter appeared to say that 
two gentlemen waited on him. 

*^ The surgeon one of them ?" 

" No, they were both strangers ; an elderly 
and a young gentleman." 

•* To wait on me !"" said Gerald, remember- 
ing that he had yet given no name in the 
hotel, " for whom do they inquire ?^ 

"For the friend of the Honourable Gerald 
Blount, Lord Clangore's brother." 

"Oh," thought Gerald; "Mr. Gore come 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 129 

back to town sooner than his lady would pro^ 
mise for. Admit them : stay ; my compliments 
and I beg to be excused from seeing, at present, 
any person along with Mr. Gore." 

The man bowed in the dignity of his place, 
and withdrew. Gerald felt much relieved as to 
his pecuniary difficulty. The waiter re-entered 
with a card, sealed in a blank and undirected 
envelope. 

" Mr. Knightly and his eldest son to pay 
their respects to the Honourable Gerald Blount."" 

" Unaccountable and very provoking again !"* 
thought Gerald : — " how have they found me 
out .'' Why every body does so ;— is ray name 
written between my shoulders.'* and what is my 
business with these gentlemen ? or theirs with 
me 'i Let Augusta indulge her fancies, but 
certainly one of the very last intimacies I wish 
to form in Ireland is with ' Mr. Knightly and 
his eldest son.' His eldest son ! — some great 
red- cheeked, yellow-haired giant, I suppose, 
half farmer, half fox-hunter. There is some 
forwardness too in this uncouth country-squire 
originating the renewal of an acquaintance, un- 
sought on my part, and limited to one meeting 
G 5 



130 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

on business when I was a boy of fourteen 
years of age. Why, I am sure I should not 
recollect the gentleman's person ; unless, in- 
deed, I saw him at breakfast after a walk to 
Highgate. — -Pray," addressing the waiter, "give 
my compliments, and I have not the honour of 
knowing Mr. Knightly and his son ; so there 
must be some mistake." 

Gerald remained in terror lest even this suffi- 
ciently explicit message should not be under- 
stood. Such were his notions of Mr. Knightly's 
very Irish character, that he expected every 
moment, after the waiter's second departure, to 
see the chamber-door pushed open by his un- 
welcome visitors, and to feel both plunging 
upon his broken arm, to shake it by the hand. 
He had not forgotten Knightly's unceremonious 
and energetic salutation at their first memorable 
meeting in the minister's library. 

But he seemed to have overrated the clown- 
ishness even of Mr. Knightly. The chamber- 
door did not again open until the surgeon came 
to make his evening call. Gerald was then pro- 
nounced not to be getting on quite as well as he 
should have done since morning, and it was con- 
jectured that he had engaged himself in some 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 131 

business which he ought to have avoided, and 
injunctions were repeated to remain perfectly 
still. The patient, who began to get on good 
speaking terms with his surgeon, obviously a 
man of superior intellect, and, allowing for na- 
tionalities, of engaging manners also, preferred 
a request to be obliged with the loan of some 
books that might help to wile away his solitary 
confinement, and was promised a parcel next 
morning, but of such a class only as would in- 
terest his mind at intervals, without exciting or 
continuously engaging it. Another opiate was 
then taken, and, after the adieus of his surgeon, 
Gerald soon fell asleep. 

When he looked round him, in the morning, 
the books lay convenient to his unhurt arm, 
and he was proceeding to possess himself of 
one, when an attendant entered with a letter. 
" Does the messenger wait ?" 
" No ; it was a general post letter." 
" The deuce it is !" cried Gerald, after the 
waiter went down ; " and Irish it must be ; for 
there has been no time to have it English — yes, 
and stamped with the post-mark of the town 
nearest to my estate ! — and a woman's hand on 
the cover ! What ! Augusta's ? — ay, hers. 



132 THE ANGLO-IRISH^ 

indeed, — and in the name of the miraculous, 
how has she^ too, got the information that, al- 
most before I could have entered Dublin, ena- 
bles her to direct — ' To the Honourable Ge- 
rald Blount, Morrysson's Hotel, Dublin ? — ' but 
hold — her direction has been to * Gervis Gore'sj 
Esq., Stephen''s Green — ' So, she reckoned on 
my calling there, and Mrs. Gore has re-directed 
the letter. The deuce again ! that lady will 
then begin to suspect that the Honourable Ge- 
rald Blount's friend is the best friend he has in 
the world — himself." 

And, considerably embarrassed by the nu- 
merous and inexplicable petty annoyances of 
his situation, Gerald perused his sister's letter, 
parts of which still more mystified him. 

"Lower Court, Clangore, Feb. 10, 18 — 

" My dearest Gerald, 
*' Here I am, you see, dating this letter from 
one of Clangore's old seats, in the wilds of 
Ireland. In the letter I wrote to you, after 
you took your seat in the House of Commons, 
you might have detected my intention of re- 
siding in this country. Since then the intention 
has become a resolve, and the resolve an act. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 133 

Before our dear brother's late illness, I re- 
quested his permission to make Lower Court 
habitable, truly giving as my reason a wish to 
live amongst the poor and friendless people 
who starve, and idle, and go almost unclad, 
upon this fine portion of his Irish property, in 
order that I might lend, under Providence's 
will, my humble efforts to better their con- 
dition, their habits, and their minds. Already 
some of my own fortune has been expended in 
this view ; and you cannot think, dear Gerald, 
how happy and gratified I am, watching the 
first fruits of my little exertions. Some re- 
spectable ladies, ay, and gentlemen, too, thou 
renegade, give much assistance ; and you will 
at once conclude that my old friends, the 
Knightlies are the most zealous of them all. 
Khoda Knightly, indeed, whom you will re- 
member to have seen when a child, is by my 
side, every thing I do, and every step I take ; 
and, moreover, shares my maiden sovereignty 
over the little empire of Lower Court ; in fact, 
has been good and kind enough (and when was 
she other than good and kind ?) to come and 
live with me — " 

"How very obliging," sneered Gerald, "ay: 



13i THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

these clever Irish people know what they are 
about ; one of the numerous family may well 
afford the condescension that places her at the 
side of a young lady who holds under her own 
command a fortune of sixty thousand pounds. 
Well ; let me hear more of Augusta ; poor 
Augusta ! how they have fascinated her — " 

" And," continued the letter, " the foster- 
sister of our dear father, who had been in his 
establishment before he left Ireland, but who 
since then experienced much distress, is our 
household prime minister ; and Clangore's own 
foster-sister, a healthy, good-humoured girl, 
called Jinny Malone, is my body-woman, and 
we are trying to discipline her youngest brother 
into the duties of a footman ; and Mr. Knightly 
has supplied us with a ready-made butler, and 
all our subjects of lesser degree are the sons or 
daughters of such of your or Lord Clangore's 
poor tenantry as we found mbst immediately in 
want of food, clothes, shelter, and, worst of all, 
employment. We do not reckon a coachman 
amongst our lieges, as I only exhibit a four- 
wheeled pony-carriage, which Rhoda is teach- 
ing me to drive with, she says, reasonable hopes 
of success. But our poor old gardener, lame 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 135 

Denny Larissy ! he is a great person amongst 
us, and one of the very happiest. Many years 
ago, when Lower Court was depopulated, after 
the sale of its furniture, and left in the exclu- 
sive keeping of a follower of Clangore's land- 
steward, Bignell,' — (now residing with his patron 
and Mr. Ambrose, the agent, at Upper Court), 
Denny received his discharge, amongst the rest, 
and, in humbled fortunes, went to live, alone, in 
a miserable cabin, where he immediately fell ill 
of rheumatism, ("'twas a hard winter,) and be- 
came so crippled as to lose all chance of future 
employment in his former mode of life. Ever 
since then, want, and feebleness, and misery, 
had been encroaching on him, until the joyful 
day when Rhoda and I drove up (as near 
as we could) to the door of his wretched habi- 
tation, and gave him instructions to repair the 
next morning to Lower Court, as head-gar- 
dener, and superintendent, in the first instance, 
of our efforts to clear the lawn, and re-define 
and re-establish its ancient fences and bounds, 
and trim it, and, in fact, make it a lawn again. 
We left him what we called an advance of 
salary, which the old man received in silent, 
almost stupid emotion, as he had received, 



136 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

indeed, our previous instructions. But if you 
could have seen him next morning ! Rhoda 
and I arrived on the ground of operation at an 
early hour. He had been there hours before 
us, decently clad for the first time during 
many years, and we found him surrounded by 
a host of more youthful and more efficient 
helpers, whom he had levied, en massey on 
his way to the Court, all engaged, under his 
supreme authority, in the prescribed work of 
' clearing the lawn.' One detachment erected 
rustic palings around the fine groups of beech 
and of chesnuts ; another were levelling a space 
before the hall-door, to prepare it for sand and 
the rolling-stone; for, long grass and weeds 
had intruded to the very steps, and indeed 
the whole ground from their edges was one 
waste, covered with brushwood, or strewed 
with sticks, straw, and stones, and grubbed by 
the pigs, and trampled by xows and horses ; 
a third party, regular stone masons, were, to 
the number of a dozen, building up the breach- 
es in the side- walls ; a fourth were levelling 
and smoothing far and wide, and obliteratintr 
the pigs' rootings, and the marks of cloven feet 
and horse-shoes ; and by far the most nume- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. l37 

rous force, chiefly composed of boys and girls, 
were zealously employed in repelling the ha- 
bitual incursions of the animals, who, year 
after year, had made the trespass I speak of, 
and whom it was difficult at last to teach that 
they must henceforth seek elsewhere for beech- 
nuts, and scanty patches of daggled grass. 

" We were descried in our approach, and 
old Denny, giving to his band the word ' Stop ! 
stop all o' ye !' took off his hat, shouted 
feebly, and waved it round his head. Those 
who had hats, like him, followed his example ; 
but all had lungs, ay, and hearts, Gerald; 
and do not smile if I assure you that the 
cheer of those grateful, and simple, and neg- 
lected beings, went through my heart with a 
thrill of the supremest pleasure I have yet 
felt. Into the middle of the lawn Rhoda drove 
her ponies. The general shout was redoubled ; 
but we could perceive that old Denny's con- 
tribution to it now grew scarce audible, and 
that, still waving his hat, he tottered from 
weakness. At last, coming very near him, we 
found that the old man had dropped sitting 
upon the root of a tree, his elbows resting on 
his knees, and his hands covering his face. 



138 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" In a short time, he attended us into what 
had been the garden — his old domain and 
kingdom : and his feelings, upon witnessing its 
state of utter devastation, must have resem- 
bled those of a real monarch restored to his 
crown after a season of rude expulsion from it, 
and taking a first glance at the breaches of all 
law and order, and the outrages committed 
upon fair establishments, during his deposi- 
tion. Often did Denny raise his hands and eyes, 
and groan, during our difficult progress through 
the impeded paths. But having gained a par- 
ticular spot, his countenance brightened. ' I 
wonder are they here .''' he soliloquised as we 
approached this corner — ' I wonder did they 
leave us even them ? — yes,' he continued, 
standing stiil ; * there they are. That 
shrub was for the young lord, the day he 
was born ; and that, so near it, was for the 
Honourable Masther Geraid, as soon as I 
heard he was born, too, in England ; and this 
purty creeper, that I trained to stretch out 
its arums to them both — my last morning's work 
in the garden — this was for your ladyship's 
own self; God be praised that I see them 
again !' 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 139 

" We continued our survey, and Denny re- 
ceived instructions, and suggested his own plans, 
and, I repeat, from that day to this, is the hap- 
piest creature in Lower Court. A few weeks 
got us all pretty well in order, upholsterer and 
all ; and upon the evening of our first day''s re- 
gular residence in the old house, there were 
such bonfires, Gerald, and such capering, and 
laughing, and enjoyment all around us ! 

" But you must not imagine that it was mere- 
ly to give a few hours' employment to a good 
many, and permanent comfort to some, and to 
get myself shouted at, and fire-worshipped, 
that I took it into my head to come here. Hea- 
ven forbid I should be so vain or unthinking ! 
No, my dear Gerald ; it is for our little schools, 
and for our little industrious establishments 
amongst the grown people, that I hope to ob- 
tain some of your approbation. Do not too 
readily listen to those who would tell you that 
your poor tenantry prefer indolence to honest 
exertion, or personal and household dirt to per- 
sonal and household cleanliness ; or, worst of 
all, ignorance to rational education. In truth, 
Gerald, I fear such a charge is often made 
against them by individuals who have caused 



140 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

the appearances that seem to give ground for - 
it. But the published reports of the Ladies' 
Hibernian Improvement Society state, from ex- 
perience, the very contrary : and allow me to 
add, that my own experience strengthens those 
reports. Already our schools are filled, and the 
poor little things tolerably punctual in their at- 
tendance ; and already, by merely showing their 
mothers and sisters how to clothe themselves, 
by their own industry, and to make a shiUing 
besides, many an idle and ragged woman has 
become active and neatly attired, and many a 
wretched cabin transformed into a cheery though 
still humble cottage. 

" I wish you would come to see us, Gerald, 
and judge for yourself. It was not, indeed, my 
intention to have invited you so soon. I had 
planned to wait until our measures should have 
effected results that would indeed lay claims to 
your praise, and perhaps patronage. But having 
learned that, under some strange circumstances, 
yet unexplained to me, you were lately seen on 
our Irish shores, not a very great distance from 
Lower Court ; and presuming that you will stay 
in Dublin a few days at least, and call on 5^our 
friends the Gores, I cannot be so inhospitable 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 141 

as to withhold this present gracious summons to 
attend our sovereign pleasure. Nor must you, 
in your answer, unless it be a personal one, 
ask me how I became aware that you are in 
Ireland. Come, and you shall hear. Go back 
to England, and remain ignorant. But I am 
sure you cannot refuse to gratify yourself and 
me together ; and so I expect you. 

" Perhaps before you receive this, Mr. Knight- 
ly will make you out in Dublin. He has sud- 
den business there, and will be accompanied by 
an individual whom I 'm sure you will be grati- 
fied to take by the hand — his eldest son. I need 
say no more, except that you cannot desire a 
friendly meeting more anxiously and cordially 
than he does. He and his father are much in- 
terested in the fate of some poor sufferers who, 
upon the very night when you were seen amongst 
us, (at least, as I before said, not very far from 
us,) were wrecked near the place of your extra- 
ordinary concealment ; you, no doubt, have heard 
of the sad occurrence. The Knightlies called 
upon me for a letter to you ; but, as I fore- 
saw it would be a desperately long one, and 
as they could not wait hours till it was finish- 
ed, you now get my epistle by post. 



14S THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" My dearest brother, I could not bring my- 
self to write to you during your late visit to 
France. I am convinced you understood my 
silence. But had I been made acquainted with 
your voyage to that country, in time to sit by 
your bed-side, you would have found me nurs- 
ing you. My kind friends, however, anxious 
about its probable effects on my flimsy good 
health, did not communicate your sufferings 
till you were out of danger, and then very 
slowly and gradually. Now I can but thank 
Providence for your safety, and also for leaving 
you the consoling reflection, that in the most me- 
lancholy cause for that unhappy meeting you 
were not criminal, (as by this time every one 
knows,) and acted, allowing for your first invo- 
luntary error, like the brother I am proud of. 
But oh, Gerald ! is there not a higher, a more 
providential comfort? I need not, I will not, 
search your feelings by more openly alluding to 
it ; — but is there not ? are you not bound to be 
grateful to a good God for ever ? — my tears flow 
in answer. 

" I shall long to know how you like all the 
Gores. We have but one favourite amongst 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 143 

them. They spent a little time near us, here, 
under the roof that I exchanged for Mrs. 
Knightly 's, before I made up my present inde- 
pendent establishment : and we thought Miss 
Gore, since married to the rich brewer, coldly 
haughty; Miss Selina, who is about to make 
nearly as good a match with old Sir John Lumley, 
fiercely haughty ; but dear Maria, the youngest, 
so gentle, and so unlike her sisters in every 
thing but beauty, — she won our hearts. We 
spirited her in amongst us, for a few weeks, 
though much against the wishes of her family, 
who call us Mere Irish, and do not like us, and 
she proved a charming addition to our circle. 
Tell her how much we all love her, as indeed 
every body does, and must do. But beware, 
Gerald, and do not you go to follow every body's 
example. There is a reason against it — and 
that reason, as well as many other amusing 
things, you shall learn when you come to attend 
our maiden state in Lower Court, and to ac- 
count for your very strange appearance, so 
lately, upon our royal line of coast — a matter 
that, I promise you, I am curious to hear ration- 
ally explained. But as my secret spies add that 



1^ THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

you were observed in good health and spirits, 
curiosity, thank God, is my strongest feeling on 
the subject. 

" Farewell, dear Gerald. I hope you will 
come down with the Knightlies. Adieu ! — But 
no — I will not leave something I have to add 
for a postscript ; 'tis a stale affectation ever 
since St. Pierre first (I believe) built an apho- 
rism about it out of poor Virginia's letter to her 
unhappy Paul. And now you already begin to 
suspect and to enjoy my unaffected confusion. 
*Tis so, Gerald, or I believe it is. Some day, 
not far off — I fear, at least, to be questioned or 
importuned on the matter, and I am not pre- 
pared honestly to say a downright — no. And, 
fatherless and motherless as I am, must I not 
(though my own mistress, which weighs nothing 
in the case,) seek the advice and approval of the 
brother I love.? Clangore will smile applause 
at your opinion, or we will compel him to do so, 
and therefore I confess only to you. Perhaps, 
in the first instance, he might question the pre- 
tensions of my conqueror ; and so, indeed, 
though not in such a lord-like or Anti-Irish 
way, may you, Gerald. Hitherto, I have not 
been able to get you to love the Knightlies as 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 145 

well as they deserve ; and — (murder will out) — 
and yet it is — a Knightly. But, my brother, 
a Knightly whom you will be more gratified to 
call 7/OU7' brother, than if he were a throned 
king of the earth ! A Knightly, whose almost 
mere appearance will give you unspeakable joy, 
in thinking that through him — him, above all 
living men, your rooted prejudices to this family, 
and your particular cause of abhorrence of them, 
are all to melt away in thrice-cemented kindliness 
and affection ! 

*' You divine what I mean. If not, see and 
know this wonder-working person, and be con- 
vinced that I do not rave. As I have already 
said, he will visit you, in all likelihood, before 
ray letter comes into your hands. So that, at 
all events, you now understand 

" Your most affectionate sister, 

" Augusta Blount." 

" Do I ?" soliloquized Gerald — " do I, sister 
Augusta ? Let the next thing I understand be 
the Pythagorean problem, if I do. What can 
she mean ? — Indeed, what does the greater 
part of the letter mean ? — What is the par- 
ticular cause for my abhorrence of these inex- 

VOL. II. H 



146 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

haustible Knightlies ? None that I know of. 
All along, I only thought little of them ; and 
such, without the trouble of ' abhorrence,' is 
my present feeling, and nothing more. And in 
what way was this ' eldest son' to turn my in- 
difference towards the whole numerous family, 
root and branch, into unbounded interest and 
affection .'' — Was he to have given me love- 
powders ; or does he cateh hearts wherever he 
goes, as the royal rat-catchers charm all the 
vermin they live by ? — Pho ! they have filled 
Augusta's mind, enfeebled, as I fear it is, by 
early and continued illness of body, with some 
absurd romance or other, which, under their 
tutelage, and for their ends, she thus vents upon 
me. Ay ; that close-mouthed, elderly Irish 
squire, and that Miss Rhoda — (a fine, inde- 
pendent, masculine character, with her beauty 
and forwardness to eke it out, she must have 
grown into by this time) — they well know how 
to manage poor Augusta ; playing off her 
schools and her associations upon her, to hide 
their real views. The * eldest son' is one of 
the 'gentlemen' who assist her benevolence, I 
suppose : yes, yes ; first secretary, at least. I 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 147 

am well rid of him and his father. I am glad 
they intruded last night, otherwise this letter 
might have thrown me off my guard. As a 
younger brother, it is not immediately my part 
to interfere ; but, the moment I reach London, 
Ciangore shall. And what is this folly about 
my having appeared stealthily or mysteriously 
on the coast ? Is Augusta really ignorant of 
the circumstances under which I visited Ire- 
land ? — She must be. She speaks of the ship- 
wreck, yet separates me from it ; and either the 
Knightlies themselves are also unaware that I 
shared that misfortune, or they will not tell 
Augusta what they know, till she is sure I am 
out of danger. Well ; that, at least, is consi- 
derate. But no doubt they have a deep interest 
in shielding her from any thing that could injure 
her health : oh, no doubt of that ! To be sure 
they must have heard I was wrecked ; old 
Knightly had it from the female crew of half- 
smugglers, half-Rockites, that so kindly con- 
veyed me to the cabin ; perhaps from the lips of 
the very disconsolate damsel, to whose personal 
admiration I hold myself indebted so much : he 
may be an old smuggler himself, on a grand 
h2 



148 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

scale : I have heard that Irish gentlemen dab- 
bled in such speculations before now ; hence 
their boasted claret. Again, I cannot make 
out Augusta's eloquence, when — alluding to that 
unhappy duel, — she mysteriously insists on my 
being so especially bound to thank God for the 
issue of the transaction^-or, at least, for the 
result of the whole matter. I suppose she re- 
joices in my not having been the individual de- 
tected in his wife''s company by poor Cox. But 
let it pass, along with a good deal more, that 
she has wrapt up in such ambiguous foldings. 
Women are ever strange correspondents, or even 
conversers ; they never can bring themselves to 
speak out. No matter. — Go down to her ? 
face all the * Knightlies, and embroil myself 
particularly with the 'eldest son.'" No, Au- 
gusta; your letter cannot even be answered at 
present, supposing me able to answer it, with 
my own hand. No. Imagine it has missed 
me until I reach London, and then your elder 
brother shall notice it. Some portions of it 
were interesting to me, indeed ; those about her 
corps of new Irish servants, and that old lame 
gardener, and his shrubs and creeper ; but the 
* eldest son' mars all. And now it is more than 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 149 

ever my duty to get funds as soon as possible, 
and the moment this unlucky arm is better, 
embark for England. — Will Mr. Gore return 
to Dubhn in time, though ?" 



150 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER VI. 

" Will Mr. Gore return to Dublin in time, 
though ?" — It was a question Gerald often re- 
peated, not only during that day, but during 
many ensuing ones. He grew well enough to 
get up, and, his arm still in a sling, to exchange 
the confined solitude of his chamber for the 
range of two spacious apartments, contiguous 
to it ; but his good friend did not yet seem able 
to keep the conditional appointment his lady 
had made for him. 

Gerald became very uneasy and impatient. 
His situation was most embarrassing. For many 
important reasons he should long ago have been 
in England ; and now his arm was well enough 
to allow him to travel (though not to write) and 
he could not stir. His purse contained little 
more than would make a suitable return for the 
able and kind attentions of his surgeon ; and 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. ISl 

funds he must have for Mr. Morrysson, and for 
tailors, boot-makers, and haberdashers, yet un- 
known, and for travelling expenses to England ; 
and supposing Mr. Gore still to remain out of 
Dublin, how were those funds to be got ? Again, 
he thought of asking the proprietor of the hotel, 
or his surgeon, to write to London in his name ; 
but again his former difficulties occurred ; nay, 
a new objection started, — ^his bankers would not 
attend to an order not in his hand, though pro- 
fessing: to come from him. Augusta would 
instantly assist him ; but if he opened a corre- 
spondence with her, he must answer her letter ; 
and that was altogether inexpedient, so long as 
he remained in Ireland. Gerald, then, at this 
renewed deliberation, could see no chance of 
relief but that upon which he had first calcu- 
lated, namely, the providential appearance of 
Mr. Gore; unless, indeed, he postponed his 
hopes of escape out of Ireland to the period at 
which he could safely take a pen in his own 
fingers. 

Endeavouring once more to make up his mind 
" to wait," he desired, upon this day, to be ac- 
commodated with apartments at the side of the 
hotel which faced the street, in order that he 



162 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

might relieve his solitude by looking out at his 
fellow-creatures as they passed up and down 
before his windows. His wishes were promptly 
attended to; and, the moment he entered his 
new lodgings, Gerald, excited by the rattling 
of carriages and carts, and the rest of the or- 
dinary noise of a street, hastened to avail himself 
of his opportunity once more to gaze at new 
faces. He could have made striking likenesses 
from memory of all the waiters who had attend- 
ed him during his more strict confinement, so 
minutely were the particulars of their features 
impressed on his mind, if indeed his weariness 
of the men would have permitted his engaging 
in the task. 

It was a street of considerable bustle he look- 
ed out upon. More fashionable equipages than 
he supposed Dublin contained passed under his 
review, and a respectable stream of pedestrians 
kept ipouring along the flag-ways. 

*' About this hour in the morning, Sir," said 
the head-waiter, " a stranger in Dublin might 
be amused by having pointed out to him dif- 
ferent remarkable gentlemen who pass this hotel 
going to the Four-Courts." 

" Then stand by ray side, and catch a few of 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 153^ 

those great people for me, if you can :"" the man 
bowed, and repaired to the window. *' Are you 
an Englishman ?" continued Gerald, hoping 
that he might find in his decorous attendant a 
man who had acquired respectable habits and 
demeanour out of Ireland, though much resi- 
dence in Dublin, of late, would account for his 
accent. 

" My native place is Knockballochery, in 
the County Kerry, Sir;" — Gerald wondered. 

" Well ; can you see any body, yet .?"" 

" I think I can, Sir : please to look at that 
tall, lusty gentleman, with the Oxford-grey 
surtout, buttoned below, but wide open at the 
breast, and with the quaker-like hat, and the 
healthy, good-humoured face, and his eyes 
cast down, thinking, and the umbrella lying 
along his arm : he that walks so firm and 
stout." 

** I have him — he may be some famous 
priest." 

" A friend to them. Sir. That 's Counsellor 
Dan." 

" Indeed ! and now going to some of the 
law-courts ?" 

" Yes, Sir ; to the Four-Courts. See how 
H 5 



154 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

all the people turn to look after him, Sir, and 
then smile at each other as they pass : they 
like to see him walking so bravely along, with 
his broad shoulders and his full breast; and 
'tis thought he likes to be seen by them, step- 
ping out over the flags of Dublin, through 
thick and thin, friends and foes ; for he could 
go in his carriage to the Four-Courts every day 
if he thought fit, Sir ; — look. Sir ! here it comes, 
close after him." 

" The green one, with the green coachman, 
and green harness-ribbons ?" 

" Yes, Sir ; and he 'd have the horses green, 
if he could.'' 

*' Pray assist me, again ; — I have my eye, 
I think, upon some other popular character, 
for the people turn to look after him, too; 
though he is so different a figure from Mr. 
O'Connell : I mean the low, slight, little gentle- 
man, who walks so rapidly, jerking his arms, 
and pushing out his under-lip so often, and 
whose complexion is so bilious, and whose nose 
is rather short and cocked, and — now that he 
happens to look up — whose eyes are so dark, 
and fine, and expressive ?" 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 155 

" You 're right, Sir ; that 's Mr. Shiel." 

" Ay ! — he is overtaken, now, by a very 
large person, who carries his head very high, 
and wears his clothes very loose, and has great 
whiskers, and a profusion of shirt-collar, and 
bears a huge stick or club on his shoulder — is 
he any one of note ?" 

" Indeed, and he is, Sir ! Counsellor O'Gor- 
man, the Secretary, no less." 

" The secretary.? — what secretary.?" 

" Of the Catholic boord, Sir." 

" Well, and that other gigantic gentleman 
who now meets him and Mr. Shiel — who is 
he.?" 

** It*s a lucky morning for you. Sir; sure he 
is Mr. Eneas M'Donnell, that hunts the Bibli- 
cals over the whole country, and gives them no 
rest or pace : when he 's on his legs, it would be 
no asy thing to make him sit down, Sir, against 
his liking, as you may persave, and he knows 
that well." 

" See ! the three gentlemen are passed by an- 
other, who, by the expression of his brow to 
them, does not seem a friend." 

" Do you mean the gentleman with the 



156 THE ANGLO-lklSH. 

broad red face, Sir, black coat and waistcoat, 
yellow leather breeches, top-boots, spurs, and a 
heavy whip in his hand ?" 

" The same." 

" Then you're right again, Sir; it's the Rev. 
Sir Harcourt Lees, that calls himself com- 
mander-in-chief of all the Orangemen, and 
offered himself yesterday, in the papers, as 
hangman to the same gentlemen you're after 
seeing pass by." 

" A precious set altogether !" thought Gerald : 
" what a state of society ! what people ! what a 
baronet ! what a clergyman !" 

" But no one minds poor little Sir Harcourt, 
Sir : he 's only cracked a little, and hasn't a bit of 
harm in him, after all. Now, Sir, here 's one 
worth looking at ; the purple-faced old gentle- 
man that gets such a shaking on the back of 
that little rough-coated horse, bending forward, 
and dropping his jaw so much, and followed by 
a servant. If ever you heard of the pleasantest 
judge in the Four-Courts, there he is, Sir-— old, 
old Lord Norbury." 

" Pray, glance the other way, after Sir Har- 
court Lees — he stops at the corner of a street a 
good way off, to shake hands with a gentleman — 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 157 

quick, and tell me if you know his friend; 
— tut ! they both turn up that cross street, 
now." 

Gerald believed he had caught a glimpse of a 
person who interested him much more than all 
the famous Irish characters in Dubhn — Mr. 
Gore. Something very like that gentleman's bland 
and seducing mode of address certainly met his 
eye ; and the side face, too, though but remotely 
viewed, almost placed three hundred and fifty 
pounds in his pocket. He flattered himself that 
his fascinating debtor might absolutely have 
been on his way to Morrysson's, after just ar- 
riving in town ; and that he only stepped back 
with the clerical Baronet, to discuss some passing 
topic, and would soon re-appear, coming down 
the street to the door of the hotel. 

Full of this pleasing hope, Gerald dismissed 
the waiter, and sat watching at the window ; — 
but he watched in vain. Either he had been 
deceived, and had not seen Mr. Gore, or that 
gentleman was in town, and intentionally neg- 
lected him. The latter supposition could not 
rest on Gerald's mind ; and, still after days of 
disappointment, he ultimately adopted the 
former. 



158 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" I must wait a little longer," was Gerald's 
only consolation ; " the surgeon promises that I 
may wield a pen in a day or two ; and if my 
obliging friend does not come in the mean time, 
then, at least, I shall assist myself." 

Simultaneously he formed another sensible 
resolution, which was, to divert as cheerfully 
as he could the continued tedium of his soli- 
tude. For the twentieth time, he turned to 
one of the books his surgeon had sent him, 
a " Guide through Dublin." The descriptions 
it contained of the public buildings aroused his 
interest, even while they offended his taste, as 
too pompous and exaggerated. He had often 
heard Irishmen boast of the beauty of their 
metropolis, until the fervour of their praises 
sounded absurd. To compare Dublin with 
London, was, at a glance, to betray overweening 
nationality ; but absolutely to rank, upon any 
account, a city containing albout two hundred 
and forty thousand inhabitants, above one con- 
taining more than a million above the Queen 
city, the Babylon of the modern world — this 
had always seemed to Gerald the very extreme 
of Irish vanity. And now, the puffs in the 
" Guide " had the same effect on his mind. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 169 

Yet he felt anxious to see with his own eyes, 
and form a settled opinion by their agency. 
Why should he not glide out, next morning, 
at the earliest light, and stroll through the 
streets ? He need not fear observation. No 
one in Dublin knew his person, except Mr. 
Gore, and a meeting with him would be rather 
pleasing than disagreeable ; besides, early in the 
morning, he could not be exposed to the chance 
of any less wished-for, though barely possible 
rencounter ; while it was the very best hour at 
which to get a satisfactory view of a strange city, 
ere its various crowds of humble and fashionable, 
of bustling men of business and of bustling 
beauty, should be in the way to call off his 
attention from what must then dwindle into the 
inanimate accompaniments of a living, breathing 
picture. 

He would go forth at seven o'clock the next 
morning. This resolution once taken, Gerald 
grew very restless and fidgetty of his confine- 
ment in the mean time. He once more turned 
over the leaves of the " Guide ;" it irritated him, 
and he twirled it down the table. There was 
a newspaper at hand, which he had conned over 
and over, all but the advertisements. The an- 



160 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

nouncement of a Catholic Meeting at "D'Arcy's 
Globe Tavern, Essex-street," fixed him. He 
should very much like to see Mr. O'Connell and 
Mr. Shiel in debate. Of the waiter, who just 
entered, he inquired if the matter to be discuss- 
ed at the notified meeting was likely to prove 
interesting. 

The man answered, highly so. " Mr. O'Con- 
nell," he continued, " was for not trusting the 
great petition to Mr. Plunket, without instruc- 
tions as to the kind of securities the Catholics 
would be willing to give in exchange for eman- 
cipation : Mr. Shiel was for sending it to him 
just as it was, and leaving every thing to Mr. 
Plunket'^s own wisdom ; and all the old vetoists, 
and a good many that were not vetoists, would 
make a great stand with Mr. Shiel against Mr. 
O'Connell ; and it was thought, for once in his 
life. Counsellor Dan would lose the day;" 
and, in fact, Gerald comprehended, that if ever 
he wished to hear a real Catholic discussion, he 
ought not to lose this one. 

He took his resolve suddenly. A fashioner, 
as the waiter called him, soon appeared with a 
variety of ready-manufactured suits ; a boot- 
maker, a hatter, a haberdasher, nay, even a 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 161 

glover, followed in his train ; and, just in time 
for the meeting, Gerald, after nearly emptying 
his inconsiderable purse, got into a hackney- 
coach, and was driven to D'Arcy's. 

The Catholic parliament were not then so 
well accommodated with a place for debate, as 
at present they are understood to be. Gerald 
entered a second or third-rate tavern, and made 
his way up a narrow staircase into an ordinary- 
sized room, communicating with another by 
folding-doors, now flung open. Both apart- 
ments were beginning to be rapidly filled, but 
as the greater part of the people had not yet 
come in, the crowd was not too dense to forbid 
Gerald's approach, even with his lame arm, to 
the table arranged for the debaters. His place 
was scarce secured, however, when a great bustle 
occurred ; and first, Mr. O'Gorman, the Secre- 
tary, walked sturdily into the room, carrying his 
great shillelagh on his right shoulder, which he 
laid down on the table v/ith an important air, 
as if it had been the great seal, or the Speaker's 
mace ; and then followed Mr. O'Connell, towing 
Mr. Eneas M'Donnell, and pursued by a throng 
that quickly stuffed the two apartments to the 
walls. A little person, wearing an unfashion- 



162 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

ably shaped blue-frock, who had been previously 
turned from the table, looking over some manu- 
script, now quickly faced round, and Gerald 
recognized the pale-coloured, peculiar, but high- 
ly intellectual features of Mr. Shiel. His hat 
was off, and a superfluity of black hair, divided, 
with some affectation, like a woman's, or an old 
statue's, upon his forehead, gave his head a pe- 
culiar character. Mr. O'Connell also appeared 
uncovered, exhibiting a plain unromantic brown 
wig, that whimsically turned up behind, so as to 
leave visible part of the back of his neck. He 
took off his Oxford-grey surtout, fully unbut- 
toned his under-coat, half unbuttoned his waist- 
coat, touched his profuse muslin frill, pulled 
down, until it hung at almost its full length out 
of his fob, a massive gold chain, to which fitly 
appended a ponderous bunch of seals, took the 
chain in his right-hand, and began whirling the 
seals about ; thrust his left-hand into his breast ; 
got into a slight rocking motion, half-earnest, 
half-swaggering ; and looking exceedingly se- 
rious, seemed as if collecting his thoughts from 
some score of law cases that day gone through, 
to fix them on the new business in hand. He 
had taken up his position close to Mr. Shiel ; 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 168 

and as that young gentleman, turning side- 
ways to the chair, folded his arms hard, com- 
pressed his small well-cut lips, or sometimes 
pushed out the under one, and, growing paler, 
and glancing upwards, as he was obliged to do, 
fixed his glittering black eyes upon the very 
Irish, but not otherwise remarkable face of his 
vast antagonist, no contrast (in their situation) 
could be more remarkable than that which ap- 
peared between both. 

In a few seconds, a judicious friend of Mr. 
O'Connell moved his brother into the chair, and 
the great " agitator" immediately " set-to." 
Gerald remembered that the question for dis- 
cussion, namely, whether Mr. Plunket should 
receive the Catholic petition with or without in- 
structions, was one upon which these gentlemen 
had also differed, to their loss, with Mr. Grat- 
tan. Mr. O'Connell's brogue, and his long 
drawling way of speaking, — his see-saw motion, 
his continued twirling of his chain and seals, 
the awkward sweep of his disengaged arm, 
and his bending low, whenever he sought to be 
emphatic ; all this did not please Gerald in the 
first instance. It was inveterately and broadly 
Irish. But as he listened, and got used to the 



164 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

novelty, the orator's fluent diction, and close 
reasoning, made a more favourable impression. 
Mr. O'Connell argued that Mr. Plunket should 
not be chosen as their parliamentary advocate, 
without solemnly declaring against the veto. 
He assumed, as the necessity for this measure, 
he ambiguity of some written pledge sent in by 
the College member to their Secretary. He read 
resolutions of synods of their bishops, passed 
against the veto many years before ; and he 
urged the assembly to attach these ecclesiastical 
dicta to the official note accompanying their pe- 
tition, and to add their determination to abide 
by them. Gerald could recognize little of the 
demagogue in Mr. O'Connell's opening speech. 
" The counsellor" stood before him as a man 
deeply in earnest, or seeming to be so ; well 
informed in his subject ; inflexible in his con- 
scientious scruples ; calm, serious, and with more 
of appeal and entreaty than of bluster in his 
manner ; — and, from all he had previously heard, 
this surprised Gerald ; and, indeed, it seemed 
equally to surprise those around him. " Dan 
is very quiet to-day," they said. On more than 
one occasion, when Mr. Shiel's friends inter- 
rupted him with cries of " question !" Gerald 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 165 

only remarked a studied pause in the speaker, 
and then a ready and adroit plea for patience. 
The continued whispers of the gentlemen near 
to Gerald explained this mystery. As had 
been premised by the waiter at Morrysson's, half 
the assembly was composed of predetermined 
voters against their old idol, and it behoved him 
to break ground very cautiously. These critics 
did not add, what Gerald ultimately discovered, 
that it was also Mr. O'Connell's plan to make as 
long a speech as he possibly could. 

At length, however, he had left himself no 
pretext to continue longer on his legs ; and Mr. 
Shiel, whose deep and almost startling look 
scarce turned till that moment from his oppo- 
nent's face, jerked round to answer him. " The 
ear-piercing fife" was hardly shriller than the 
" Sir !" with which, addressing the chair, the 
young politician began, as he stepped back from 
the table, closed one hand on his breast, and 
protruded the other, clenched also. Gerald was 
within one or two of Mr. Shiel, and alniost 
started. Sentence after sentence rang out, in the 
same key, modified, now and then, by a some- 
what theatrical but melodious under-tone. This 
energy, at starting, must soon have defeated it- 



166 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

self, if it could not progress to a climax really 
vehement. But so it did. 

It was Mr. Shiel's plan to shake the authori- 
ty and weight of Mr. O'ConnelPs opinion, in the 
present instance, by stamping with inconsistency, 
and satirizing bitterly many previous opinions of 
the veteran agitator, upon the same, or upon simi- 
lar questions. He read manuscript-extracts from 
newspapers, pui*porting to bear Mr. O'Connell's 
signature, all at variance with his present pro- 
position, or with each other. Taking up Mr. 
Plunket's written pledge to the Secretary, he 
made it bear a construction very different from 
that given to it by Mr. O'Connell ; and he pro- 
ceeded to an eulogium, ardently eloquent, upon 
the talents and political character of Mr. Plun- 
ket, calling him the only man alive fit, in every 
way " to bear their mighty cause upon his 
Atlantean shoulders." In> the first part of his 
address, Mr. Shiel was loudly applauded, and 
Mr. 0''Connell much laughed at, and evident- 
ly losing ground. But now Gerald began to 
discover the tact and mannerism of the Catho- 
lic colossus, and, at the same time, to witness 
the excessive vivacity of his antagonist. It was 
by no means Mr. O'Connell's policy to allow his 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 167 

young and learned friend uninterruptedly to 
accumulate evidence and sentiments which, 
pressing upon the understanding of the meeting, 
might prove too much even for his own pre- 
scriptive popularity, and for his time and mate- 
rials for reply. He did not, therefore, hesitate 
to interrupt Mr, Shiel, almost at every sentence. 
He flatly denied the connexion of the extracts 
that had given him such a blow, and demanded, 
what he knew could not be immediately pro- 
duced, the newspaper-file itself. He called to 
order every two minutes, " merely to correct a 
fact." When Mr. Plunket's name was rever- 
ently mentioned, he hinted, under his breath, 
as it were, that just then, Mr. Plunket had at 
his disposal " some very snug commissioner- 
ships of bankruptcy for rising young vetoist 
lawyers." With well-feigned solemnity he 
squibbed off sundry personal sarcasms, and 
cross-fired, and hedge-fired, at the battle-array 
of his opponent, and at the powers of compre- 
hension, of patience, and of abstinence of the 
close-packed rooms, imtil his contemplated 
result was amply produced. Mr. Shiel's clarion 
voice became a scream ; his visage grew ghast- 
ly ; his lips blue ; his eyes roimded and flash- 



1^ THE AMGLO-IRISH. 

ed ; he jumped back, and he jumped forward; 
he smote the table ; he raised his clenched 
hands to his head, — reminding Gerald of 
Kean, in the mad tragedy of Bertram, about 
to strew the halls of Aldobrand with his 
raven hair — he foamed ; he grinned ; and, (if 
it seem a bathos in narration, it was also one 
in the reality,) he began to repeat the same 
eloquent things over and over again, and there- 
by tire his own friends. For it was now past 
six o'clock ; dinners were overdone at home ; 
guests were met without hosts; wives were 
" nursing their wrath, to keep it warm ;" and 
still the indignant orator would reply to every 
one of Mr. O'Connell's interruptions ; and then 
go back to the subject, arguing after convinc- 
ing, and, above all, evidently bent upon a grand 
peroration. His warmest adherents obstrepe- 
rously expostulated with\him, requesting to 
be " let home to their dinners." He turn- 
ed upon them, eloquently and poetically de- 
manding, " if the great and sublime interests 
of their freedom and their religion were to be 
sacrificed because their domestic viands lay 
smoking on the board ?" They remonstrated 
again ; Mr. O'Connell still poked at him ; he 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 169 

would not have done ; he would not sit down ; 
and many thereupon deserted, for their " beef 
and cabbage, and a hot tumbler," (Mr. Shiel had 
said " viands,") the famishing post of patriotism. 

" Wretches hang, that jurymen may dine." 

But for reasons, Mr. O'Connell had not so 
tired his liege men. From various '* asides" 
Gerald understood that many of them were to 
dine with himself; the rest remained, because 
they felt almost personally engaged in a contest 
which, for the first time, threatened to end in a 
majority against their worshipped leader. He 
knew this ; and, waiting for the politician's mo- 
ment, magnanimously sacrificed his right to a 
reply, and, raising himself the cry of " question, 
question !" organized a division while Mr. Shiel 
yet stood screaming to the chair. 

Gerald continued observant. The greater 
orator's voters stood their ground ; their oppo- 
nents went up-stairs. Tellers were appointed ; 
and counting heads after them, the two an- 
tagonists stood at the outer-door, side by side. 
Mr. O'Conneirs votes were first ascertained. 
They amounted to eighty-five. Now came the 
tug. It was a hard-fought, doubtful battle ; 

VOL. II. I 



170 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

and, as Gerald studied the countenances of the 
political commanders, he saw that neither had 
yet arrived at any anticipation of the issue. 

" Come down, gentlemen !" cried Mr. Shiel, 
at the stairfoot, and his friends descended like a 
cataract. " Eighty !" he shouted, turning in 
his eightieth man. "O'Connelll what's that 
you say you are ?" 

" Eighty-five !" shouted his learned friend. 

" Eighty-one — two — three !" continued the 
author of Evadne: — "Come down, if you please, 
gentlemen ! — eighty-four ! — for God's sake, come 
down ! what keeps you up there 'f 

" There's no one else to send down to you, Mr. 
Shiel, Huzza !" exclaimed one of Mr. O'Connell's 
tellers, who had run up to see : and " Huzza ! 
huzza !" shouted Mr. O'Connell, rushing back 
into the room, throwing off his broad-brimmed 
hat, and jumping perpendicularly upward, while 
all his seals rattled — " We have it, boys ! we 
have it ! — No veto ! no vetoists ! Huzza !" a 
great shout followed. 

Gerald stept out to the door and looked at 
Mr. Shiel. He continued to stand at the stair- 
foot, his hand resting on the balustrade, his 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 171 

head drooped, his lips firmly shut, the paleness 
of exhaustion and disappointment now succeed- 
ing to that of excitement and vehemence, and 
his large kiminous eyes half-closed in fatigue. 
A heavy step descended the stairs : he started 
and looked up. An old man, some super- 
annuated servant of the house, came down; Mr. 
Shiel clutched him with both hands. *' And 
whom do you vote for ?" he screamed into his 
ear. 

" The Lord bless you ! Sir," answered the old 
man, much startled, " I don't know how to vote 
at all — I'm not used to it." 

" And what brings you here, then .''■" twisting 
the poor old fellow round, and violently turning 
him down the second flight of stairs. 

" 'Twas very exciting," ruminated Gerald, 
on his way home ; " Irish, to be sure ; — but am 
I to leave them nothing Irish ? I certainly 
witnessed much knowledore of the matter in de- 
bate, much cleverness and tact in its discussion; 
and from Shiel, eloquence, absolute eloquence, 
which time will perfect, and render more plea- 
sant to an English ear. No. These men are 
not to be considered as many would wish us to 
consider them. Very different, indeed, are they 
I 2 



172 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

and their audience from any thing of the kind 
in England ; but are they so inferior as is said ? 
To be sure, they lack the decorum and the pro- 
priety of our speakers ; and the meeting, for its 
rank, showed less steadiness of demeanour than 
one might see at the Crown-and- Anchor in the 
Strand ; yet I have beheld this day, in this real 
Irish Catholic debate, an earnestness, a reality, 
a downright energy, which, every thing consi- 
dered, I like." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. ITS 



CHAPTER VII. 

Pursuant to his plan, Gerald issued forth, 
next morning, in the first glow of such a Fe- 
bruary sun as is sometimes witnessed in England, 
but oftener in Ireland. He did not propose to 
learn the names of streets and squares, or to 
acquire a geographical knowledge of a city 
which he must leave so soon, and most probably 
never revisit ; and he went, therefore, unprovided 
with a map, and without much previous refe- 
rence to the " Guide." 

Turning to his left, from the steps of his hotel, 
he walked up a street of some aristocratic im- 
portance, as was evident from the fact of its 
being composed exclusively of private-houses. 
It led him into a square containing as many 
noble-looking mansions as any square in Lon- 
don, and nearly twice as spacious as any. Keep- 
ing to his left, he rambled into another, of less 
dimensions, but elegant proportion. He paced 



174 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

round to it, and then down a street which led 
him again to his hotel. Delivered from this, he 
pushed across the street which ran at right an- 
gles with it, and down another opposite to him. 
Now he began to despair of Dublin, and to think 
he had already viewed its best quarter, for the 
houses gradually became mean, and the way not 
cleanly. He involved himself in a maze of 
alleys and mews, and was losing his patience as 
well as his way. Suddenly he emerged into a 
fine broad street of shops. Close at his left 
hand, arose, obviously, a " public building." 
" Come," said Gerald. The edifice seemed a 
square of about one hundred feet, with three 
fronts, and crowned by a dome. Gerald ad- 
mitted it to be a graceful and fine structure. 
He faced round, as its chief front faced, and 
looked down a spacious street, also of business; 
straight forward over a handsome bridge ; 
and on still, in a straight line, until the avenue 
became indistinct in the distance. 

" Good," said Gerald ; — " I am near the 
river ; let me see their vaunted quays." He 
gained the bridge, and, standing over its middle 
arch, glanced up and down ; and, up and down, 
farther than his eye could distinctly reach, there 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 175 

appeared, indeed, quays that, after all, he al- 
lowed had not been overpraised. And to his 
right, as he continued to look towards the 
river's source, a building of peculiar beauty 
arrested his attention. It consisted of a cen- 
tre supporting a dome, and of squares at 
each side, separated from the quay by arcade 
screens, surmounted by stone balustrades, and 
having open archways into court- yards. The 
front of the centre pushed a portico of Corin- 
thian pillars with pilasters to the quay, sup- 
porting a pediment, ornamented with statues. 
Above arose a circular lantern, divided by 
pillars, an entablature, and then the dome. 
The quay-wall in front of the whole building 
was surmounted by a massive balustrade, which 
running, at either hand, to the distance of about 
a hundred feet, joined the balustrades of the 
bridge upon which Gerald stood, and also that 
of another in the contrary direction, and thus 
formed a finished and splendid foreground to 
the whole pile. " I wish, after all, I knew 
the names of these two buildings,'" said Gerald ; 
glancing alternately from that before him to 
the first he had viewed, and of which the prin- 
cipal front now terminated the street leading 



176 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

to his present stand. Of a man who came by, 
crying " Freestone-ne-ne-whoo !" in a very 
startling manner, he made his inquiries ; and, 
after the stentorian fellow allowed him to wait 
till he had ended the last cadence of his savage 
song, was answered — " Why, you're a stran- 
ger in Dublin entirely, Sir, not to know the 
ould Royal Exchange, and the Four-Coorts, 
long life to 'em !" 

Gerald crossed the bridge, and proceeded up 
the long line of street running from it. Here 
he encountered nothing remarkable but the 
extent of a city, indicated by the streets that 
branched to his right and to his left, as well as 
by the length of that one which he traversed. 
It struck him, however, that as his hotel and 
the squares in its vicinity, with the Royal 
Exchange, lay at one side of the river, and 
the quarter he now explored, including the 
Four-Courts, at the other, I^ublin seemed to be 
equally divided by its quays : a much more 
interesting as well as convenient arrangement 
for a city, than that of London, running in 
parallels, to such a tiring extent, along one 
bank only of the unseen Thames. 

" This must almost concentrate," said Ge- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 177 

raid, " the different haunts of business and of 
pleasure, and permit one to come upon either, 
from the outskirts, at any side, in a comforta- 
bly short time ; instead of being compelled to 
travel four miles to one's banker's from Port- 
man-square, or three miles to the theatre from 
about the same point." 

The long street, or rather succession of 
streets, at last ended ; and continuing to walk 
forward through a fashionable outlet, Gerald 
stood upon a broad road, having good resi- 
dences at its either side. With his right hand 
to the way he had come, he looked over an ex- 
tensive clustering of the city, which, he con- 
cluded, he yet knew nothing of ; its spires and 
domes, its blue roofs and red-chimney tops 
appearing vividly against a back-ground of the 
sea, of which the sun-tipt waters were alive 
with vessels, outbound and inbound, while 
snatches of picturesque sweeps of land, some 
blue and lonely, some showing villages or 
villas, farther beautified the scene. Gerald 
paused in pleasure. It was to him a peculiar 
and very interesting view. The city and the 
sea; artificial bustle and nature's solitudes ; the 
works of man and the works of God ; all so 
I 5 



178 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

immediately in contrast ; — " Very beautiful, 
Dublin," quoth Gerald ; " very beautiful, I 
admit." And he was pleased to reflect how well 
situated for the purpose of traffic Dublin was ; 
a bay thus running, as it were, .ilmost into her 
arms. 

He moved from his agreeable position, and 
bent his steps to explore some of the yet 
strange quarter over which he had been look- 
ing into the blue waves. Abandoning the 
road, he made way through fashionable pri- 
vate streets to a square, nearly as good as the 
second one he had discovered at the other side 
of the river. He pushed on, sure that every 
step brought him into the midst of the quarter 
he wished to observe. But, by the common 
mistake of traversing streets that seemed run- 
ning straight to his point, but that really, 
though gradually, diverged, from it, Gerald, 
after a good deal of twining and turning, was 
ushered almost upon the bridge which he had 
crossed from the Exchange. Despairing of 
doing better, he recrossed it ; again stood be- 
fore the Royal Exchange ; and, after a second 
glance at the building, looked down the broad 
street which ran to his left. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 179 

As before-mentioned, this was a street of 
shops and offices, with, about half-way, a pub- 
lic building incorporated with it : another, of 
much greater importance, seemed to terminate 
it. " Indeed?" said Gerald ; " I thought, from 
the monotony of my last ramble, that I had 
seen all of these worth seeing." He quickened 
his steps down the street, and, after passing 
an equestrian statue, stopped short, not before 
one, but between two structures, which, whe- 
ther from their relieving and enhancing one 
another, or that their separate merits claimed 
the eulogy, he thought produced a richer effect 
of architectural beauty than he had seen in 
London or in Paris. The first swept across 
the end of the street ; the second partly occu- 
pied its termination, at the left hand, and 
partly curved round another that took it up at 
right angles. The front of the former was of 
a grave yet chaste character, running about 
three hundred feet; its stones were weather- 
stained to a dark tint, and here and there spotted 
with white; the order of its architecture was 
the Corinthian. The centre of the other was 
a magnificent colonnade of the Ionic order, 
forming three sides of a rectangular court-yafd^ 



180 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

supporting an entablature, based on a flight of 
steps, and continuing round, at either hand, to 
meet two almost equally splendid fronts : the 
colour of its stone was light, as was itself, 
tliough so extensive a structure ; and to com- 
plete its contrast with its adjacent rival, the 
morning sun played through its clusters of 
pillars, through its receding spaces, and par- 
tially over its summit, while the other impres- 
sive mass of building remained in shadow. 

Again Gerald condescended to ask of a 
humble passer-by the name of " those public 
buildings." The man was one of many news- 
venders, who, to his annoyance, had for some 
time been hurrying up and down this end 
of the street, vociferating, in a vile Dublin 
brogue, (the vilest of any in Ireland, for it 
is slang-brogue) — " Dubhl Evelil Post !" 
—"Weekly Registher !" — "Freemal!" — 
" Sauldhers !"" — and so forth ; and, at Gerald's 
question, the ill-clad fellow glanced at him from 
head to foot, with an expression half-waggish, 
half impudent, as he replied, in his own national 
way, " Them public buildils. Sir .?" The ap- 
pearance of groups of young men in academic 
gowns and caps, issuing, at this moment. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 181 

through the gateway of the edifice which ter- 
minated the street, informed Gerald, without 
farther assistance from the news- vender, that to 
his right was the Alma-Mater of Congreve, 
Swift, Goldsmith, Berkley, Burke, Grattan, 
Curran ; he therefore confined his renewed 
questions to the other structure. 

** Maybe, you lever hard o' the Parliamelt 
House that we used to hab il Dublil, Sir ?" 
" Yes ; thank you ;^' Gerald was turning off. 
" Al you dol't know youVe il ould College- 
Greel this morlil, Sir.? lor who the little mal 
sittil ol the horse, there, like al uldacent high- 
lalder, is, Sir ?" 

" No ; but you will tell me." 
*' That's King Willy, Sir, that we sticks ovel 
with ribbols, twice a-year. Sir." 

*' Thank you, again. Pray, are there any 
more public buildings, or any continuation of 
the town worth seeing, in that direction ?" point- 
ing down the street which ran at right angles 
with College-green. 

" Lot wol. Sir ; lot a bit : — where would 
we get them ? — Freemal tuppels ! Sauldhers 
thruppels !" and the man ran screaming away. 
Gerald, approaching the College-front, so as 



182 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

to command the street in question, found that 
the ragged news-vender had jeered him. It 
ended at a bridge, more spacious and beautiful 
than that upon which he formerly stood, and 
beyond seemed an extent of city superior to 
what he had yet seen. Having gained the end 
of this street, and set his foot on the bridge, he 
stopped short,and looked before him, behind him, 
and to either hand. Before him ran a street, 
much wider than Portland-place, to about the 
extent of three-quarters of a mile, all its houses 
good, and many of them fine : about mid-way 
shot up a pillar, surmounted by a colossal sta- 
tue, to the height of more than one hundred 
feet, doric fluted ; and fronting it, at the left- 
hand side, projected a portico of Ionic columns, 
also fluted, attached to a building of consider- 
able extent: indistinct in the distance, at the 
end of the street, appeared part of a round, 
unique-looking edifice ; and the view was crown- 
ed by the light and graceful spire of a church, 
still more remote, and peering over an expanse 
of houses. Behind him, in a continued line, 
was the street he had last traversed, closed by 
the confronting University and former Parlia- 
ment House. To his left-hand stretched the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH, 188^ 

*' vaunted quays," connected at either side of 
the river by bridge after bridge, one appearing 
through the arches of another, and another 
through the arches of that again, until the last 
grew almost visionary ; and still more to the 
left, ancient steeples and spires, overtopping 
dark masses of building, suggested an extensive 
and populous portion of Dublin, which he had 
not yet approached. And to his right-hand, 
over a forest of masts, and beautifully finishing 
the quay that ran to it, towered, what Gerald 
concluded to be, the Custom-house ; a building 
not unlike that on the banks of the Thames, 
but handsomer, he thought, or at least more fa- 
vourably situated and seen. 

" Yes," said Gerald, " and better brought 
out, by its forming a feature of this whole pic- 
ture. Indeed, I now understand how Dublin 
and her public buildings, though so inferior to 
London and her's, seem superior, or at least 
more interesting. They group together, and 
make pictures together. In London they stand 
widely separated, or hide themselves amid mazy 
streets and dusky houses. Here, all you want 
to see challenges your eye almost at once; there, 
you must go hunting out, one by one, all you 



184 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

want to see. Nay, very often, when you come 
suddenly upon a public building, you cannot see 
it at all ; that is, not the whole of it ; — of St. 
Paul's, equal to these Dublin buildings in a lump, 
one absolutely does not see a tenth part from 
the Church- Yard. One can only walk round it, 
and look up at a single front, and then the 
dome vanishes. A mile or two away, the dome 
appears, but you lose the rest. If it stood at 
the end of such a street as I see before me, and 
if the other great and splendid edifices of Lon- 
don stood in different parts of such a city pano- 
rama as this is ! — but until they do, or until the 
immense and crammed Babylon allows of such 
four openings, to my front, to my back, to my 
right hand, and to my left — until then, I must 
admit that I now stand in the centre of per- 
haps the most beautiful city-picture in the 
world. 

" And is there any more of it ?" resumed Ge- 
raid, after a pause of admiration, when his at- 
tention was diverted by the clattering approach 
of a troop of the — th dragoons, whom he much 
wondered to see in Dublin. An officer headed 
them, sitting very stately and warlike in his 
saddle, although his smooth, boyish face seemed. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 1^ 

at a distance, not to look the warrior. At a 
closer approach that inoffensive face, however, 
startled Gerald. It was Flood's. 

" Why, when I parted from him in Paris, he 
was in the — th," thought Gerald : " shall I 
avoid him ?" 

The question came too late ; for with a quiet 
"Ah, old and excellent fellow-student," Flood 
halted close by his side. 

" Few words, now, by your love for me," 
he continued, " I am compelled to conclude, 
by the very primitive workings of your fea- 
tures, good Blount, that you are in one of 
your old fits of agitation at seeing me here : 
credit me, I also experience the indication of a 
faint surprise at the vision of Gerald Blount 
on CarHsle-bridge. Six little words, however, 
will elucidate my case : at the pressing and 
tiring recommendations of my gallant parent, 
I exchanged, and was incontinently sent to Dub- 
lin with my new comeradoes ; what has placed 
you before my longing eyes I cannot tarry to 
learn. Stem duties are in hand: you behold 
a man — once more much sacrificed in the service 
of his paternal country — who, since twilight 
yester-evening, has scarce been out of his sad- 



186 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

die, such was his zeal in reconnoitring the 
harbour of the Grand-canal, situate beyond the 
purheus of the Broad Stone, and Stony-Batter, 
expectant of an invasion of this good city of 
Dublin by a fleet of turf-boats, bearing as 
many armed Rockites or llibbonmen, as ' sods 
of turf,' from various bog-holes in the heart of 
wild Ireland, who, it is ascertained, propose to 
themselves the amiable achievement of cutting 
the throat of each man, woman, and child, that 
sprinkleth not the forehead with holy-water." 

" What ! Flood ?" 

" I retreat at that inconveniencing expres- 
sion of interest," continued Flood, spurring his 
fine charger, so as to make him prance ; " or no, 
— one single word in very compassion for you. 
As yet, ' you, and I, and all of us,' are safe ; no 
fleet appeareth ; in an hour, follow to my post 
of guard at the Castle, or, as Mr. Gore pro- 
nounces that word of power, ' the cawstle ;' then 
shall I be relieved from my rigid and perilous 
duties, and then shall we more abundantly con- 
verse; the faint resemblance of breakfast ap- 
pearing between us during our colloquy. Now, 
be thou very happy, and bear a poor friend 
in mind." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 187 

Flood trotted off at the head of his company, 
leaving Gerald much interested, if not alarmed, 
at his account of the threatened invasion of 
Dublin by Captain Rock. Now, at all events, 
the sooner he escaped from such a disturbed 
and disagreeable state of society, the better. 
Doubtless his old schoolfellow had, according 
to his manner of relating every thing, made a 
mockery of the circumstance, and perhaps ex- 
aggerated its importance, even while he sneered 
at it : but Gerald was at least certain that 
Flood spoke of real facts, however he might 
have coloured them, because his practical jest- 
ing never went so far as to be indebted to pure 
invention for the exercise of its talent. 

" And Flood himself shall get me off," con- 
tinued Gerald ; " ay, this very day, too." 

" I request you to understand me to assert, 
excellent Blount," said Flood, when, according 
to his invitation they met at breakfast — " that 
real, positive, and very afflicting, (to themselves 
and to each other,) were the fears of the King's 
most loyal subjects of Dublin yester-even and 
last night ; and still more afflicting will be their 
condition this coming evening. We were not, 
till a few hours ago, quite convinced of the night 



188 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

of this imminent slaughter that is to be ; hence 
our late watchfulness; — but, even since 1 part- 
ed from you on Carlisle bridge, very certain and 
detailed information has reached us. This, — 
pre-doomed Blount! this approaching night must 
prove to be the very one upon which you, 
among thousands of other guileless victims, are 
to fall beneath the rusty fowling-pieces, pistols, 
pikes, prongs, sickles, scythes, long knives, or 
haply, alpeens of the primitive Irish, reinforced 
by one hundred thousand half-clad and whole- 
starved mechanics of the liberties of Dublin. 
Fly, while thou canst. The soldier's stern 
duty binds thy friend to his post ; but, be it in 
Pigeon-house packet, or in Pigeon-pie-dish, in 
merchantman, collier, oysterer, skiff, or open- 
boat, fly, thou inestimable Blount, and pre- 
serve in a happier land the exceedingly precious 
life which, by such caution, may yet serve man- 
kind, and, it is distantly probable, indite an 
elegy to the untimely and very unmerited fall of 
him who loved thee well." 

Flood covered his eyes with one hand, and 
extended the other. 

" Your ridicule of this business leads me to 
hope there will be little danger in staying where 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 189 

I am, Flood," replied Gerald, laughing. " You 
surely know it to be an absurd, false alarm ?" 

" Be not tempted to found any pleasing and 
perhaps perilous delusion upon the playful man- 
ner of thy friend," answered Flood. " I am 
what I am : Nature bounteously endowed me 
with a soul enormously inclined to amiable 
pleasantry even, I venture to anticipate, at the 
rather interesting moment when the indecent 
spectre. Death, shall beckon me away from the 
flowery paths, and smooth flagged-ways of this 
tolerable world ; — therefore, construct no stu- 
pendous syllogism upon my present gentle hu- 
mour ; rather go forth, and enter beneath the 
roofs of the unhappy Protestants of this belea- 
guered and proscribed city ; view the pallid 
faces of fathers and mothers as they tearfully 
glance towards their children ; or the bolder 
front of other householders who collect many 
stand of arms in a comer of the room, and, with 
the domestic lead torn off the gutters of their 
houses, and then melted in a kitchen-pot, cast 
bullets in little bullet-moulds to prepare for 
the coming night; or haply your mind may 
receive conviction from the frequent appearance 
of very reputable ladies of fifty and upwards, 



IW THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

kneeling at chairs and sofas, their faces turned 
from the windows, and piously stipulating 
before high Heaven for safety to themselves and 
their families : — go forth, I say, and believe." 

" Nay, Flood ; 'tis not such proofs can shake 
my scepticism, when I see you so amusingly 
indifferent ; I will flatter you, for once in my 
life, by saying, that if there were real danger, you 
are brave enough, and, after all, sensible enough, 
to be more serious. No. Not on this account 
do I accept your advice to fly immediately to 
England. Yet I have most important reasons 
to hasten my departure. And without your 
aid I cannot stir. Listen to my explanation ; 
listen to the circumstances that wafted me to 
Ireland : listen to a great deal, in fact." 

And Gerald related his shipwreck ; the break- 
ing of his arm, his consequent want of funds, and 
his great anxiety to possess some immediately ; 
not even, if possible, would he wait for an an- 
swer to the letter Flood might now write to 
London in his name. 

" Somewhat interesting, I half admit," said 
Flood, sitting upright, as Gerald began his 
story : " nay, positively interested I insinuate 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 191 

myself to be," he resumed, as the narrative went 
on — " Alarming !" he continued: then, at inter- 
vals, till Gerald had done, while his old friend 
often caught his eyes seriously and manfully 
bent on him, " And very romantically-real, 
too !" — " but so agitating, again ;" — " so ridicu- 
lously frightful," — " andone compelled to believe 
its reality, all along, or else engage in single 
combat with a man-of-the-sea and a Rockite. 
Monstrous ! an absolute arm fractured ? 
Blount, though occasionally worthy, you are a 
desperately incommodious acquaintance ; you 
go through more than a score of plain, sensible, 
people, just to put one out of one's way, and 
make one nearly do so vulgar a thing as to 
feel. I protest against it : it will very certain- 
ly deprive your friend of life ; — he is not inex- 
haustible.'"' 

During the latter part of his speech, Flood 
had been ringing the bell, asking for writing 
materials, and penning a draught on his Dublin 
banker ; now it was completed, and he handed 
it to his servant, who withdrew. 

" Thanks," said Gerald, inclining his head 
towards the door, " though, indeed, I need not 



192 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

have thus trespassed upon you, had I had the 
good fortune to have seen Mr. Gore since my 
arrival in Dubhn." 

" Say you so ?" asked Flood, turning upon 
Gerald one of the shrewd, worldly-wise glances 
that occasionally escaped through all the affec- 
tation of his drooped lids and dulled eyes : 
" May there be the very most delicate approach 

to a question tantamount to what do you 

mean, fellow-student ?" 

" I mean that, in the case I supposed, Mr. 
Gore would have immediately supplied me." 

" You are exceedingly confident ?" 

" Quite so.'' 

" That is — if again be permitted a slight hint 
of a meaning — that is, it would have been no 
immeasurably vast flattery if Mr. Gore ' of the 
cawstle,' had done, as you poetically imagine 
he would have done, primitive Blount ?^ 

" Such is my meaning.'* 

" Ah, worthy soul !" 

" Why your equivocal panegyric. Flood ? 
Mr. Gore is surely a gentleman of punctual 
habits in these ordinary matters ?" 

*' Long live he so !" 

« With all my heart." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 193 

*' And long live you to think so. But, now, 
force me into no predicament, no realities over 
again ; suffer, rather, you who cause others so 
much suffering, the infliction of many discon- 
nected and unfatiguing questions. Why did 
you not, (mark how you infect me with your 
downright habits of speech,) why did you not 
see Mr. Gore when you came to Dublin ?'''' 

Gerald related the circumstances of his hav- 
ing written a note, and of Mrs. Gore having 
answered it in the manner already known to the 
reader. 

" Ay .?"" resumed Flood ; '* let me desperately 
inconvenience myself by a retrospect of dates 
and facts. Yes ; about that day, Mr. Gore cer- 
tainly was from home ; and yet, upon that day, 
I apprehend I saw him within the limits of this 
ancient city of Dublin." 

" What.'' you insinuate a horrid thing, and 
an enigmatical thing, Flood. First, you thought 
it necessary to compare dates and facts, in order 
to decide if a lady's assertion was credible ; 
next you would have me believe that Mr. Gore 
reached home the evening of the day I received 
that lady's note, and yet came not near me, 
then or since ; is it so .''" 

VOL. II. K 



194 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" He would cramp me round about still," 
replied Flood. " Particular and minute Blount, 
I admit not that he returned into the soft bo- 
som of his home that evening/' 

" But you saw him in Dublin?"" 

" Yea, and well and anxiously attended by 
those who, for a bribe of many hundred pounds, 
would not consent to his absence." 

" At the house of a mutual friend ?" 

" Of an old acquaintance of Mr. Gore, and, 
haply, once before known even to me : in fact, 
excellent fellow, it was in a house which the 
vulgar call," continued Flood, settling himself 
in a usual position of consummate indifference 
to every thing — "a spunging-house, good 
Blount." 

" My three-huudred-and-fifty, adieu !" me- 
ditated Gerald. 

" But you have not seen him since ?" ques- 
tioned Flood languidly. 

" No ; have you ?" 

The servant, re-appearing with a bundle of 
bank-notes, interrupted Flood's answer, if in- 
deed he would have given one ; and the man at 
the same time announced a gentleman to wait 
on Captain Flood — Mr. Gore. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 19! 



CHAPTER VIII. 

The eyes of the friends met expressively as 
Flood desired Mr. Gore to be shown in ; and 
ere he appeared, the warlike dandy carelessly 
presented Gerald with the roll of bank-notes, 
lisping out — " To some men be as a brother, to 
some as a stone- wall ; to some men appear as 
liberal as you are, to others as a Jew ; to one, 
admit " the good the gods provide thee," to 
Mr. Gore — (put up the pretty rags by our com- 
mon love) — to Mr. Gore always be even as a 
parish pauper.'' 

" Ah, my dear Captain Flood !" cried the 
honey-tongued Mr. Gore, catching Flood's two 
hands, as he turned to meet him at the door, 
" how delighted to see you once again this 
morning ; we all passed a wretched night, but 
your situation was peculiarly perilous ; and be 
assured your friends in Stephen's-green were not 
k2 



196 THE ANGLO-IRISH- 

forgetful of it — still we see you safe, thank 
God !" another pressure of the hands, which 
made Flood slightly writhe. " But what is this 
I hear ? The dreadful night not over, after 
all ? This night to be our night of trouble in- 
deed ? Have you been whispered as much ? 
You know you are one of us, and people would 
give you a hint ; I suppose they did, my dear 
Flood?" 

" Very sincerely do I regret confirming your 
melancholy tidings," lisped Flood. 

*' Gracious heavens ! and only to think, 
amongst other things, that upon this very even- 
ing I give my first dinner to dear Angelina, 
after her return with her husband, that rich 
rascal, Blake, to Dublin ! and you to join us, 
and all ! Good God !'' 

" Desperately distressing : but I have a no- 
tion we overlook a kind of mutual acquaintance 
all this time," said Flood, glancing over Mr. 
Gore's shoulder at Gerald, to whom the visitor''s 
back was turned, and whom he had not closely 
observed when he entered the apartment. 

" Who .f"' asked Mr. Gore, earnestly, and in 
a low voice, as, again grasping Flood's hands. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 197 

he looked into his face, and did not alter his po- 
sition — " any friend of yours, my dear Captain 
Flood ! — but who ?" 

" Mr. Gore, how d"* you do 1"" said Gerald, 
advancing, tired of the scene. 

" Ah, heavens ! my dear, excellent young 
friend, Mr. Blount !" quick as thought, Mr. 
Gore wheeled round, and relinquished Flood's 
hand to seize on Gerald's, not a jot of any thing 
but the liveliest and most graceful pleasure now 
visible in his handsome face ; — " What good for- 
tune ! what a delightful coincidence with all our 
very last thoughts at breakfast, in Stephen's- 
gi-een ! you cannot tell how happy we shall all 
be to see you ! Why, my dear Blount, there 
was a friend of yours, some little time ago, in 
town, at Morrysson's, I think, and I unfortu- 
nately in the country ; and Mrs. Gore, I under- 
stand, acted so inhospitably (though it is not 
her habit, I assure you, as you shall and must 
bear witness) as not to invite the gentleman to 
call at Stephen 's-green ; and then, when I got 
home, I had really so very much to do, I could 
not immediately go look for him ; — but, would 
you believe it ? this very morning I had entered 



108 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

down a call at Morrysson's in my pocket-book. 
Good gracious ! I hope the gentleman is yet in 
Dublin ?" 

" He is, Mr. Gore, and much at your dis- 
posal." 

" How fortunate! — what pleasure it gives 
me ! — Come, my dear Blount, you shall do me 
the honour of a personal introduction, and that 
will be so much the better. My dear Captain, 
good morning — you hear what duties take me 
away, but I must call back to consult you 
about this horrid night ; though I, for one, do 
not despair ; hot work it may prove to be, yet 
surely our fine garrison can protect us : God 
gi'ant it ! Good morning. Come, my dear Blount, 
first to Morrysson's, and then to Stephen's-green, 
if you please, where you must allow me the 
happiness of presenting you to Mrs. Gore, and 
the Misses Gore ; only two of them now, since 
I had the pleasure of seeing you in London, and 
—excuse a secret — one of the two not likely to 
bear her present good name long, ha, ha, ha ! — 
Come." 

" Flood, good b'ye," said Gerald, extending 
his hand, as Mr. Gore hurried him through the 
door. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 199 

" Nay, no leave-taking for a parting that must 
be very short," resumed Mr. Gore; " for sure- 
ly, my dear Mr. Blount, you already submit 
yourself to join my dinner-party to-day, though, 
God knows how we are to get through the even- 
ing ! — all, good reason you had, that delightful 
day I met you at the Secretary's, across the 
water, to call this a miserable country ! — And 
Flood is to be with you, you know.'"* 

" I fear, Mr. Gore, I must not so surely 
reckon upon all the pleasure you promise me,'' 
said Gerald, shaking Flood's hand, (who lisped — 
" Enormous inconvenience, this very ancient cus- 
tom of pumping each other's bodies by the 
handles ;") " for," continued Gerald, " it is my 
plan to leave Dublin this very day." 

" Good heavens! can you mean us so un- 
kindly ? But no, no, no ; first to your hotel, 
however, and then — " continued Mr. Gore, ob- 
viously abandoning much of the vehement kind- 
liness of his tone and manner, — " why, then we 
shall see." 

Gerald allowed him to bustle him on into 
the street, because he wished to arrive at some- 
thing like an explanation with Mr. Gore. 

" Gracious heavens f resumed that gentle- 



200 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

man, as they walked along in the direction of 
Morrysson's, " to have missed your good friend 
so longT' 

** You have not missed him absolutely so 
long as you think : in plain English, my good 
friend is my good self; only, that for particular 
reasons, I wished to conceal the fact of my 
being in Dublin, when I wrote the note to 
your house, from every one but yourself, Mr. 
Gore." 

" Good God ! why it is a very sad and unfor- 
tunate case, after all, then. — What ill-chance 
drove me into the country just at that time ! I 
hope, my dear Mr. Blount, that you got — along 
with my most sincere regrets for detaining it so 
long — (a provoking matter which, I hope, I can 
explain to your satisfaction) — the three hundred 
and fifty you so very kindly obliged me with in 
London ?" 

Gerald, pleased, as well as surprised, said 
he had not yet had the honour of such a commu- 
nication from Mr. Gore ; mentally concluding 
that his sudden and late changes of place must 
have left him ignorant of his unsuspected good 
fortune, and that, in all likelihood, the enclo- 
sure awaited him in London. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 201 

" That is very, very strange," said Mr. Gore, 
thoughtfully, and as if a little alarmed. 

" You remitted by post. Sir ?" asked Gerald. 

" No — but — as I thought — by a much safer 
conveyance: a friend, a highly reputable friend, 
was just going to England, and thence to India, 
and I handed him the three hundred and fifty 
to join to his own deposit in a house here, who 
would advise their London correspondents of so 
much — his own funds and that — placed to his 
credit ; and then, when he reached your great 
city, he was to hand to you, after calling at the 
London bankers." 

" Oh, then, all will be found perfectly corr 
rect, Mr. Gore : your friend, not hearing of me 
in London, must have either enclosed the sum, 
and left it for me, or perhaps allowed it to rest 
at the banker's, dropping a line to my address."* 

** Of course ! I am sure it must be so — I 
hope it is : and yet, if all was indeed safe, why 
should not my friend have advised me, by a 
letter from London, that he could not find 
you ?" 

" And you have not since heard of him?" 

" No, indeed. Can it be possible, that in some 
untoward hurry, or forgetful fit, he has sailed 
k5 



202 THE ANGLO-IRISH, 

for India without discharging my commission ? 
Indeed, I hope not ; for," — Mr. Gore sighed, — 
" in the present position of my family, enor- 
mous claims are made upon me, and, though 
not a poor man, Mr. Blount, I really could 
scarce afford the loss." 

A respectable-looking person interrupted 
Mr. Gore, by standing before him in the street, 
and bowing to him, half deferentially, half 
sulkily. 

" Ah, M'Farlane ! how d' do .? how is your 
good wife and the fine little ones .'^" 

Mr. M'Farlane replied in a mumble and 
a smile, pleased and flattered ; and then pro- 
ceeded in a lower tone, which sounded like 
serious remonstrance, as he drew from his 
pocket what Gerald unintentionally saw at a 
glance was a protested bill. 

" I know, I know, my dear M'Farlane," 
cried Mr. Gore, interrupting him, and with — 
" beg your ten thousand pardons," to Gerald, 
drawing him aside : and then, although Gerald 
took little notice, there ensued a very energetic 
parley on Mr. Gore's part, mingled with sweet 
smiles; until at last M'Farlane walked away, 
bowing much more graciously than when he 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 208 

had come up, and evidently a man of more 
hopes. 

" Yes," — Gerald caught Mr. Gore's last 
words — " yes, M'Farlane, the very moment 
I am released from this last bustling though 
happy event in my family, depend on me for 
the two matters together." 

He again took Gerald's arm, and was re- 
newing his discourse upon their own affairs, 
when Mr. M'Farlane a second time gained 
their side. 

" I beg your pardon, Mr. Gore ; but I don't 
think I require any more time to decide that 
the situation in the Post-office would suit my 
boy William better than one in the Custom- 
house." 

"Very well, M'Farlane; very well ; I can 
manage one just as well as the other for you ; 
make your own choice — you and William be- 
tween you — all the same to me." 

With a bow and a smile of unqualified 
content, Mr. M'Farlane finally departed. 

" You will excuse me, my dear Blount," 
resumed Mr. Gore; "these are some of the 
little annoyances resulting from holding a con- 
siderable place under our good King — God 



204 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

bless him ! People of all kinds will come to me 
and ask clerkships and secretaryships for their 
sons or themselves : 'tis rather boring, though, 
heaven knows ! I would willingly do every thing 
in my power for every body ; and indeed I try 
to do a good deal for a good many : and as to 
M'Farlane, he's a very honest fellow, and 
a capital merchant-tailor: let us walk quick, 
if you please." Mr. Gore cast a side-long 
glance towards the door of a mercer's which 
they were approaching — " I beg your pardon, 
but this must be a very busy day with me ; — 
what a dashing turn-out that is !'' looking 
straight to the end of the street. It would 
not do. The proprietor of the shop stood pal- 
pably, at his door, and, as Mr. Gore shot by, 
requested one word with him. 

" Ah, Thompson ! how d' do ? — To be sure ; 
only I am in a great hurry, and can step in but 
for a second — see, this gentleman, my friend, 
will be kept waiting: my dear Blount, do for- 
give, once again — ^just an instant." 

Mr. Gore entered the shop, and, from it, a 
little back-parlour. His stay far exceeded the 
time for which he had stipulated. At length 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 20^ 

Gerald, who was not uninterested in studying 
Mr. Gore, saw him re-appear through the par- 
lour-door, his countenance very animated as he 
said, " Full of promise, indeed ; upon my life, 
a boy of no common natural genius, for his 
years ; you really must allow me to prevail on 
you to send him to college, Thompson, and, as 
I said, perhaps I can make some friends for 
him there. — My dear Mr. Blount, step in a 
moment, if you please — " Gerald complied — *' I 
wish to show you an instance of our very 
abundant Irish talent, forcing its way through 
every obstacle ; this way, this way, — and mind 
the step." 

Followed by Mr. Thompson, Gerald found 
himself in the little half-lighted parlour, in the 
presence of Mrs. Thompson, who received him 
with a great show of gratified pride and flat- 
tered feelings, and in that of a pale-faced boy 
of about thirteen, who stood at a table, holding 
a roll of scribbled paper in both his hands, and 
looking half- frightened. 

" Now, my good little friend," continued 
Mr. Gore, "will you just allow this gentleman 
to look over some of the lines you have read 



206 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

for me ? Suppose the beginning of the blank- 
verse poem, on the Last Day, that is to run to 
twenty-four books." 

" Only twelve, Sir, like Paradise Lost," said 
the juvenile bard falteringly. 

" Oh, very well : all the better ; but let us 
see it/' 

" I 'm afeard no one can read it but myself, 
Sir," answered the boy. 

"James's thoughts come so quick to him, he 
doesn't wait to pen them down in a good shop- 
hand, though he has brought home the best 
Christmas-pieces wrote in the school, since he 
was six years old," said Mrs. Thompson. 

" I '11 be bound he has, Mrs. Thompson : no 
matter; he can just oblige us by reading the 
lines himself." 

And accordingly, poor James, growing paler, 
unfolded his inspired roll ; and after many 
efforts to keep it from curling back into its 
former obscure state, by spreading it out on 
one knee, Gerald heard him read, in a broad, 
Dublin brogue, a page of the most utter non- 
sense ever inflicted on him, even by " uncom- 
mon geniuses" of James's own age. It was 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 207 

with difficulty he kept his countenance, as he 
observed the mantling pleasure and triumph 
of Mrs. Thompson over fustian which she had 
so often before heard ; or the more sedate 
delight of her husband, who, resting his back 
against the wall, looked modestly though smil- 
ingly on the floor. But the acting of Mr. 
Gore was inimitable, and still more amusing 
than their sincerity. He stood near the poor 
boy, laying his hand on his shoulder, and with 
noddings of the head, and glances of approba- 
tion, and smiles of patronage from the father to 
the mother, and then to Gerald, displayed how 
exceedingly he relished the balderdash. 

" If you really think James would make his 
way better by going to College, Mr. Gore, 
than by attending to some business or other, 
I 'd certainly try and squeeze a point to send 
him," said the father as they regained the shop 
door. 

" If I really think, my dear Thompson! to be 
sure I do. You don t know — you can't say, 
what such talent, properly cultivated, may 
end in." 

" Well, Mr. Gore ; I 'm obliged to you, and 



208 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

I '11 think of it, Sir ; but sometimes the Latin 
and Greek books don't stand a lad's friend 
like the account-books." 

" And do you, indeed, see any thing in the 
lines we have heard/' asked Gerald, as he and 
his friend emerged into the street, " beyond 
what a half-educated boy, who has half-spelled 
his way through a half of Paradise Lost, 
might jumble together, in mere mechanical 
imitation ?" 

" Why, to deal candidly, my dear fellow, 
I suppose I praised the poor little boy's 
scribble rather more than it strictly merited ; 
but we must afford a few kind words to the 
natural feeling of parents;" — Gerald feared 
there had been another motive, — " and, I pro- 
test, after all, I do think, upon my honour, 
that there 's something uncommon in the son 
of a shopkeeper writing blank- verse at thirteen: 
it may be nonsense, to be sure ; still it is quite 
uncommon. But again — once again — I have 
to beg your pardon. One of my blundering 
servants forgot this morning to call at the 
wine-shop opposite — may I trespass upon you, 
while I correct his error ?" 

They crossed the street, and Mr. Gore 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 209 

quickly entered the shop, or office, leaving 
Gerald some paces behind. His friend, con- 
tinuing his walk by the door, heard a man 
within say, " Very sorry, indeed, Sir ; but, as 
Mr. Burke is from home, we cannot at- 
tempt to break his last orders on the sub- 
ject ; which were, that, until the former ac- 
count " 

" Oh, very well, very well," interrupted 
Mr. Gore, catching a glance of Gerald passing 
by — " you may depend on me : any thing in 
my power, for your master or you — good 
morning, Mr. Garon !" and thus trying to 
change into business of patronage, and of 
doing the wine-merchant a favour, what Ge- 
rald, in much astonishment, suspected to have 
been an effort to cater for his decanters for 
that day's dinner, Mr. Gore hurried my hero 
along the street. 

" Stay," said he, after they had walked ra- 
pidly some distance, as he stopped, evidently 
in a puzzle — "What are we about to do.'' — 
oh ; ay ; — you, my dear Blount, are coming 
with me to Stephen's-green, to allow me the 
pleasure and honour of presenting you to my 
family — (and only that^ you most unkind 



JEIO THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

friend) — before you get under weigh for Eng- 
land, this evening."" 

Gerald wondered at this rather unceremo- 
nious tying him to his own first arrangement ; 
in contrast, at least, with Mr. Gore's former 
redundant politeness, it was enigmatical; and 
Gerald half resolved not to get under weigh 
that evening, merely to take himself out of the 
dictation of Mr. Gore — " And, indeed," con- 
tinued that gentleman, " now that I think of 
it, the packet sails at three o'clock, to-day. 
But come, my excellent young friend ; I hope 
we shall catch my idlers at home ; they were 
to be out early, in the carriage, shopping; 
perhaps we had better wait till we think they 
have got domesticated again ; meantime, if you 
have no objection to accompany me a little way 
farther, I will feel so obliged to you ! for I 
suppose you can have no schemes for filling up 
the afternoon on your own account .f^" 

Simply declaring his willingness to attend 
Mr. Gore, Gerald took a step onward. 

" A thousand thanks ! — Stay, again — I have 
really so many things to think of;" he once 
more became stationary, looking down, and 
absorbed in thought — " Yes ! — that first — just 
turn in here, my dear fellow."" 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 211 

They went into a shop where stc'mps were 
sold. Mr. Gore purchased one, and withdraw- 
ing to the far end of the counter, asked for 
pen and ink, filled it up, folded it, and put it 
into his pocket. 

" I forgot, my dear Blount, that I was to 
meet a person with a modicum of rent from 
my country property to-day, and came out 
unprovided with a stamp receipt ; here, how- 
ever, I have secured one ; and, in your kind 
company, I will now seek a meeting with the 
rather interesting individual I have mentioned." 

" I fear the lad has made some mistake. Sir," 
said the owner of the shop, who had come be- 
hind the counter after Mr. Gore procured his 
receipt ; " I believe you asked a stamp for a 
bill at nine months for a hundred pounds ?" 

" No, no ; a stamp for a receipt, you mean : 
all is quite right," answered Mr. Gore, as, in 
some confusion, he retreated, with Gerald, from 
the presence of the inquisitorial shopkeeper, 
who now more strongly looked his fears that 
some mistake had been committed. 

" Very stupid these tradespeople sometimes 
are," said Mr. Gore, still hurrying on: — "I will 
give you a few late instances;" and thereupon 
he went through recitals, which, notwithstanding 



M^ THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

his fluent, plausible, and graceful style, Gerald 
half-feared entitled Mr. Gore only to be called 
an excellent Irish improvisatore — in more homely 
English, they all seemed like cock-and-bull sto- 
ries, or rigmarole. 

By the time he had ended his last illustration 
of the obtuseness of shopkeepers, in calling 
things out of their proper names, and in con- 
founding one thing with another, Mr. Gore had 
wound his way into a very humble street, and 
there stopped beforeavery humble-looking house. 
Hb knock was answered by a pale young woman, 
on whom the visitor immediately smiled in a 
charming way, and began — 

" Ah, my most interesting young friend ! Is 
your worthy father at home ? Having had to 
walk this way, Mrs. Gore wished me to assure 
you that there is little doubt of placing you in a 
family of very high respectability and connexions, 
where your talents and accomplishments will be 
fitly estimated." The modest and pensive girl 
curtsied low, and blushed in obvious pleasure. 
"Is he at home.?" pursued Mr. Gore; "ah, 
yes, here he comes." A mean-looking little old 
man, whose features and manner betokened, 
however, more of the lowliness of the miser 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 213 

than of the pauper, steaUhiJy issued through a 
door in the narrow hall. *•" Peter, my friend, 
how d" do ? — you have heard, I presume, the 
communication I had the pleasure to make to my 
sweet little friend, Ann, here ; but I just wish to 
speak another word with you ; and, perhaps, 
your agreeable Ann will oblige this gentleman 
by a specimen of her great skill and taste on the 
harp, while you and I chat a second together ?''"' 
Gerald forthwith followed the young wo- 
man into a room, where he heard her perform 
very pleasingly some harp-music. In about 
a quarter of an hour, Mr. Gore joined him, 
his countenance now lighted up with unaffected 
vivacity, and his right hand earnestly thrust 
into the pocket of his trowsers, as if it held 
tight therein something that it was pleasant to 
grasp. After calling on Gerald to admit the 
many merits of Mrs. Gore's young protegee, 
and repeating his own eulogies to herself, he 
took his friend's arm, and with a buoyant step 
approached the hall-door, whispering, " 1 've 
detained you shamefully long, but it is so 
difficult to extract my country-rents from the 
clutches of this strange town-agent of two of 
my more considerable tenants." 



814 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

The little old man here sneaked a second 
time into the passage, and addressed Mr. Gore. 

*' 'Tis a long date, Sir" — Mr. Gore coughed, 
hemmed, and hastened to unlatch the door ; 
the latch was restive, and though he pulled 
with all his might, he could not effect an escape 
until the usurer had continued — " a long date, 
Sir, notwithstanding the little premium ; nine 
long months." 

*' Curse this latch ! open the door, Peter !" 
interrupted Mr. Gore, in such a change from 
his milk-and-honey manner and tone, that by 
dint of contrast, it might be called ferocious : 
the old fellow slowly advanced to obey, but 
still went on — " And I trust all to your honour, 
Mr. Gore, not to let this one come back — And, 
as to poor Ann — " 

" Good morning, Peter, good morning," — he 
at last got Gerald into the street — " and, yes, 
yes, tell Ann not to fear but Mrs. Gore and I 
will do every thing in our power — every earthly 
thing — Good morning." 

The last words had somewhat restored him 
to his common blandness of accent, look, and 
manner; and he extricated Gerald from the 
mean maze of streets into which he had beguiled 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 215 

him, eloquently sounding Ann''s claims to en- 
couragement, and Mrs. Gore's settled determi- 
nation to do something for so deserving a young 
person. 

He was )'et talking, Gerald exceedingly en- 
tertained, when his auditor, pointing to an open 
carriage which stood at a fur-shop in a respect- 
able quarter of the town, requested Mr. Gore to 
inform him, if he could, who was the very beau- 
tiful and interesting young creature, one of three 
ladies who sat in it ? 

" Where, my dear Blount ? what carriage ? 
which way ?" said Mr. Gore, anxiously looking 
in a contrary direction, and still bustling Gerald 
along with him. His young friend peremptorily 
stopped, however, and plainly pointed out the 
object of his curiosity. 

" Why there are three or four carriages near 
that door," answered his inefficient cicerone, 
with, perhaps, in his face, more affected than 
real perplexity, and yet with much of the latter 
too. 

" I mean the yellow open carriage, containing 
three ladies, one elderly, but a fine woman, the 
other younger, and a blaze of charms, and the 
third, my goddess, Mr. Gore, still younger and 



216 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

more charming, if not more beautiful — you 
cannot mistake — a shopman stands at the step, 
and seems to receive the commands of his visi- 
tors with a very dubious countenance." 

" I protest, my dear young friend," began 
Mr. Gore, " I hardly can say, at this distance: 
my eyes, though they look good eyes, are half- 
blind. But, bless me !" — the younger beauty, 
suddenly turning her head, kissed hand to Mr. 
Gore — " what have I been raving about ! why, 
it is my own carriage ! they are my own wife 
and daughters ! Come, my dear Blount," at once 
changing into the utmost cordiality and earnest- 
ness, — " come ! here we have them, by Jupiter ! 
— come, allow me this great pleasure i Well ! not 
to know my own wife ! ha, ha ! It has, indeed, 
been surmised as difficult to know one's own 
children sometimes, Blount, eh? but not to 
know one's wife ! ha, ha, ha !" 

The three ladies now turned their regards on 
Mr. Gore and his companion ; and Gerald was 
presented in the most kindly way to Mrs. Gore, 
Miss Gore, and Miss Maria Gore. At the first 
sound of his name, the latter-mentioned lady 
started, and looked at Gerald with a singular 
expression of interest. He would not permit 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 217 

himself to be quite so vain as to set down Miss 
Maria Gore's stare to the account of his per- 
sonal merits, considerable as they were ; and 
yet otherwise he knew not how to explain such 
flattering attention. A sudden thought oc- 
curred. He glanced, in return, attentively at 
her. She smiled, whether at his answering ear- 
nestness, or from some other cause, and turned 
to say a word to her mamma, who had now 
relinquished the fur-merchant to the oratory of 
her accomplished husband. After his scrutiny, 
and particularly at the smile, Gerald stood 
fixed. It was somewhat like the smile of the pro- 
phetess of Pere la Chaise. The beautiful eyes, 
too, which had so curiously regarded him a 
moment before, were blue ; and the damask- 
rose cheek he now gazed upon, and the sunny 
locks, and the classic line of the nose, all re- 
minded him of that perplexing individual. But 
did they make him sure.? He longed to see 
Miss Maria Gore, walking or standing, that he 
might receive the whole impression of her face 
and figure. 

" I will not get under weigh this evening," 
resolved Gerald. 

But while he so resolved, and while previously 
VOL. II. L 



218 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

he had been so occupied with his observations 
and thoughts, he had remained at the carriage- 
side without speaking, after the first common- 
place questions and answers that passed between 
him and Mrs. Gore and her beautiful daughters. 
This was not as it should be. For although 
Mrs. Gore and Miss Gore, having sweetly 
craved pardon, engaged themselves with, per- 
haps, surmises of the probable result of Mr. 
Gore''s oratory upon the shopkeeper, and al- 
though the object of his study and conjectures 
had also turned to whisper one word to them, 
as has been noticed, still, for many minutes after, 
she remained perfectly disengaged, and at li- 
berty to attend to any thing he might choose 
to say. But he said nothing at all. In fact, 
he was embarrassed, if not a little awkward. 
It has before been hinted that Gerald was much 
more forward in mental acquirements and ma- 
turity, than at the side of a beautiful woman. 
And, at last, the young lady, herself, seemed 
to think it would be well to relieve him. 

" Have you been long in Dublin, Mr. Blount?" 
she asked, again fixing her eyes on him, and 
again smiling, Gerald thought, expressively. 
Her manner of uttering the words also seemed 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 219 

to have a meaning in it ; and he slightly started 
at the sound of her voice, which, allowing for 
some difference, probably occasioned by her not 
speaking in French, as the lady of Pere la Chaise 
had done, he was disposed to be very sure he 
had heard before. 

He answered, guardedly, that he had been 
but a very short time indeed in Dublin. 

" And you came direct from France, I be- 
lieve ?" she resumed, still in a provoking manner. 

" Yes ; but not so direct from Paris : and I 
regretted being obliged to leave that interesting 
city; indeed, its neighbourhoods are as interest- 
ing as itself ; — Pere la Chaise, for instance,"" he 
continued, now hazarding a shade of expression 
on his own part — " don't you think so?" 

" Certainly, from all I have heard," replied 
Miss Maria Gore, very quietly, while her fea- 
tures lost their former remarkable point, and 
her answer sounded the most natural thing in 
the world. 

Gerald was about to make a more positive 
experiment, by asking — " Have you never been 
there ?" when Mr. Gore, radiant with triumph 
over the shopkeeper, who now had ordered out 
all his assistants, laden with furs, for the inspec- 
L 2 



*28l& THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

tion of Mrs. Gore, regained his side, again 
shook his hand, and interrupted his half-formed 
words. 

" Not to know one's own wife, my dear Blount ! 
— ha, ha ! — and you praising one of my own 
daughters to my face, and pointing her out, and 
I not recognizing her either ! I assure you, Ma- 
ria, my love, it was exactly so when you made 
us out and kissed hand ! — My dear fellow ! " 
aside to Gerald, " how flattering ! how delight- 
ful to a fond father's feelings, was your uncon- 
scious eulogy just now ! — such opinions from a 
man of your cast of mind and highly-cultivated 
eye— exceedingly gratifying 1 Pardon the father 
again, my dear Mr. Blount," — Mr. Gore's eyes 
moistened — " if I say I have reason to believe my 
youngest girl, and my favourite, is as good, as 
you do her the honour of thinking her personally 
interesting — the heart, the heart, my young 
friend — the heart is her best vaunt. But, tut ! 
what bad taste all this is ; Maria, my sweetest, 
make room for Mr. Blount, he is tired with walk- 
ing — indeed, / have unmercifully tired him ; 
and, after taking him about a little, you must drop 
him at Morrysson's ; but not bid him good-bye 
there, for he will, he will accept my repeated 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 22l' 

requests to join us at dinner,"" continued Mr. 
Gore, pressing Gerald's arm as he assisted him 
up the carriage- step, the footman having dis- 
mounted to open the door. 

" Oh, he will, he must !" urged Mrs. Gore, 
her purchases now made. The lady spoke in a 
universal bloom of smiles over her whole hand- 
some face, which went near to eclipse even the 
fascinations of her sweet lord, all the time keep- 
ing her lips wide apart — (the teeth were certainly 
beautiful) — and catching her breath between 
every word, in a pretty, affected fashion, some- 
times observed in England, but then almost uni- 
versal among the female beau monde (such as it 
was) of the English-Irish in Ireland. 

Miss Gore, who, as Gerald recollected from 
his sister's letter, had, until the late marriage 
of the eldest beauty " to the rich brewer,'^ been 
Miss Selina Gore, employed herself, during her 
mamma's little speech, in eye-glassing Gerald, 
her head inclined to one side, till the clustering 
black curls hid one of her blacker and much 
brighter orbs, — her splendid features unrelaxed, 
and something like a habitual curl on her Juno 
lip, and a little contraction on her brow. 

" Do, Mr. Blount,'' tingled the voice of her 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

more charming though perhaps not so striking 
sister at Gerald's ear, " do come to us ; indeed 
all the chivalrous persons of even our slightest 
acquaintance ought to come to us this evening, 
considering what we have to expect from the 
turf-boats." 

** And that is true, Maria," rejoined Mrs. 
Gore, " and an unanswerable argument to Mr. 
Blount." 

" True, indeed," observed Miss Gore, not 
in an exquisitely musical tone — " although 
Maria seems to think so little of our danger 
from these savages. Mamma, while every other 
human being around her thinks a good deal of 
it, — and although she alludes to it in such an 
incredulous and would-be-wise way." 

Miss Maria certainly had conveyed to Gerald's 
mind the notion of a slight sneer at the expense 
of the fleet of turf-boats. She had also conveyed 
something else. Still her accents, in English, 
or rather in the best Irish-English, were like 
some he had heard in French, and her peculiar 
self-possession, and her tendency to quiet satire, 
especially exemplified in her last words, almost 
confirmed him in believing her to be the bearer 
of Michael Farrell's letter to his hand. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 223 

" Come, our excellent young friend consents 
to give us the happiness of his company," re- 
urged Mr. Gore. 

f Gerald had consented long ago ; almost 
before he and Mr. Gore came up with the 
carriage, and that, thereby, he had acquired a 
new and cogent reason for consenting. His 
compliance now was therefore no great victory 
for the united smiling-forces of Mr. Gore and 
his lady to attain. They mutually expressed, 
however, as much joy and exultation as if it 
was ; and his host-elect, once more shaking his 
hand, and bidding fond adieus to his " sweet 
loves," turned from the carriage-side " to dis- 
patch a host of business yet to be gone through 
on that busy day." 

As Gerald and his new and charming friends 
rolled off through a bustling and lively street, 
his arm became an object of Mrs. Gore's ten- 
derest compassion. He was called on to account 
for its being in " that sad sling." Taking ad- 
vantage of the opportunity to acquire some ideas 
upon a matter that much more deeply interested 
him, he mentioned its having been fractured by 
a fall from a stage-coach : " And," he continued, 
catching Miss Maria's eye, " the poor fellow who 



224 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

drove the stage came worse off; I felt greatly 
for him ; he was the only support of a large 
family ; and his trade as a coachman his sole 
means of supporting them ; although, at his 
outset, he and they had been comfortably in pos- 
session of a farm, of which they were deprived 
by an intriguing land-steward, or perhaps, I 
should say, by the neglect of an absentee land- 
lord." Miss Maria listened and looked atten- 
tive. " I believe I learned and can remember 
the unfortunate coachman's name, so much did 
he interest me." Gerald went on, retaining her 
glance — " It is, I think, a pure Irish one — Mi- 
chael Farrell." Miss Maria showed not the 
slightest consciousness of having heard it before. 
But the allusions to the circumstance of his 
fall from the coach caused Gerald to reflect that, 
having now arranged to stay " perhaps some 
little time" in Ireland, he was bound to advise 
his sister Augusta of his present safety, although 
he would not more amply reply to her epistle, 
but rather ask her permission to waive that duty 
till he should see Lord Clangore in London ; 
and to Lord Clangore himself a line was also 
necessary, lest his Lordship might have heard of 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

the wreck of the vessel in which he left France, 
and be uneasy on his account. 

It seemed farther advisable that Gerald should 
dispatch both his letters that very day ; and as 
he could not do so unless he repaired imme- 
diately to his hotel, instead of spending the brief 
remainder of the afternoon riding about the 
streets, he proposed, with many regrets, to take 
leave of his fair company for the present ; and, 
amid the more numerous regrets of Mrs. Gore, 
was set down at Morrysson's, while Miss Gore 
peered about her, at every body, through her 
€ye-glass, and returned his parting bow, and, 
no more ; and Miss Maria remained also silent, 
affording him, however, a smile, and an ex- 
pressive one still. 

As Gerald entered the hotel, he heartily 
wished he had not felt himself compelled to give 
up, so soon, his place at this young lady's side ; 
but he consoled himself with the reflection that, 
in the course of the evening, he would enjoy 
sufficient opportunity for determining if he really 
had ever seen her before. 



L 5 



226 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER IX. 

" And why can I not decide at once?" ru- 
minated Gerald, on his way to Stephen's-green : 
" 'Tis very singular that I cannot. The ques- 
tion is a simple one enough ; namely, is she 
a person I have previously seen, and con- 
versed with for about half an hour? My 
first notions say she is; her manner and pe- 
culiarities, so far as I have since remarked 
them, support the case; and yet something 
keeps me wavering. What something? Define 
it. I don't know how. Perhaps, as I before 
thought, it lies in her not speaking French, at 
this, our renewed acquaintance. I '11 ascertain 
if she can speak French, and then I'll get her 
to speak it, and that ends my doubts one way 
or the other. I '11 ask her, bluntly, about the 
main fact ! I will ; 'tis the shortest course. She 
cannot possibly equivocate ; — why should she ? 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 2S7 

But has she not done so already ? Pere la 
Chaise was a charming place, " from all she had 
heard ;" and when I pronounced Michael Far- 
rell's name, it did not move her. This, however, 
is nothing. It was not downright disavowal; 
and while there is certainty that a lady will not 
utter the language of untruth, there is equal 
certainty that women of every class know how 
to mistify the truth. 

" I will propose the matter to Miss Maria 
Gore plainly, and at once. I '11 secure her arm 
to the eating-room, if I can. I '11 secure a chair 
by her side at dinner. She will not evade me 
then, for she cannot run away, nor pretend to 
play with my question : she must answer it. 

" Still, how very strange that I should re- 
quire to go to all this trouble on such a point ; 
one of mere identity. Why, we know a build- 
ing again at a glance, though we have but seen 
it once before, or a mountain, or a street ; nay, 
I have been sure of a dog upon a Monday, that 
I but casually patted on the head upon the pre- 
vious Monday ; and yet, here is an individual 
of Nature's cunningest handiwork, and I am 
not sure of her. She is not one in my mind ; 
my brain puzzles itself about two individualities. 



228 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

when I would get her before me. 'Tis like the 
Athanasian creed. 

" And pray, Gerald, my good friend, why 
do you fret yourself so much about the 
double lady ? What is it to you if she is her- 
self and another, or another still, supposing it 
must be so ? Is it the metaphysical difficulty of 
the question that exclusively engages you — that 
has broken up your wise resolve to get under 
weigh this evening.?" 

" A fig for your reverie," said a well-known 
voice close at Gerald's ear, as he slowly ascend- 
ed the steps of Mr. Gore's hall-door, and, to his 
great surprise, he saw Mr. Gunning about to lay 
his hand on the knocker. 

" You in Dublin, Mr. Gunning !" 

" Yeg, and you too." 

*' And coming to enact a dinner at Mr. Gore's 
table, Sir.?" 

"^ I can't help it. There was no escaping 
him. The first man I met, after landing in his 
country, about an hour ago, was'almost he ; and 
he so plunged on me, and so harangued about 
his dinnering " precisely at six," and so shook 
me, and smiled at me, that, to get rid of him, 
I said yes; just as the woman said yes to her 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 229 

teazing adorer. I wonder what it will all be 
like. Let us begin to see." 

Mr. Gunning applied himself to the knocker, 
and he and Gerald soon entered Mr. Gore's 
drawing-room. 

After undergoing, just at the door, the lus- 
cious greetings of their happy, their very happy 
and delighted host, which Gunning bore badly, 
as, offering two fingers, he just grumbled a 
word, and looked critically around him, both 
gentlemen were led to Mrs. Gore, who, splen- 
didly arrayed, and enthroned amid a pile of 
cushions, in the middle of a sofa, rose, and ad- 
vanced her step, and did her bend, sparkling all 
over with smiles, like the sky with its countless 
stars (indeed her very instep and the toe of her 
slipper might be said to smile, as another lady's 
body has been said to think), and catching her 
breath so prettily, between every honied word, 
and altogether playing her part with the perfect 
ease and grace of a lady — (acting). 

Gunning soon hobbled away from her, on his 
stick ; but Gerald had not, like him, the heart 
to cut Mrs. Gore short in the midst of her very 
kind and sweet speeches. He therefore stood 
still until his queen-like hostess requested his 



236 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

attendance to the other end of the room, where 
Mrs. Blake, late Miss Gore, occupied a second 
sofa, wearing, newfangled with matronly cos- 
tume, a rich turban, beneath which was one 
of the most beautiful faces that sculptor ever 
modelled, but much less expressive and alive, 
eyes and all, than many productions of the 
studio. Beside her sat Lady Offally, almost as 
inane, yet talking in a low and slow way to the 
new-married beauty, who, her regards vacantly 
fixed on the confronting sofa her mamma had 
just quitted, seemed not to mind a word. 

After a stately, and, Gerald thought, repre- 
hensive recognition, upon a certain account, 
from Lady Offally, he was presented to Mrs. 
Blake; and while her intense stare just trans- 
ferred itself from nothing to him, and her warm 
rich lips mumbled some very cold words, and 
her neck just curved down, and not the faintest 
reflection of her mother's smiles lighted her 
faultless features, he fancied, that if the shade 
of any positive expression toned with the dead 
loveliness he gazed upon, it was, as Augusta's 
letter hinted, icy hauteur. 

A very young officer of Flood's regiment 
leaned gracefully upon a corner of her sofa, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 231 

silently admiring, with the mixed affectation of 
a boy and of a boy-soldier, Mrs. Blake's pas- 
sive charms. And, indeed, his mute worship 
could hardly be found fault with ; for there 
those charms were, obviously for no other pur- 
pose than to be so contemplated. "As to 
talking with her," concluded Gerald, when he 
gladly turned off, after the few cold words, and 
the colder pause, " one would as soon think 
of entering into conversation with the marble 
Venus." 

" The great Sir 's son,'' whispered 

Mrs. Gore, when they had passed the young 
officer. 

Gerald was much interested. Meeting the 
son of a celebrated author is almost like meet- 
ing himself; and Gerald resolved to obtain some 
opportunity of making up to the young gentle- 
man who, along with the splendour of his uni- 
form, thus shone in the reflected light of his 
illustrious father's fame. 

Upon yet another sofa, at one side of the apart- 
ment, half reclined Miss Selina Gore, not a dead- 
preserve beauty, like her elder sister, and yet 
looking alive only to a sense of her own transcen- 
dency. Her eye gleamed brilliantly in proud 



232 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

consciousness, and her out-turned lips seemed 
(though, after all, they said nothing) as if they 
were just about to utter some fierce sentence 
to old Sir John Lumley, who sat on a chair at 
the end of her sofa, and bent his head — (a good 
study for a specimen of gone-by Irish aris- 
tocracy, made up of powder, ruddy though 
sunken cheeks, weak blue eyes, thin, dry lips, 
and a prominent chin,) — and smiled earnestly, 
yet humbly and cravingly, and talked his best, 
at the unflattered ear of the object of his re- 
suscitated admiration. 

After his bow, Gerald, feeling that he had 
no business, as well as no inclination, to tres- 
pass on these ill-assorted lovers, passed on and 
joined a group of gentlemen with whom Mr. 
Gore stood conversing, and amongst whom 
were Lord Offally, old Lord Harmer, and Mr. 
Priestly. But after listening a moment to 
their discourse, and finding it a digression from 
the expected massacre of the approaching night, 
to the conversion of all Ireland out of the gloom 
of popery, he still moved farther on. Another 
group of younger gentlemen occupied a win- 
dow, and to them Gerald was led by Mrs. 
Gore, who a second time abandoned her regal 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 233 

state, in order to introduce him to her son, Mr. 
Frederick Augustus Gore, the nucleus of the 
circle. 

The young gentleman came forward with 
much of his father's blandness, modified by the 
portion of aristocratic precision he had learned 
at Oxford, and with all his mother's pretty 
trick of catching his breath between every 
word. Gerald joined him and his friends, en- 
couraged by seeing Mr. Gunning near them. 

Here the conversation was kept up, almost 
exclusively, between Mr. Gore junior and the 
son of a Four-Court judge, who had also been 
at Oxford ; and it consisted of the fashionable 
slang about Tom Crib, and Dan Donelly, and 
" fibbing," and " coming up to the scratch," 
and watermen's gibberish, and " good whips," 
and " gentlemanly" coachees, and so forth, all 
of which was an emulation by the young Irish 
students, of the knowledge and accomplish- 
ments of their English disiinguh. 

The Judge's son was obviously less at home 
in these matters than Mr. Frederic Augustus. 
He had not been so long at Oxford; had not 
so often sat on the boxes of the different stages 
that run up and down between that learned 



234 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

University and Bangor-Ferry ; nor so often 
taken lessons, at high bribes, from the cele- 
brated coachees of each. Hence he deferred 
to the superior acquirements of his young friend, 
and appeared more vain-glorious in exhibiting 
the full extent of his own knowledge, such as 
it was. Of the silent, admiring, and envious 
audience who surrounded both, a square shoul- 
dered, full-breasted, lusty young militia lieu- 
tenant, seemed the most sincerely respectful. 
He had never before heard a discourse so much 
above his humble technicals of the road and of 
fox-hunting, acquired previous to his getting his 

commission, through the interest of Lord . 

Besides, he had never been out of Ireland ; and 
the names of the various places at which the 
stages changed horses, and the notions of the 
important characters of the English coachees^ 
vaguely impressed on his mind by the allusions 
of the gifted speakers, filled him with a kind of 
awe, and a due consciousness of his own defi^ 
ciencies. A second listener appeared to bear 
the superior pretensions of Mr. Gore, junior, 
and the Judge's son, with less deference. This 
was Lord Friar, a person of middle age, sal- 
low-cheeked, sunken-eyed, black -bearded, horn- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 235 

mouthed, spindle-legged, and, notwithstanding 
his title, stamped in face and person, in look, 
expression, motion, as one whom nature had 
intended to be not only ugly but vulgar. Upon 
mere Irish roads he was a very distinguished 
whip. In imitation of his brother nobles in 
England, he often paid a high price to the 
coachmen to be allowed to drive them and their 
passengers fifty or sixty miles a-day ; and more 
than once he had been offered his shilling by a 
homely " outside," for very proper conduct. 
With all the crabbed language of Irish whips, 
therefore, he might be deemed acquainted ; but 
the newly-imported slang was a flight beyond 
him ; and after one or two unsuccessful attempts 
to chime in, he stood listening to his young 
superiors in evident chagrin and jealousy. Some- 
thing similar appeared to be the feelings of a 
young Dublin College graduate. He also had 
vainly tried to pass off the few ideas acquired 
from native men of whipcord, during his perio- 
dical journeys from town to his friends in the 
country, and back again : and the high aristo- 
cratic allusions of the Oxonians to every thing 
belonging to their English University ; to the 
studs, for instance, and to the " turns-out " of 



2S6 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

their academic acquaintances, farther oppressed 
him with a sense of Irish discrepancy, which 
his attempts to speak fashionably thick, as he 
affectedly winked his eyes, and smacked his lips, 
and sometimes turned oflP a pace or two, throw- 
ing out his limbs stiff from the knee, stamping 
on his heels, and then scraping the carpet with 
his toe, could not quite disguise. 

The learned phrases which most deservedly 
raised the characters of the young English-Irish 
whips were such as — " Down that hill I gave it 
to them like fun ;" or, " off with the drag, and 
then we go it, bang;" or, " their sixteen trotters 
going like little pigs f or, in allusion to a leader 
getting restive, "he tried it, but 't wouldn't fit.' 
But a portion of the dialogue which much edi- 
fied Gerald, is worth transcribing at length. 

** Ah, Sir, a man may drive all his life, but 
that will make him no whip. 'Tis not driving 
alone. Sir ; nothing like it ; ^tis good bringing 
up." 

" I 'm quite sure of that. Do you know Taylor 
of the Oxonian ? a deuced good whip is Taylor ; 
but a little too hard; don't laike that;" (the 
Judge's son had been learning, amongst his 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Other studies, pure English pronunciation upon 
the tops of coaches) ; " have seen him whop his 
horses, and they standing still ; though hitting 
hard is a good thing, too ; can hit hard myself,— 
strong arm : can hit my near wheeler hard ; as 
hard as any one." 

" Can you ? but can you hit your off leader 
hard?" 

" Yes, pretty well." 

" And the near leader .'^" 

" Don't know that." 

" If you can hit him at all. Sir, 'tis doing 
very well ; a nice thing to do. If you hear a 
youngster talk of hitting, just say to him, ' Sir, 
be good enough to hit that near leader for me.' 
That ni try him." 

*' Ah, I know it is a pretty stroke. Very 
pretty. Will practise it next time I run up 
from Bangor to Oxford, if I can get Taylor to 
give me the rein, a thing he '11 not always stand. 
How do you do it ? This way ? over your near 
wheeler's head — so.?" 

" No, over both my wheelers, so ; then send- 
ing it forward, so — that fits. Yes, I know 
Taylor won't always pass one the rein. Mr. 



238 THE ANGLO-IRISH, 

Taylor I should say ; we call him Mr. and the 
others by their names, he's such a gentlemanly 
person."" 

" Yes, quite above his situation. Talk him, 
when he is talky, and he '11 speak to you of the 
whip like any gentleman ; a very nice fellow. 
But I wish he would oftener oblige one. He re- 
fused my friend Lord Lash three times in the 
same day. How do you like Popkins, of the 
Tallyho.?" 

" A very respectable whip, indeed ; but 
makes bad hands. There's Sir Richard Jervis 
he brought up ; now, he will never be clever 
the longest day he lives." 

" How old is he r 

" Let me see ; about your own age." 

" Then don't you think, if he changed tutors, 
a better education might do something for him, 
yet.^" 

" Possibly ; but I doubt it much." 

" Come here," said Gunning to Gerald, as he 
motioned him to a corner, after he had caught 
his eye. Both turned away from the group, 
to the orators of which Gunning as well as his 
young friend had been attentively listening. 

" Sit down here, and let me give you an 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 239 

idea, and ask one in return," continued the 
cynic : " What do you think of all this ?" 

" A great deal, and yet very little," answered 
Gerald, smiling at the mannerism of Gunning. 

" Why, I '11 tell you," resumed his Mentor : 
" First, I listened to the women, that is, to such 
of them as can or will speak, and they talked of 
nothing but having their throats cut this even- 
ing ; then I hovered round the knot of seniors 
yonder, and heard only vile declamation about 
making God''s children of the people of this 
country, and about their vices, and ignorance, 
and savageness, just as a lot of our Indian 
planters might discuss the merits of their slaves; 
and as to the last specimen of eloquence you 
and I have witnessed, why, its original, in Eng- 
land, is bad enough, but this meagre Irish, or 
English-Irish copy of that original, is the devil, 
out and out, I take it." 

" I am of your opinion," said Gerald. 

" What are we to do ?"" 

" How do you mean ?"" 

" To be sure, you are, yourself, rather 
English- Irish, and yet, from your unadulterated 
education and training amongst us, at the other 
side of the Channel, how the deuce will you 



240 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

be able to stand this English-Irish evening? 
Have you ever been among such a set? As 
for me, I should be off, but that I am just 
enough curious to see what kind of a thing the 
eating-room is to be. What brought us here ? 
What kind of people are these ? Do they live 
in Ireland, as a part of its population, or 
what ?" 

" Oh, Mr. Blount, you poor fellow !" broke 
in Miss Flint, running up to them. 

" I 'm done," said Gunning, slowly rising, 
and cruizing into a back drawing-room. 

" Think of this !" resumed Miss Fhnt ; " you 
in Dublin with us, after all ! my gracious good- 
ness! — and on such a day as this is! a day 
that is to have such a night ! But you are a 
capital reinforcement to all our other protec- 
tors. Have you provided yourself with arms ? 
No ! — that's bad. I must see and borrow some 
for you ; any of the gentlemen here can oblige 
me; for they all carry little pistols, and little 
daggers, though they won't frighten us by 
showing them : I'm sure they do ; I know they 
do; — but, dear me! how did you hurt your 
arm ? 'Tis a trifling hurt ? think of that ! I 'm 
so glad! — apropos — you have not paid your 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 241 

advance-subscription to our Hibernian Im- 
provement Society ; but you can now, you 
know ; here *s a receipt, ready filled and signed, 
only to put in your name : I knew I should 
meet some arrears in this house to-day — (a 
word in your ear — tis a capital house for ar- 
rears — he, he !) — and so I brought out a lot in 
my reticule — think of that ! — Stop a moment — 
My dear Mrs. Gore, any kind of a pen, and a 
drop of ink, in the persuasive name of charity, 
there's a dear, good creature ! You don't see 
it near ? Well, no matter ; I can go and hunt 
it out ; 'tis my duty, you know : — Mrs. Blake, 
love, have you an inkstand near you ?" Mrs. 
Blake opened her eyes wider. " No ? — Selina, 
my dearest — " 

" No, no. Miss Flint, I know nothing about 
it ; try Maria :" and Miss Gore haughtily 
averted her head. 

" Thank you, how good you are ! where is 
she ? — not present, I protest ; think of that ! 
Oh, I remember ; drawing caricatures, she and 
Captain Flood, in here, with the very thing I 
want — dear me ! Come, Mr. Blount, follow 
close, and you shall soon have 30ur receipt." 

Miss Flint led into the back-drawing-room, 

VOL. II. M 



242 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

whither Gunning had just retreated; and Ge- 
rald, who had hitherto felt disappointed at not 
seeing Miss Maria Gore, now gladly obeyed 
the official command to " follow close.'*'' 

The first person that here attracted his notice 
was Gunning, sitting in the midst of a nume- 
rous circle of ladies, old, young, and middle- 
aged, and hearkening to their strongly ex- 
pressed terrors, as Gerald learned by a few 
words, of the expected massacre of the coming 
night. The old humourist also seemed, from 
the expression of his angular features, to be 
maliciously engaged in heightening the fears 
of his new friends. 

At a table in the corner of the apartment, 
shaded, and almost concealed by the half-open 
door, was Flood, scratching grotesque outlines 
of human faces, with, indeed, the pen Miss 
Flint wanted ; and standing over him — and now 
exhibiting to Gerald the very height and pro- 
portions of the figure he had seen in Pere la 
Chaise — appeared Miss Maria Gore, laughing 
heartily at his graphic wit. 

Gerald felt more interested than ever, but 
he also felt uncomfortable. Here was his good 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 243 

friend Flood on the best terms in the world with, 
he had now little doubt, the individual lady 
towards whom the gallant dandy once expressed 
so much (for him) admiration in another coun- 
try. Gerald half-hated his old schoolfellow. 

When, at Miss Flint's urgent request, Flood 
relinquished his pen, the friends exchanged a 
glance of mutual consciousness. But the mar- 
tial fop, with one of his usual silly salutations, 
soon recovered his ordinary manner ; while Ge- 
rald, not so adroit in self-management, allowed 
his brow to continue blank. 

Miss Maria Gore received her new acquaint- 
ance gracefully and charmingly, and still with, 
he believed, a meaning. Flood slid out of the 
room. Miss Flint handed him his receipt, and 
put up, in great glee, his liberal subscription. 
The object of his now lively solicitude sat down 
to admire Flood's caricatures once more. The 
zealous secretary beckoned him aside. 

" So, wonders will never cease, Mr. Blount." 
" I suppose not ; but why, in particular .?" 
" Because it is to be a match, after all, be- 
tween your sister. Lady Augusta, and him-— 
think of that!" 

M 2 



244 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

"Him?— who?" 

** My goodness gracious ! you, of all men 
alive in the world, to ask !" 

*' And yet I am under the necessity of asking 
again." 

*' Though I hear you are not expected to ap- 
prove : and now, that, to me, is really the very 
strangest thing under the sun : because, letting 
alone other reasons, he is not so bad a match ; 
the property he got from his old aunt, that 
died the other day, only for just changing his 
name — ^ 

" I assure you, Miss Flint, you speak re- 
buses and charades to me," interrupted Gerald 
impatiently ; " and I must once more implore 
you to inform me, who is he ?" 
■ " Now, for shame, Mr. Blount ! This is quite 
too bad ! We all thought you had more heart ! 
And though we don't much like that set, we be- 
lieved you would act generously ! And now to 
pretend not even to understand the he I speak 
of ! — think of that ! Why, you do know, as 
well as I, and all the world besides, that he is 
the he— yoMr he — Knightly's eldest son !" 

" Pho," said Gerald, turning off. 

«Pho!— think of that!" cried Miss Flint, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 245 

looking very much surprised at Gerald, ere she 
pattered out to torment Mrs. Gore. 

" Mr. Blount, I pray a word with you," 
said Miss Maria Gore, raising her head from 
the caricatures. He bowed, and sat down at 
the table with her. 

" We are not very, very old friends," con- 
tinued the young lady, " and yet it falls to my 
lot, this day, to ask you a question, which may 
seem an intrusion on your private sentiments, 
only I am commanded by fit and competent au- 
thority to ask it." 

" Something about my taking no notice of 
Michael FarrelFs remonstrance," thought Ge- 
rald, " and so I make out my case of identity 
without a shadow of doubt — though," gazing 
on her downcast face, " I never saw her look 
so unlike before." 

To Miss Maria he expressed his great readi- 
ness to attend to any question she would do him 
the honour to propose. 

" Thank you — in the name of another, how- 
ever. And tell me, plainly, if you comfortably 
can, now; — Why did you hurtfuUy decline, the 
other day, the well-meant visit of — Mr. Knightly 
and his eldest son ?" 4. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Gerald started, ere he demanded in turn — 
" And, for Heaven's sake I Miss Maria Gore, 
how was I bound to accept their visit ?" 

** Sir !" said the lady, glancing up in surprise, 
and perhaps some displeasure — " you really re- 
quire to know ?" 

" I most certainly do, Madam.'" 

" Then, pardon me, Mr. Blount, if, on such 
an occasion, I excuse myself from becoming 
your instructress:*" and Miss Maria Gore, 
with a very sweet but appalling inclination of 
her beautiful person, also left the room. 

"Curse 'Knightly and his eldest son!'" 
muttered Gerald ; " curse them very particu- 
larly, I say ; no matter upon what account I am 
thus annoyed by them." 

" Where are you, my dear Blount ?" asked 
Mr. Gore, entering the back-drawing-room : 
** Come, be ready to offer Maria your arm ; 
dinner will soon be announced — and, indeed, it 
is time ; — they have kept us shamefully long"" — 
(and so Gerald thought, to say nothing of his 
friend Gunning) — " but beforehand, I just 
have time to request your permission to whisper 
One word — I hope you have been gratified 
by meeting since — "" — Mr. Gore laid a peculiar 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 247 

emphasis upon the word, and spoke it with a 
peculiar smile — " by meeting, since — Knightly's 
eldest son?" 

" The devil!" said Gerald to himself. 
" Since when, Mr. Gore? what do you mean?" 

*' Ah, I beg your pardon, my excellent young 
friend," affectionately tapping his shoulder ; " I 
see it agitates you ; and no wonder ; any person 
of your heart must feel exactly so; excuse me, 
I was wrong, 'tis a very delicate matter ; but 
forget it ; for this day, do not let it deprive us 
of the happiness of your unclouded counte- 
nance. And come, now, I hear dinner an- 
nounced ; where is Maria? — Maria, my love !" 
Mr. Gore walked quickly out to seek her. 

" This will make some amends for my vex- 
ations, and my most vexatious wonderings about 
these screech-owl Knightlies," ruminated Ge- 
rald, following him. 

" Stop," cried Gunning, dragging him back, 
and clutching his arm; " you and I for it 
together ; you shall lead me down, and nobody 
else; by your side alone can I face this Irish 
dinner-table: stand quiet, and let the mob pass." 

" I am really sorry," Gerald began, when 
Mr. Gore returned with Lady Offally to say, in 



248 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

a great hurry, that he could not make out 
Maria, but left her to Gerald's talent for dis- 
covery ; and smiling graciously, he led the way, 
followed by Lord Offally and Mrs. Gore. 

" You hear, Sir," continued Gerald to Gun- 
ning. 

" No matter for that, you are my own," 
answered his pertinacious admirer. 

" I shall get rid of you, though, if I can 
execute Mr. Gore's commission," thought Ge- 
rald. 

They gained the outskirts of the numerous 
party in the other room, the greater portion of 
whom stood still, while the rest were getting 
through the door. Gerald anxiously gazed 
around. Miss Maria Gore was not near him. But 
looking over the little throng before him, he saw 
her, holding Flood's arm, close by the wall, and 
just Avithin the door-way^ as if she and her 
companion were awaiting a favourable moment 
to pass out. His gorge rose still higher against 
the gallant dandy. While he looked, the young 
lady's eye met his, and without any expression 
of its former interest and meaning, or even 
kindness, was quickly averted. The next in- 
stant, Flood led her down. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 249 

" Take care of me, man," exhorted Gun- 
ning, in a cross snarling tone, as Gerald soon 
after hurried him to the dining-room ; " do you 
suppose me a voltigeur, that I can with impu- 
nity make a somerset from the top to the bottom 
of these vile Irish stairs ?"" 

" I beg your pardon," answered Gerald ; 
" hold by the bannister ; — break your neck if 
you like," he added, between his teeth ; and in 
such a pleasant humour he finally seated him- 
self beside Gunning at dinner. 



M 5 



260 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER X. 

Gerald would not own to himself that his 
cofitinued spleen arose chiefly from being de- 
prived of the honour of occupying a chair at 
Miss Maria Gore's right-hand. He rather 
accounted for his silent and grave face, amid 
the clatter of (except his companion, Gunning) 
every one around him, while all arranged them- 
selves at table, by dwelling upon the repeated 
oflFences offered to his private sentiments, as to 
the pretensions of " Knightly's eldest son" to an 
alliance with his family. ^ It was very officious, 
and strange, and Irish, in Gerald's mind. Miss 
Flint he scarcely condescended to be angry 
with ; flippancy and impertinence were in the 
way of her vocation. But Mr. Gore could 
not so readily be passed by. Upon what 
grounds was a gentleman, so very slightly ac- 
quainted with Gerald, at liberty to question 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. S51 

him concerning a matter of such peculiar 
delicacy ? Granted, these Knightlies, particu- 
larly the old lady, had rendered important ser- 
vices to Augusta and her brothers, by nursing 
her through very doubtful symptoms of a very 
dangerous complaint ; but could their sense of 
obligation conferred, stop at nothing short of 
the appropriation of the high-born individual 
they had thus merely nursed, and of her con- 
siderable fortune, into the bargain? And 
must Lord Clangore and the Honourable Ge- 
raid Blount, be compelled to evince their grati- 
tude of obligation received, by assenting to a 
remuneration so unsuitable and extortionate, 
and by no other means ? Who were the best 
judges of the question ? They themselves, or 
Miss Flint, and such as she, with her com- 
ments upon Gerald's want of heart ; and Mr. 
Gore, and such as he, with his most unwarrant- 
able freedoms ? As to Miss Maria Gore, and 
her pretty indignation at, no doubt, his lack of 
generosity and common feeling in not agreeing 
with her and her sentimental correspondent, 
Augusta, upon the propriety of his sister " pay- 
ing" the Knightlies, "with herself" and hef 
sixty thousand pounds, (thus Gerald account^ 



252 THB ANGLO-IRISH. 

ed for the little scene between him and the 
young lady,) why, he could find in his heart, 
(bad as she was pleased to think it,) to excuse 
her^ upon the score of exalted notions of things, 
and of heroic friendship for, of course, her 
much-wronged Augusta. 

These thoughts passed rapidly through Ge- 
rald's mind, as he seated himself by his agree- 
able friend Gunning, and were now interrupted 
by a young clergyman pronouncing grace, to 
which there was appended an impromptu prayer, 
as follows : — " And shield and interpose to save 
us, O Lord, ever, and now, and most especially 
this coming night, from the blind hatred and 
fury of our cruel enemies !" 

The faces which an instant before had been 
cheerful, darkened, and were cast down, while 
the young cleric sonorously and slowly uttered 
these words; the festive clatter of more than 
twenty tongues subsided in deep silence ; and 
when he had ended, an impressive " amen !'" 
arose from all,— three of the party only except- 
ed. One was Gerald, who, in consequence of 
Flood's badinage about the fleet of turf-boats 
during the day, sti'ongly inclined to treat the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 253 

whole matter lightly, and would not therefore 
lightly " worry Heaven with prayers ;" another 
was Gunning, who, his napkin seriously adjust- 
ed, had been glancing, half-critically, half- 
hungrily, at the soup, and now cried " stuff!'' 
instead of " amen," (" amen stuck in his 
throat,") loud enough to be heard beyond Ge- 
rald's ear, into which the expressive monosylla- 
ble had, by a quick turn of his head, been 
directed ; and the third was Miss Maria Gore, 
who just demurely held her tongue, until an 
ostentatious " amen !" from the gallant officer 
at her side, caused her to exchange a glance 
with him, and then she distinctly smiled. 

" Maria ?" remonstrated Miss Gore severely, 
though in an undertone, as she fixed her almost 
flashing eyes on her sister. 

" Well, Selina ?" responded Maria quietly. 
It was evident to Gerald that the sisters might 
love each other better. But the independent, 
though, as has been said, quiet look of the one, 
was a match for the dictatorial regard of the 
other; and with a shrug on the part of Miss 
Gore, the matter ended. 

Sighing, from the effects of the termination 



254 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

of the grace, and, for the first time since Gerald 
had known them, their smiles faded, if not quite 
withered, Mr. and Mrs. Gore began to do the 
honours of their table. 

Gunning, having been at last helped to soup, 
just tasted it, and then abruptly took leave of 
his spoon. 

" Don't touch it," he said to Gerald, " it 
will freeze you ; they have iced it, and it will 
poison you with bay-salt and cayenne." 

Gerald had, however, already entitled himself 
to form his own opinion ; and he now thought 
Gunning's censure too harsh, and told him so. 

" Nonsense ! you're as bad as they ; the thing 
is as plain as my stick : it might have been 
tolerable vermicelli, if it had not been left to 
grow cold in their mismanaged Irish kitchen ; 
and then they tried to make it hot with season- 
ing instead of fire, (the fire was boiling or roast- 
ing some of the great joints we are yet to see,) 
and they succeeded." 

So, Mr. Gunning, all but groaning with im- 
patience, would for the present only chew a 
morsel of crust, and along with it " the cud of 
sweet and bitter fancy." 

By and by, however, he ventured on fish, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 255 

which, excepting that he called it also " cold 
and spoiled," seemed to please him better. 

He proposed a glass of Madeira with Gerald, 
and had scarce raised it to his lips, when, not 
going to the trouble of hiding a horrid grimace, 
he put it down again. Mr. Gore caught both the 
grimace, the action, and also the glance, but with 
a conscious dropping of his eye, took no notice. 
Gerald sipped the wine, and observed it in his 
glass, and felt, indeed, assured, that, whatever 
might have been its original merit, it was now 
out of order, — hot, and discoloured from recent 
shaking. Nor, recollecting Mr. Gore's futile 
visit, a few hours before, to the office of the 
disobliging wine-merchant, did he see much 
difficulty in assigning a reason why. 

Gerald, really feeling for his old friend, thus 
disappointed of the pleasant stimulant reckoned 
upon by palate and stomach, advised him to try 
the Sherry. Gunning did, and pronounced it 
worse than the Madeira. The Moselle, and the 
light French wines, he would not touch : he 
hated them — hated every French potation ex- 
cept La Fitte, and that — even could one hope 
for it under the name of Claret hej'e^ — he must 
not expect to see till the dessert appeared. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

As a desperate resource he called for beer. 
The servant handed it, and he sent it back to 
the side-board, in the hearing of the identical 
brewer, Mr. Blake, whose manufacture it was, 
and who sat almost opposite to him ; — malt 
liquor is certainly not found as good in Dublin 
as in London. He asked for soda-water. There 
was none : but ginger-beer was at his service. 

*' No. Whoever liked that stuff," he mut- 
tered to Gerald, " might go seek it, in a rural 
visit to the heights of Primrose-hill, of a sunny 
Sunday." 

Meantime, dinner went on, through its re- 
moves and courses, each abundant, and, it might 
generally be admitted, well-cooked and nicely 
arranged, if not neatly served. But Mr. Gun- 
ning, though he condescended to offer substan- 
tial proofs of his good opinion of a saddle of 
mutton, of different kinds of wild-fowl, and of 
the pastry, still contended, in his asides to Ge- 
rald, that he had never got through so uncom- 
fortable a dinner. 

" It quite agrees," he continued, " with all I 
have heard of every thing in Ireland, where 
every thing just comes near to what it ought 
to be — manner, mind, dress, house, furniture. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 257 

equipage, dinner — and yet always wants a cer- 
tain something to make it as perfect as we have 
it at home." 

But Gerald, from his slight insight into the 
hurry and doubt which had presided over the 
first needful arrangements for this particular 
dinner, argued that Mr. Gunning was not quite 
at liberty to take it as a fair specimen of all the 
other dinners given by individuals of wealth, 
as well as of fashion, throughout the Emerald 
Island. 

** Champagne ?" queried Mr. Gunning, in 
mixed satisfaction, doubt, and surprise, as an 
attendant proffered it, while he devoured some 
preserved-fruit pie — " Well !" he turned round 
to be ready for the glass, saying to Gerald, 
" in the fuss this makes, one can swallow it, 
whatever it is like:" and when he had caused 
the foaming liquor to disappear — " Gooseberry," 
he added ; " but good gooseberry, however ;" 
and he seemed slightly conciliated. 

" Mr. Blount, my esteemed young friend, 
you will agree with us, poor English-Irish, that 
our lot is a sad one, in this wretched country," 
began Mr. Gore, adverting to a conversation 
which for some time had been going on between 



258 THE ANGLO.IRISH. 

almost all the guests except Gunning and Ge- 
rald, who did not even attend to it ; " and so 
will your excellent friend at your right." 

" I don't know that," said Gunning. 

" But, my worthy Mr. Gunning," resumed 
Mr. Gore, in almost the full re-bloom of his 
smiles, which reminded Gerald of an old air of 
his country, * a rose tree in full bearing:' — 
" Before we accept your dissent, you will 
allow us to remind you upon what grounds we 
have all agreed to reckon on the great pleasure 
of your vote : you surely are aware in what 
a situation we are this evening placed ; scarce 
able to enjoy the happiness of each other's so- 
ciety ; scarce able to celebrate, convivially, the 
domestic event that brings us together." 

" I certainly was not aware that you were all 
placed in any such situation," answered Gunning. 

" Indeed ! — not that we sit here expecting, in 
the course of a few hours, an attempt to de- 
stroy us, and every person of our religious and 
political opinions in Dublin ?''"' 

" No. What kind of an attempt ? by whom ? 
— what the deuce does he mean ?" turning to 
Gerald. 

" By the Popish Rockites, my dear friend, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 259 

who rush up from their native wilds for the 
purpose, and who are to be joined by the old 
Popish rebels of the liberty, my dear Sir — the 
discontented weavers." 

" With their shuttles, positively," lisped 
Flood. Gunning looked hard from Mr. Gore to 
him ; and after a moment's scrutiny, seemed to 
comprehend. 

" How has this been found out ?" he inquired 
dubiously. 

" We are not, perhaps, precisely in posses- 
sion of the information necessary lo answer your 
question, my good Sir; or, perhaps,' — assuming 
official mystery — " it would not be considered 
prudent at the Cawstle if we did answer it ; but 
found out the thing has been." 

" And you are so positive that it must hap- 
pen .?" 

" Providence — who, since the first planting 
of English interests in this miserable country, 
has wonderfully upheld those interests, against 
an immense numerical odds of the Papist 
people — may, indeed, be pleased to avert our 
danger. But so nearly positive are we of what 
we have to encounter, that, before twilight, the 
guards were doubled at the Cawstle, and at 



260 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

every other point through Dublin; our gar- 
rison, of many thousand men, received orders 
to be in readiness for instant action ; horse- 
police, (the great Duke's excellent institution 
when he was Secretary at the Cawstle,) as- 
sisted by squadrons of the — th dragoons, began 
to patrol our streets, — hush ! there some of them 
go by ; — and you could not find one loyal 
Protestant house, in our whole city, unbarri- 
caded, this moment, or the male inmates of one 
unprepared to defend to the last, their hearths, 
their families, their religion, and all that is dear 
to them." 

" Then, I suppose, I sit in a fortified hold ?" 

" Indeed, my dear friend, you do. I took 
every precaution, to be sure, against unneces- 
sarily alarming, by my measures, such of our 
guests as the affair might prove new to, or 
might jar too much;" bowing, and now sadly 
smiling from one lady to another round the 
table. 

" But we knew we could depend on you, 
Mr. Gore ; indeed, we did," said Miss Flint. 

" Thank you, my dear Miss Flint ; I hope 
still to be found worthy of your good opi- 
nion. But, my dear Mr. Gunning, I trust I 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 261 

was not, therefore, deficient in energy and fore- 
sight, in arranging every means of defence ; 
and so well secured are our doors and win- 
dows, so watchful my servants, and so well 
armed too, together with many who hear me, 
that, even supposing our patrols surprised 
abroad in the city, it will require a large and 
determined body of rebels to overpower us." 

" Oh, we need have little fear, after all," 
resumed Miss Flint ; " the savages will get 
what they deserve — only I don't know what 
in the living world I shall do with myself 
when I hear the shots, and hear them roaring 
for us !" It seemed that Miss Flint enjoyed 
her panic in a strange kind of way, and antici- 
pated the commotion in as much glee as anxiety. 

" Then, from all you tell me, Mr. Gore, 
you must excuse my saying — notwithstanding 
your excellent soups, wines, and every thing 
else — that I wish I was safe at home, in No. 13, 

street, Grosvenor-square, instead of sitting 

here, this night." 

" Ah, my kind friend, well may you be 
excused ; Ireland is, indeed, the country to 
wish to get out of." 

" Well ; and 'tis also the country to get out 



262 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

of, if we survive this bloody night ; — and there's 
my comfort ; and yours, too, should you only 
be inclined to follow my example." 

" But how? when — to live — we cannot y my 
dear friend; — when here, fortune has cast our 
lot, for good or ill— -you surely will not at last 
decline to admit that lot to be, as I have said, 
a very sad one." 

" Yes, indeed, since you cannot enjoy your- 
selves, in your houses, after dinner, in the me- 
tropolis of Ireland, watched over by your gar- 
rison of so many thousand men, without ex- 
pecting to have yourselves put to death in cold 
blood. But to me, an Englishman, it seems 
rather strange that you cannot. Is there no- 
thing to be done to get you and the people of 
the country to live better friends ?" 

" Nothing, my dear Mr. Gunning. They 
are a half-savage race who hate us, our reli- 
gion, our superior station, and our English 
descent, just as the Caffers and Hottentots 
hate the members and subjects of our pa- 
ternal Colonial Government at the Cape, 
and " 

" If you give them the same cause for ha- 
tred, as that Colonial Government, which you 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 263 

call paternal, gives to the CafFers and Hotten- 
tots, I love them for hating you with all their 
hearts and souls," interrupted Gunning. 

•' And I," said Gerald. 

" But of course you do not ?''' continued 
this plain-speaker, half- willing to relieve the 
profound blank of countenance his comment 
had produced. 

" Indeed we do not. On the contrary, we 
strain every nerve to benefit them, and they 
won't let us." 

" How, twice over ?" 

" In the first place, we establish schools for 
them, all over the country, at great expense, 
our funds derived from individual donations 
and subscriptions, and from parliamentary 
grants ; and into these schools they will not 
send their wild little children, merely because 
their bigoted priests object to our Bible with- 
out note or comment." 

" Nay," said Mr. Priestly, " we open that 
Bible to them, and on the authority of its Word, 
we prove to them that their priests are the 
teachers of an idolatrous and blasphemous su- 
perstition, in the mire of which they and their 
children wallow, and " 



264 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" They won't believe you, I suppose ?" asked 
Gunning. 

*' Before the rescinding, within the last forty 
years, of the principal penal statutes, they were 
inclined to be quieter, though they never could 
have grown to like us," said the Judge's son, 
who was " going to the bar"" — a great " go," (as 
he would himself have said,) amongst all classes 
of young English-Irish, from the tradesman's 
son to the Earl's ; — " Since, then, however, ac- 
cording as Papist-attornies, and barristers, and 
merchants, and farmers, have sprung up, and 
have been permitted to brawl their way on, in the 
Four-Courts, and to make demagogue speeches 
at taverns, and to engage in all kinds of traffic, 
and to take, nay, to become absolute proprietors 
of land, — while nothing can be more injurious to 
English ascendancy in this country, than their 
thus engrossing much professional and social in- 
fluence, which ought to "be limited to the King's 
loyal subjects, the sturdiness, and the presump- 
tion, generated, at the same time, amongst the 
lower orders of their countrymen, in consequence 
of their petty elevation, is intolerable, Mr, Gun- 
ning, and may be said to be the chief cause of 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 265 

our uncomfortable situation in Mr. Gore's house, 
Sir, this very night."" 

" If they spare us, this very night, I have no 
quarrel with them about the ' sturdiness' how- 
ever," said Gunning; " I hope they'll grow as 
sturdy as they can, it will be all the better for 
them — the peasants of my country are sturdy 
rascals, and I think well of them for it — I am 
sturdy myself, and I like myself because I am. 
But, concerning the presumption .'*'" 

" Perhaps Mr. Gunning will allow me to ex- 
plain that," said old Sir John Lumley, bowing 
graciously ; '* I ought to know something of it ; 

I have been dealing with those people these 

that is, since I came of age ; and about the time 
mentioned by my learned young friend oppo- 
site to me — or rather some years afterwards — 
I found them tractable, and respectful, and 
obedient, almost to the extept one could expect 
from beings of their caste ; but, as my learned 
young friend also has said, ever since persons of 
their religion, and sprung almost from their 
own class, began to figure away as counsellors, 
forsooth, and demagogues, and gentlemen far- 
mers, ay, and landed gentlemen too, and rich 
merchants — " 

VOL. IL N 



266 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" And would-be bank-directors — I beg your 
pardon, Sir John, but my hint may add to the 
information you are conveying to our English 
friend," said the brewer of the beer Mr. Gun- 
ning had sent back to the sideboard, who, by 
the way, loas a bank-director. 

" Yes, Mr. — a — a — Blake — thank you ; — yes, 
Mr. Gunning, some of those mushroom, purse- 
proud Papists, thought to foist themselves in 
also amongst the respectable persons who manage 
the important concerns of our national bank ; 
but they met the repulse they merited. And to 
continue — ever since the common people of this 
country saw their fellow-papists making way in 
the different pursuits I have described, nothing 
can equal the remarkable change that has taken 
place in their demeanour towards the Protestant 
noblemen and gentry, who, generally speaking, 
are, thank God ! yet their landlords." 

" For instance, Sir Jbhn .?" 

" Why, my good Sir, these fellows absolutely 
begin to threaten you, upon the slightest provo- 
cation, with summoning you, and processing 
you, and going to law with you." 

" The deuce they do," sneered Gunning. 

« Think of that !" cried Miss Flint. 

" Yes, Sir,'' resumed Sir John ; " I assure 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 267 

you, Mr. Gunning — I assure you, Mr. Blount 
— that the son of a fellow whom, thirty or forty 
years ago, you might have paid with a horse- 
whipping, or with setting your dogs at his heels, 
if he presumed to teaze you with a complaint 
of high rent, or a complaint against your land- 
steward, or for breaking his fence, or for tread- 
ing down a few of his potatoe- stalks, or a few 
blades of his corn, or what not, out hunting — 
the son of that same fellow will now threaten to 
indict you for a common assault at the quarter- 
sessions, when you only lay your whip across 
his shoulders, upon any such annoying occa- 
sion." 

" The slave ! Does he not knock you clean 
down .''" asked Gunning, suddenly thumping the 
table, as he gave way to the indignation of a 
man born, and, almost to the present moment, 
living amongst a free and independent people. 

The ladies started. The gentlemen looked 
at each other. During a short pause — " This 
is quite too bad," said he to Gerald ; " come 
away." 

" Stay, for Heaven's sake !" said Gerald, as he 
prepared to rise upon his stick : " I share your 
feelings ; but let us recollect ourselves, — our fair 
friends ; see, they are frightened." 
N 2 



268 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Are they ? I beg your pardon, Mrs. Gore," 
grunted Gunning, quietly re-seating himself. 

*' Besides," added Gerald, " you know we 
cannot well force our way out of this fortified 
house ; and even if we did, it were but to face 
the Rockites and disaffected weavers." 

" Stuff ! — if there really were such a mob in 
the streets, I could find in my heart to go out 
and head them in upon these people." 

" But the main question," said Mr. Gore, 
softening over the late little explosion with a 
muster of all his best graces, " and, indeed, the 
most useful one, is, how are we to take millions 
of wretched and ferocious peasantry of Ireland, 
out of the hands of those who so inflame them 
against us, in order, as you so properly have 
remarked, my dear Mr. Gunning, to live at 
peace with them, and to guard against the re- 
currence of such nights as we now sit exposed 
to ?" 

" Educate them," said Lady Offally. 

" Your Ladyship knows they won't be edu- 
cated on our plan."** 

" Couldn't noblemen and gentlemen get a law 
passed to take their children from them by 
force, and send them to school .''" asked Miss 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 269 

Gore regally, with a slight glance upon Sir 
John. 

" If indeed, by any good and lawful means, 
we could get the poor infants under our care, 
at the very earliest age, and allow them to 
develope the * determination which God has 
given to their nature,' and ' the germ of his 
everlasting Word, by which the whole universe 
was created, and upon which all existence, 
spiritual as well as material, depends,' " resumed 
Lady OfFally, quoting from a mystic little book, 
" then, indeed, we might hope to see the natives 
of this country improved in the rising generation. 
A few of such infant schools, on the principle of 
Pestalozzi, established by myself, I have great 
hopes of, as you know. Miss Flint." 

" Ah, no wonder !" assented Miss Flint ; 
" those your Ladyship showed me, last month, 
in the country ! Lots of the poor little dears, 
Mrs Gore, sitting on mats, to keep the damp 
of the clay floor from their poor little — bodies,*^ 
hesitating, " and none of them more than three 
or four years old ; and they so comfortable there, 
the day long, out of harm's way, and fretted 
with nothing in the world wide, but just allowed 
to ' develope the consciousness of the divine 



270 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

germ within their own hearts !' Think of that ! 
So, educate them after dear, delightful Pestalozzi, 
I say too.'" 

" Educate them, but not so vaguely," ob- 
served Mr. Priestly : " educate them in the 
letter as well as in the spirit of the Word : that, 
and that only, will allow you to be friends with 
them, and avert recurrences of such a night as 
this." 

" That is, convert them,'^ said Lord Harmer. 

" Keep them down,'' recommended Sir John 
Lumley. 

*' And begin with the demagogues," added 
the Judge's son, " and the 'counsellors,'" with 
a sneer. 

" Make them tidy," exhorted Miss Flint ; 
" support our society, teach them to go neat, 
and to turn small loans, and to whitewash." 

At the last word Mr. Gore slightly started. 

" Set them to drain all the bogs," said Lord 
OfFally. 

" And to improve the fisheries," hinted Lord 
Friar. 

*' Thin them," advised a young Fellow of 
Dublin College. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 271 

" That 's the way," agreed the Militia lieu- 
tenant. 

" Yes, ship them off, in fleets, to our colonies," 
recommended Mr. Blake. 

"And afterwards, — indeed, immediately, — 
make marriage amongst those who stay at home, 
except under prescribed circumstances, and at a 
certain age, penal," said the young clergyman 
who had pronounced grace, a deep student in 
Malthus. 

" Think of that !" cried Miss Flint, looking 
very much pleased at him, (though astonished 
and puzzled,) in gratitude for his confining 
matrimony to " a certain age." 

" Mine is a shorter way," resumed the young 
Fellow of College ; " they and their demagogues 
threaten us with their numbers — let them 
rebel." 

" Ay, and thin them then," echoed the 
lieutenant. 

" What say you, Mr. Gunning .?" asked Mr. 
Gore. 

" Oh, nothing like leather," answered the 
cynic. 

Mrs. Gore arose to lead her fair battalion to 



272 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

the drawing-room, ere Mr. Gunning gave his 
reply; as if, indeed, she and they were not to 
sit and listen to the opinions of so uncouth a 
person. 

The moment they had retired, Lord Friar 
raised his glass, and while his common, vacant, 
and disagreeable features betrayed a peculiar 
excitement — " Come, Gore," he said boiste- 
rously, " you shall have my remedy in my old 
toast at the ' Beef-steak,' and here it is — 
' The Pope in the pillory, the pillory in h — 11, 
pelted with priests by the d 1 !' " 

Amid the cheer which followed. Gunning 
arose, and said, " I decline that toast."" 

" And so do I," said Gerald, standing by 
his side, and offering him his unhurt arm. 

Glances were interchanged round the table, 
and Lord Friar began to swell. A shout in 
the street, as if in answer to the cheer that had 
just been given, diverted the rising storm. 
Every face now looked more seriously occupied ; 
the next instant, while the shouts abroad con- 
tinued, a kind of clashing was heard. The 
next, screams echoed from the drawing-room ; 
a rush of light and small feet came down-stairs ; 
two servants, pale and agitated, stumbled into 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 273 

the dining-room, both faltering — " Oh, Sir ! — 
Oh, gentlemen 1" and as Mrs. Gore and all of 
her fair party, Miss Maria Gore excepted, 
rushed in, still more pale and frightened, some 
yet shrieking, (Miss Flint the loudest,) and 
some prepared to swoon in the first pair of 
strong arms they could encounter — " Up, 
gentlemen, and arm ! — Spike ! throw open the 
lockers of that sideboard ! It is the blood- 
thirsty yell of the Papists, by Heavens !" cried 
Mr. Gore. 



N 5 



274 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER XI. 



The servants quickly executed their master's 
orders, and flinging wide some little cupboards 
in the article of furniture he spoke of, displayed 
a goodly depot of pistols, great and small, with 
one or two blunderbusses. This accession to 
the secret arms, which, as Miss Flint hinted, 
most of the gentlemen assembled had carried 
about them, and which they now quickly dis- 
played, soon transformed the festive circle into 
a gallant band, prepared to resist to the last. 
Even Gerald allowed a \^eapon of death to be 
thrust into his single available hand, and Mr. 
Gore called loudly on Mr. Gunning to arm 
himself also. At first the old gentleman did 
not appear amongst his friends, nor answer to 
his name ; but when the challenge was repeated, 
he spoke from the chimney-corner, where, re- 
mote from the whole group, who had clustered 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 275 

in the middle of the apartment, he appeared, 
bent towards the fire, propping himself with 
one hand upon his stick, and with the other 
making the poker hot. 

" A pistol, my excellent friend !" cried Mr. 
Gore. 

" No, thank you," replied Gunning. 

" Then a blunderbuss, if you prefer it !" 

" Nor that, neither : don't mind me ; I en- 
gage to defend myself with this;" he spoke 
either in the most imperturbable coolness and 
bravery, or else in a downright sneer : Mr. 
Gore and his friends could not tell which ; 
but Gerald thought the latter, because, pre- 
vious to his retreat upon the fire, he had seen 
Mr. Gunning exchange a few significant words 
apart with Captain Flood. And yet Gerald 
could now really see no cause for sneering at 
the matter, notwithstanding that Flood might 
still choose to amuse himself with real danger, 
and the fears of others. 

"The rest of the servants guard all the 
lower doors .?" demanded Mr. Gore of the two 
trembling attendants who had entered, and who 
also were now strongly armed. They answered 
in the affirmative. 



276 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" You both, then, remain to watch the 
windows of this room : — dear ladies, you will 
be under the necessity of withdrawing to the 
cellars below, — they will be our citadel — them 
we will defend to the last drop of our blood ! — 
Mrs. Blake — Angelina, my heart ! do not sit 
there, looking so very helplessly frightened." 
Mrs. Blake did not look frightened to any 
great degree, but rather much surprised at 
being put out of her way. — " Mrs. Gore, I 
thank you, love, for your heroism ;" the lady 
was supporting Miss Fhnt through the perform- 
ance of a faint ; or, as in her own double- 
refined English she called it, a feint, — " now 
lead down your dear friends, and our dear 
charge — some gentlemen will assist you to the 
cellar-door with poor Miss Flint. Mrs. Hunt, 
my respectable old friend, do not kneel in that 
corner : where are Miss Chip, and her younger 
sister, Mrs. Stone ?" Mrs. Gore pointed to 
one of the close-drawn crimson curtains of the 
apartment; and when it was dragged aside the 
old ladies appeared, indeed, behind it, kneel- 
ing with their faces to the floor, in the recess 
of the window. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 277 

" To the cellars, dear ladies !" continued 
Mr. Gore, as, ere he had quite completed his 
muster of those who were to be incarcerated in 
them, the shouts which for the last few minutes 
had been growing faint at a distance, now rose 
shrilly abroad, and seemed rapidly approach- 
ing to the hall-door. " Yet, stop ! the villains 
come on so quick, it may be better not to trust 
our precious charge out of our sight. — Hark ! 
the clashing of pikes and other rude weapons 
increases ! — what do you advise, Captain 
Flood .?" 

" Permit the suggestion that you ask Lord 
Friar ; his Lordship has served in former cam- 
paigns against these wild enemies," said Flood, 
pointing to the noble person he spoke of, who, 
his back against the wall behind the door, the 
arm which held his pistol dropped at his side, 
his sunken eyes staring, and his disagreeable 
features cadaverously pale, seemed the indi- 
vidual of all the band least capable of guiding 
the counsel of war. 

" His Lordship ought, indeed, to assist us, 
in every way, for his own sake," said Gunning, 
still watching his poker, with his back bent 



278 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

and turned ; " for, if I don't greatly mistake, 
they were listening to his toast down the 
chimney." 

*' I leave every thing to you and Captain 
Flood, Mr. Gore," faltered Lord Friar ; " and 
as to the unlucky toast, I hope to be able to 
explain it." 

" Then speak at once, Flood !" exhorted Mr. 
Gore, as the shrill shouts seemed to arise ex- 
actly before the house; " Shall we lock the 
ladies into this parlour, and defend them in the 
hall, rather than trust them to a sudden sur- 
prise on their passage to the cellars ?''"' 

" Very positively, I tend to think so," answer- 
ed Captain Flood ; " and first, before we leave 
them here, remotely allow, valiant host, the hint 
of a little stratagem, or ruse de guerre, to inspire 
doubt, if not terror, in the assailants." 

" Any thing you please, my dear fellow !" 

" Then, amiable ladies, fall back ; all divisions 
of our band of defenders, advance, and form in 
line here^ — good. My Lord Friar, fall in ; now, 
eyes forward to the fire-place, and, when I give 
the word, salute it with a volley." 

" What 's that ?" asked Gunning, suddenly 
hobbling aside, and abandoning his poker, while 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 279 

renewed screams arose amongst the ladies, and 
Miss Flint, Miss Chip, Mrs. Stone, and others, 
turned their faces to the wall, and stopped their 
ears. 

'•' Ready, present, fire — " commanded Flood ; 
and there ensued, indeed, a stunning volley, 
rendered ten times more harsh than it would 
have proved in the open air, by the limited 
space to which the explosion was confined. 
One of the blunderbusses scattered slugs wide of 
the mark, and did wild work amongst the glass 
on the sideboard, which considerably added to 
the noise ; the coals jumped out of the grate, and 
rattled against the fender; the fire-irons were 
knocked down, and clashed against each other; 
many panes in the windows burst to shivers ; 
Lord Friar's ball erred aside and shot a lap-dog, 
whose dying yelps frightfully joined the general 
din ; but the climax of the uproar were the 
frantic shrieks of Miss Flint and her middle- 
aged friends, as, unable to control their impul- 
sive terror, they fell flat on the carpet, kicking it 
with their toes, and scratching it with their nails. 

" Nice shooting, good practice," applauded 
Flood : " recover arms, prime and load, and 
reserve the next volley for the enemy, if, indeed, 



280 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

this manifestation of our force and resolution 
does not cause them remotely to contemplate a 
retreat; — and hush ! are they not already silenced 
and in motion past our position ?" 

It was even so. The shouts abroad instantly 
subsided upon the discharge of the fire-arms, 
and the noise of a running crowd grew every 
moment more distant. 

" Yes, my dear Captain, you are right ! 'twas 
an excellent thought!" cried Mr. Gore; "but 
do you account us quite safe ? — may they not 
have run back merely to obtain a reinforcement 
from their main body ?" 

" It is exceedingly probable," said Flood. 

" Now, then, is our moment to escort our 
dearest friends to the cellars," continued Mr. 
Gore ; and, under the protection of some of the 
armed party, to the cellars the ladies according- 
ly withdrew : Miss Flint and her contempora- 
ries borne in the gentlemen's arms, while they 
loudly bewailed themselves; Mrs. Blake looking 
at last alive, and coldly muttering, " How very 
odd !" and Miss Gore, looking frowning and 
fierce, and tossing out of the parlour with a — 
" desperately provoking !" 

They were scarcely gone, when a body of 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 281 

horse trotted hard by the house, and were soon 
out of hearing, down the square. 

" There go our friends !" exclaimed Mr. 
Gore joyously, " in time to cut off the rebels 
in a second advance — still let us stand prepared. 
What's the matter, my dear Offally ?" as his 
Lordship spoke loud in the hall — " Indeed !"" — 
having gained the parlour-door — " gentlemen, 
friends, here's domestic treachery !" he conti- 
nued — " some one of my household, in the confi- 
dence of the rebels, has extinguished the lamps 
in the hall, and on the stairs, and in the pas- 
sages ! Come in, Lord Offally — come in, gen- 
tlemen — ^let us secure the door, and investigate 
this." 

With a grave look, Mr. Gore turned the key 
in the lock, and went on in a low voice. 

" I think I can fathom it at once. Notwith- 
standing all my efforts to procure loyal Pro- 
testant servants exclusively, by public adver- 
tisements as well as by private inquiries, I 
have not been able to complete the number 
necessary for my establishment, without inclu- 
ding one Papist footman, Regan O'Regan by 
name ; and that he, this Papist, Regan O'Regan, 
has, according to agreement with the rebels, now 



28S THE ANGLO.IRISH. 

put out the lamps, in order to create confusion 
amongst our little garrison, and so facilitate the 
attempt of our sworn murderers, I, for one, do 
not entertain a doubt." 

Many of Mr. Gore's friends agreed with him. 

" Then, should we not secure him ? — Spike !" 
to one of the servants who had first entered the 
room, and who, according to orders, remained 
to guard its windows — " in what part of the 
house is this fellow to be found ?" 

" He stands guard with Tomlin, and Mr. 
White, at the back-door. Sir — but '' 

" Arrest and disarm him instantly ! and con- 
duct him hither." 

*' Meantime, the duty be mine to reconnoitre 
the principal enemy from some window above 
stairs," said Flood, and withdrew. 

" Why do you hesitate, sirrah .?" demanded 
Mr. Gore to the servant, who had been earnestly 
speaking to his companion. 

" James Day, here. Sir, thinks it his duty to 
set you right about O'Regan and the lamps, 
though he is sure you will be angry with him- 
self." 

" What, villain !" cried Mr. Gore to Day — 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 283 

"yow — you ! and not this Papist, are the traitor ? 
you confess it, do you ?"" 

" He confesses a great neglect of his business, 
Sir, though no treason. In the hurry of the 
house, this morning, preparing for dinner and 
the mass-sacker together, — he forgot to put fresh 
oil in the lamps." 

" The mouse is born," whispered Gunning 
to Gerald, *' but 'tis only mouse the first ; the 
mountain will have twins this time." 

" You careless scoundrel !" cried Mr. Gore, 
more angry at his own failure in sagacity than at 
poor James Day's neglect — " prepare to leave 
my service to-morrow morning, — you and that 
Papist together." 

" As soon as you pay me my wages. Sir, I am 
ready to go," grumbled Day. 

" Leave the room, you dog !" Gerald observed 
with surprise a ferocious change in Mr. Gore's 
manner, much more positive than he had wit- 
nessed in the morning, while walking with him 
through Dublin ; " put down your pistol, and 
leave the room !" 

" Though, if I stay till your honour does pay 
me, we '11 be apt to be a long time together, I 'm 



284 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

thinking," rejoined the man, as he obeyed the 
first of these commands. 

" Begone, without another word !" bellowed 
Mr. Gore, stamping at him. Gerald now 
thought his bland host — savage. The servant, 
unlocking the door, doggedly withdrew. 

The open door admitted sounds from the 
drawing-room, which made every one start and 
listen, and particularly Mr. Gore. 

" Hush !" he said, " surely there has been 
one of our ladies forgotten above stairs, and 
something now happens to throw her into that 
appalling hysteric laugh ; some of you follow me, 
gentlemen, for Heaven's sake !" 

Gerald, the first to attend to his host's re- 
quest, ascended the stairs by his side. Mr. 
Gore gave the word to advance cautiously, and 
all stole upon tiptoe. The stifled laughing still 
rang on their ears, with scarce an interval of 
cessation. In certain misgivings, Gerald got 
several paces before Mr. Gore, and stopped alone 
at the open drawing-room door to listen. The 
voice of Flood reached him, recounting, in a 
low key, but in the very best specimen of his 
ridiculous style of exaggeration, the scene of 
firing a volley at the grate in the room below ; 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 285 

and his portraiture of the valour of the gentle- 
men, and of the terror of some of the ladies, was 
really so mirth-moving, that his auditor might al- 
most be forgiven her enjoyment of it. Mr. Gore's 
hasty approach now arrested, however. Miss 
Maria Gore's laughter, and Gerald heard the 
hoaxing dandy move towards a window. 

"Good God! Maria! — Maria, my love!" 
ejaculated Mr. Gore, as accompanied by Gerald, 
and followed by his party, he entered the draw- 
ing-room, " What has happened to j^ou V 

" Nothing, Sir," answered the young lady 
demurely. 

" Collect yourself, my dearest child ! See — 
your friends are with you — how wild she looks ! 
Answer me, for Heaven's sake ! who has so ter- 
rified you ? Some of the villains that have been 
spirited into the house, I am convinced, gentle- 
men. Ha ! that window open ! and a man behind 
that curtain !" 

" And your poor friend, ever," said Flood, 
advancing, " very diligently stationed here to 
reconnoitre." 

" Has my dear child explained the cause of 
her fit to you .?" Mr. Gore joined him. 

" Excuse the ignorance of an exceedingly 



286 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Steady soldier, attentive to nothing but the 
duties of his post," answered Flood. 

" Maria, my love !" — Mr. Gore turned to 
address her again, but Miss Maria had left the 
room. " This is very strange !" said her fa- 
ther, when the renewed clatter of horsemen 
aroused a new interest. In a moment a patrole 
of the — th halted before the house. 

" Flood !" cried the officer ; " 'tis Flood ?" 
"Rather positively, good Morton," replied 
his friend. 

" In the name of wonder, what have you all 
been doing in this house ? or what has been 
doing to you all ? We have ascertained that 
under Mr. Gore's roof was the discharge of fire- 
arms, which reached us half a mile off, and ter- 
rified all your neighbours to death, and fright- 
ened all Dublin — is it so .?*' 

*' There was a volley, positively," agreed 
Flood. 

" At whom ? for what .?" 

" While the rebels came up to assault our 

doors, Captain Morton," answered Mr. Gore, 

presenting himself at the window, " and it had 

the desired effect of scaring them away, just 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 287 

before you pushed by to profit by their retreat ; 
— ^you came up with them, did you ?" 

" Pho ! Mr. Gore ; if that be all, your powder 
and ball are wasted, and your neighbours startled 
to little purpose. I came up only with a ragged 
crowd of boys and lads, who, in mockery, I 
suppose, of the terrors of people who ought to 
be wiser than they, were amusing themselves 
very laughably about the streets." 

" But we heard the clash of some kind of 
rude weapons. Captain Morton !" 

" You heard the clash of a bundle of tin can- 
nisters and old kettles tied to a dog's tail, upon 
whose back was strapped a cat, habited in mi- 
litary uniform, and whom the young rascals 
were hunting up and down the square, Mr. 
Gore." 

" Mouse the second," said Gunning, " and a 
much finer mouse than his twin-brother. I love 
those ragged little villains, and their cannisters, 
in my heart of hearts." 

'' Good God! is it possible!" cried Mr, 
Gore, after expending a good many other eja- 
culations; "and up to this hour — let me see, 
near ten o'clock, — up to this hour we are all 
really safe, Captain Morton ?" 



288 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" You are, Mr. Gore ; and I think I may 
warrant your safety till morning, provided you 
let each other alone, and avoid the chances of 
stray bullets from another speculative volley. 
Good-night, Mr. Gore ; my compliments and 
assurances to your amiable ladies — Good-night, 
Flood ; I see we may thank you for this — ^you 
are, what you ever have been, a sad dog." 

" Good-night, too confident comrade," said 
Flood. 

With faces expressive of a doubt that they had 
rather made fools of themselves, many of the 
gentlemen, now abandoning or concealing their 
arms, proceeded, led by Mr. Gore, to relieve their 
fair friends from imprisonment. And in a short 
time the ladies re-appeared in the drawing- 
room, their brows yet anxious and their cheeks 
pale, their head-dresses ornamented with cob- 
webs, and their slippers and flounces not the 
better for having swept the floors of the cellars. 
Miss Maria Gore joined them ; the only lady of 
the party who still exhibited her usual smiles 
and roses, as well as her usual good order of 
attire. 

" What luck you had to be left behind !" 
said Miss Flint to her : " and, think of this ! 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 289 

nothing but cannisters at a- dog's tail, after all ! 
and we so safe, out of the way, and every thing 
in the world ! Dear me !" 

" Gentlemen should take time to reflect before 
they subject us to such homd inconvenience,'* 
observed Miss Gore, glancing hostilely at Sir 
John Lumley. 

" I 'm very cold, I believe," murmured Mrs. 
Blake, giving a little yawn and a shudder. 

Tea and coffee, a replenished fire, and shut- 
ting the drawing-room doors, somewhat re- 
established the comforts of the party. Gunning, 
after whispering, as he passed Gerald, " all 
this is being in Ireland," drew a chair close to 
the fender, and set himself to contemplate the 
phantasmagoria of the red coals in the gi'ate. 

Gerald remained wholly occupied with another 
kind of phantasmagoria. His friend Flood and 
Miss Maria seemed still better acquainted than 
his growing interest towards that young lady 
allowed him to relish. Finding them together 
in the drawing-room, confidentially amused with 
the mortal terror of the whole house besides, 
was worse than their fine-arts studies and their 
relative positions at dinner. And he felt very 
anxious to ascertain Flood's sentiments, at least, 

VOL. II, o 



290 THE ANGLO-IRISH, 

on the subject, which he proposed to do by con- 
versing with himself. But he would not put 
any abrupt question. 

He would imperceptibly lead to such a one 
as must serve his purpose. 

Flood soon gave him the opportunity of ask- 
ing any question. Since the return of the ladies 
from their subterraneous dungeons, he and Miss 
Maria had not noticed each other. Gerald 
looked round for her, previous to his approach 
to him, at the other side of the room, (where he 
was assisting Miss Flint to extract the scraps of 
cobwebs from her cap and her front,) and saw 
the young lady seated by Mr. Gunning at the 
fire, holding his stick while he sipped his coflPee, 
and chatting merrily with him, while the rough 
old man absolutely seemed, from the expression 
of his face, to be aroused into something like a 
human sympathy. 

" I am your suitor folr an opinion, Flood, in 
a case of extreme difficulty," said Gerald, after 
he had stood over his friend and Miss Flint, 
until her cap and curls (the latter, as has already 
been insinuated, only called hers) were pro- 
nounced cobweb free. 

" Friend of my early days, I attend you.'" 
They found out an unoccupied corner. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 291 

** You have already assisted me to get at our 
good host, Mr. Gore ; help me again." 

" Positively, no." 

" Why so .?" 

" Even because, worthy fellow, Heaven hath 
endowed you with eyes, ears, and observation 
of your own." 

'* But supposing me ever so gifted, I require 
time and multiplied opportunities to arrive at my 
point ; and, if I cannot aflbrd the time, and so 
miss the opportunities, and if my interests. Flood, 
require, notwithstanding, that — ^ 

" Ah, hear him ! Very certainly he holds me 
bound to be as a guide and a light to him, in 
every imaginable way ; and since such is the lot, 
as well as the slight inclination of your constant 
friend, estimable Blount, — speak." 

" Well. Mr. Gore has, long ago, while I was 
in France, given three hundred and fifty pounds 
in trust for me to a friend of his who was going 
out to India, via London, and the money awaits 
me either at Lord Clangore's, or at my banker's." 

" If, very unhappily, Mr. Gore's friend may 
not have taken it, through the merest shade of 
a mistake, out to India ? Goes it not rather so.?" 

*' Yes ; rather so, indeed."" 



i&St THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" And you incontestably do not comprehend?"^ 

" I art very unwilling to comprehend as you 
seem to wish I should." 

" Which, I venture to hint, is being as verdant 
as you are accomplished and virtuous, magna- 
nimous Blount. — But what was ' magnanimous 
Goldsmith ' at ' Scarron's of old ?' " 

" A gooseberry fool," answered Gerald. 

" Thou hast said it, and not thy faithful and 
respectful admirer, old class-mate : — wherefore 
spare me." 

" You are pardoned. But listen. You saw 
how anxious Mr. Gore was, in your presence, 
this morning, to get me here to dinner. Well, 
his hospitable zeal wonderfully cooled as we 
walked along the streets, and he even wanted 
to see me under weigh, this evening, out of his 
country, until by chance we met his excellent 
lady, and Miss, and Mias Maria Gore, in their 
carriage, and then he grew irresistibly warm, 
and good, and pressing again, all of a sudden — 
read me that." 

" First, primitive being, vouchsafe a very few 
admissions. You laboured under one of your 
constitutional agitations, at sight of Miss Maria 
Gore, I am bold enough to pronounce." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 293 

*' Yes, indeed, and even raved of her to her 
father's face, before I knew who she was." 

" Doubtless. Hearken, then, to the words 
of thy poor oracle. The original warmth of the 
morning, was English- Irish accomplishment ; 
while the heart beneath hoped and prayed to 
its gods for the identical refusal you accorded." 

" Why, what could be the motive for hating 
my company, at such a rate ?" 

" The simple vision of that noble countenance, 
which, though redolent of high aspirings and 
deep benignity to all the world besides, Avas 
unto thy excellent host, even as would have 
been the features of ugliness, enmity, yea, and 
threat." 

" You must go on." 

" Horrid remembrancer ! — a leaf of a trades- 
folk's ledger it was — a protested bill — an at- 
torney's letter — a summons — a process — a lati- 
tat — a forehead marked with the mark of The 
Beast." 

" Oh, now I accompany you. Well, But 
his sudden change into affection, when he pre- 
sented me at the carriage-door ?" 

" To that thy oracle answereth in pithy 
aphorisms, i/ou slightly continuing to recollect 
o 3 



294 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

the eloquent praises of a certain lady pronounced 
by your lips ere the memorable presentation. 
Often blessed is a father, over head and ears 
in debt, in the beauty of his daughter. Sweet 
as the promise of a receipt in full from a credi- 
tor, is the smile of that creditor upon her come- 
liness.'" 

" Well, Flood, and I own that Miss Maria 
Gore desperately fascinated me." 

" As why should the very brilliant person 
not .?" 

" Shall I allow her to keep doing so .''" 

" In this respect, content your susceptible 
heart according to its yearnings. The flower 
of her garden she may be suggested to be, al- 
ways taking into account her sympathetic power 
over bosoms such as thine, easily fascinated 
Blount. But allow to thy still watchful friend 
the shadow of yet another warning. For all 
your present gentle feelings, and for all your 
future sweet communings with the present lady 
of your love, hand not to her pleasing parent 
many more little drafts on your London 
banker. Her, win and wear, unto death, if you 
can ; — him wed not along with her." 

" I shall remember your friendly hint. But 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 295 

do you know, Flood, my interest for the lady 
has chiefly been aroused by her strongly re- 
minding me of a charming person we met a few 
weeks ago in Pere la Chaise ?" 

" And, indubitably, your constant friend was, 
by the first vision of Miss Maria Gore, also in- 
clined to be startled, as if at a re-appearance of 
that evasive individual."" 

" Is she not the very same ?" 

" I will even positively put myself in gentle 
motion, and ask her for you." 

" That's very obliging — pray do ; she glided 
this moment into the whist-tables in the other 
room." 

" Venture to account the service undertaken;'" 
and Flood accordingly slid off. 

Gerald looked round for Gunning, anxious, 
till his friend's return, to get an idea from him of 
the kind of chat that had for some time gone on 
between the cynic and Miss Maria. He did not 
appear, however, at the fire. Miss Flint pat- 
tered up to Gerald's corner. 

" We want your opinion, this very moment, 
Mr. Blount, of — Which is the very best, and 
most delightful, and most striking of the novels 
that all the world is reading and raving about ? 



296 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

And, come here. Captain ," calling to the 

mute young admirer of Mrs. Blake — " we want 
yours too, above all things in the world wide l"' 
she repeated her question. 

The young gentleman drawled out that, " Po- 
sitively, he could not venture to say ; he had not 
happened to have read any of them." 

"No!— think of that!" cried Miss Flint, 
looking more a meaning than she should have 
done. 

" No, positively, he never read at all — the 
— th never read.'' 

** Then maybe you write ?" 

" Certainly not ; — never, on any account." 

" And you the son of such a very great 
writer .''" 

" Yes : his father, he believed — wrote :"" and 
he coursed after Mrs. Blake. 

" Think of that !— well, upon my word !" and 
without insisting on her answer from Gerald, 
she suddenly changed the topic. 

" I ni tell you a secret, Mr. Blount. Thaty" 
nodding her head to Sir John Lumley and Miss 
Gore, ** that will be a match a great deal sooner 
than most people think. I Ve made it out since 
I came here to-day ; ay, and the reason why 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 297 

long before. You must not think I listen to 
what others wish to say amongst themselves, 
but not a great many hours ago, I overheard, 
by chance, and in spite of me, Mr. Gore and 
Mrs. Gore laying their particular commands on 
poor Selina to let Sir John have his way in 
naming the earliest day he liked — to-morrow, if 
it came into his head — think of that !" 

" Well, perhaps Sir John has been very ur- 
gent with Mr. and Mrs. Gore, Miss Flint.'" 

" Oh, no doubt in the living world of that, 
poor doting old man, and who can look at dear 
Selina and blame him, gone by as he is. But 
that's not the whole reason. Things cannot go 
on in this house another week, take my word for 
it. Indeed, the wonder of the world wide is, 
how they have gone on for the last week, ay, 
and the last year, along with it, and the last ten 
years, on the back of that again, if you knew 
but all. I have a sister married to one of the 
first solicitors in Dublin, and she assures me, 
that since he was eighteen years old poor Mr. 
Gore has been going in debt, going in debt, day 
after day, year after year, down to the present 
blessed moment, and never paying a shilling to 



298 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

a single human being — think of that ! there 's 
for you !" 

" But your sister may have been misinformed, 
Miss Flint, the thing seems so very impossible ; 
why, Mr. Gore is now about fifty, I should 
think, and you suppose him living for thirty 
years in such a way. " 

" Well, and it 's not so impossible, after all, 
in Ireland. You only think it is because you 
have been brought up in England. I '11 tell you. 
As long as a mortgage could be laid on the 
estate, creditors had patience, and something was 
raised for bare living. Something else came in 
by giving, now and then, a bill for a hundred 
pounds to some greedy tradesman, and getting 
fifty from him, the other fifty paying an old 
debt, and a premium into the bargain : and 
something else came in by begging and bor- 
rowing from friends and^relations. But all was 
jtt nearly over with the poor Gores, when that 
place you and your brother got for him in the 
Castle, (a good friend you and yours have been 
to them,) and Mr. Gore's sweet promises, and 
speeches, and engaging to procure situations for 
their sons or their brothers, and praising and 
patronizing some of their children, that the 



THE ANGLO IRISH. 299 

poor fathers and mothers thought were uncom- 
mon geniuses," — (Gerald remembered,) — " why, 
by dint of all this, they consented to fifth or 
sixth renewals of their protested bills, and to 
wait a little longer, in God''s name. Then came 
this fine house, and fine furniture, and the new 
carriage, and who dashed like the Gores ? — and 
the people grumbled again. But he went round 
to them, in confidence, giving hints about poor 
Angelina and the rich brewer — (there's for you ! 
that was a good hit, the first few months! that 
was making hay while the sun shone !) — and 
from his candied speeches, the poor tradespeople 
thought that Blake was to give the means of pay- 
ing every thing, to the last shilling. But they 
found a mare's nest. The brewer would do no- 
thing but brew and bake for himself, and ima- 
gined it was quite enough to take a fine-lady 
wife without a sixpence ; and so, not a farthing 
would he settle on her, not to talk of taking 
her father out of difficulty. Think of that ! — 
a close fellow, and my blessing on him for it. 
So, into the sheriff"'s clutches poor Mr. Gore 
went, about ten days ago, and then there was 
such working heaven and earth to get him out 
before other creditors laid detainers on him. 



300 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Every one was worried, Captain Flood amongst 
the rest. Gore thought he was caught by Ma- 
ria ; but he doesn't care a pin for her ; and it 
was a very old affair, and no one stepped for- 
ward, not even Blake — why should he? Until, 
as good luck would have it, up comes poor old 
Sir John from the country, where Selina had 
contrived to brow-beat him into a fit of dang- 
ling after her, and he did the business in a mo- 
ment, and got us our poor Mr. Gore back again, 
before the rest of the creditors knew what hap- 
pened. Ay, and more than that ; Selina is to 
have a draft on the Bank of Ireland, and a 
rent-charge on Sir John's estate, making toge- 
ther a round sum of thousands on thousands ; 
and she engages to give her poor father as much 
out of it as will help to set him on his legs again 
—think of that!" 

" I am very sorry for my friend Gore and his 
charming family," said Gerald ; " and it is on 
this latter account, as well as to comply with 
Sir John's urgency, that your friends here 
wish Miss Gore to be so amiable when her ad- 
mirer shall next speak of the day .?" 

"' Just so ; only there happen to be more par- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 301 

ticular little reasons ; — whisper — the creditors 
have resolved to make sure, this time, one way 
or the other ; if Mr. Gore's promises on the 
strength of this second marriage do not hold 
good, they ""11 have him, poor man, and every shil- 
ling's worth in this house, as sure as day — whis- 
per again — they have him and them already ! — 
think of that !" 

" How do you mean '?" 

" My sister's husband saw thirteen execu- 
tions sent in, last week and this, and the thir- 
teen ugly-looking fellows that served them are 
this moment under the same roof with you ! 
And did you notice a mean-faced, though very 
smartly-dressed little man that sat at the lower 
end of the table at dinner, saying nothing to 
nobody, and nobody saying any thing to him, 
and that now sits near Mr. Gore, beyond — look ! 
as silent as ever ; he is taking care of Mr. Gore 
himself, at a great bribe, every day, not to force 
him to the SherifiTs prison ; he arrested his man 
coming home this very evening." 

" A bailiff!" whispered Gerald in conster- 
nation. 

" Yes, nice as his clothes are — got for the 
occasion, to hide things as well as possible — 

VOL. II. P 



302 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

a common catchpole — think of that !" — and 
Miss Flint, obeying a call from Mrs. Gore, hur- 
ried off, answering, " Yes, yes, dear love !" 

Gerald had not recovered from the effects of 
this astounding intelligence, when Flood re- 
appeared. 

" According to the amazingly ingenious me- 
thod of accomplished Avomankind, excellent 
fellow, the lady rather unequivocally demurs to 
answer any question of yours till you answer a 
new one of hers." 

** Propose it, if you know it." 

" Yes ; I have a faint notion that I come so 
instructed. Wherefore attend. Resolve Miss 
Maria Gore, in the name of a friend of hers, 
why you did not think fit to honour with a 
reply a letter sent to you in France, and in- 
dited in common by — Mr. Knightly and his 
eldest son ?"" 

" Again !" cried Gerald, much provoked : 
" pray. Flood, inform Miss Maria Gore, what- 
ever may be her reasons for asking, that I 
received no such letter in France, and, in fact, 
know nothing about it." 

" No ?" questioned Flood, looking interested. 

** No ; and to yourself I will add that I am, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

and have been much amazed by people teaz- 
ing me with this Knightly and his eldest son, 
of which persons I know just as little as of their 
letter, having seen but one of them, the father, 
once in my whole life, and then without wish- 
ing to see him again." 

"And his eldest son, never, positively?" 
continued Flood, his interest increasing. 

" Confound his eldest son ! no, never ; do 
they say I have.'' What do they all mean.'* 
Why, you, yourself, you mean something this 
moment r 

" Me .? I, mean ? overpowering ! you err, 
enormously to my discredit, fallible Blount. 
Your friend's sole business and idea is incon- 
tinently to bear back your answer to the other 
power, between whom and your eminent self 
he has the very great felicity of accounting 
himself diplomatist." 

" Too much of that, perhaps," thought Ge- 
rald, as Flood a second time entered the back- 
drawing-room. After a short pause, during 
which his friend might be supposed to have 
conveyed his instructions, Gerald's ear caught 
a suppressed laugh, which he reddened to think 
came from Miss Maria Gore. " She amuses 



304 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

herself with me," was his thought ; and acting 
upon an impulse given by it, he followed 
Flood into the apartment. 

The dandy and the young lady stood to- 
gether at the fire, their backs to Gerald as he 
came in, so that they did not observe him. 
And Miss Maria still laughed through her 
parted fingers, as, at intervals, Gerald caught 
these words, " Excellent ! oh, what a letter for 
my dear Augusta to-morrow ! And what 
visions of delightful things, woven out of it 
and him, and the other puzzle, rise before my 
sight !" 

" Indeed ?" queried Gerald, as he softly 
stepped back; and, determined that neither Miss 
Maria Gore nor his wilful and indecorous sis- 
ter, her * dear Augusta,' should weave any 
thing out of him, whatever might be the puz- 
zles devised by both for tormenting him in 
consequence of his indifference to their Knight- 
lies, he looked round the outer drawing-room 
for Gunning, in order, with him, to leave the 
house that moment. 

" You want me," said the old gentleman's 
voice at his back. .., 

"Yes, Mr. Gunning; are you tired ?" 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 305 

" I 'ra tired of being tired, I began so long 
ago." 

" Come, then." 

" But the danger of the night is not yet 
over, gentlemen, and you venture into the 
streets, alone !" remonstrated Mrs. and Mr. 
Gore, as both proposed to take leave. Arm-in- 
arm, however, Gunning and his promising pu- 
pil soon made way along the fine square of 
Stephen's-green. 



END OF THE SECOND VOLUME. 
THE 

ANGLO-IRISH 

OF 

THE NINETEENTH CENTURY. 
VOL. III. 



LONDON: 
PHINTED BY S. AND K. BEKT1EY, 
Dorset Stifet, Fleet Street. 



THE 



ANGLO-IRISH 



OF 



THE NINETEENTH CENTURY. 



A NOVEL. 



IN THREE VOLUMES. 



VOL. III. 



LONDON: 
HENRY COLBURN, NEW BURLINGTON STREET. 

1828. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER I. 

" And do you think I wonder, after this, 
that mere Irish people hate half-Irish people ?" 
said Mr. Gunning, pursuing a conversation with 
Gerald, on the way home ; " or that they, or 
at least the poor devils of peasants amongst 
them, should get together on the hill sides, or in 
the bogs, to which Sir John Lumley and his set 
kick them, or horsewhip them, and there plan 
some atrocious piece of vengeance ?" 

" Oh," said Gerald, " but we must not con- 
clude that the horsewhipping system is any 
longer in operation ; indeed, Sir John said it is 
not." 

" Ay, but its spirit is, as well as the recol- 
lection of itself. Every word we heard this 
VOL. III. B 



2060837 



2 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

evening, about the population of the country, was 
full of that spirit ; and I must and will con- 
clude, that so is every act of these nondescript 
colonists towards the objects of their impolitic 
dislike and impudent contempt — ay, impudent : 
and, confound their impudence, say I ; no 
matter about their folly ; that has cost them 
dear, and (may God forgive me for hoping that 
it may) cost them dearer. Favour me by sup- 
posing England — (its real population, like that 
of Ireland, undiminished) — colonized by a hand- 
ful of men like these ; how long would the fools 
be allowed to play their antics within the limits 
of our chalky cliffs ?" 

" But again, Mr. Gunning, we are not to sup- 
pose all the English-Irish in Ireland like to- 
day's specimen." 

" True ; though I see no reason why they 
should not be ; at least, if * the Caustle' gives 
the cue here, as St. James's does in town. I '11 
wait, however ; but, in the mean time, hinder 
me, if you can, from abusing that * to-day's 
specimen." I never knew till now why it was 
that, whenever such of your half-Irish as I have 
seen, came to visit us in England, they appear- 
ed to be over-polite, over-conciliating, self- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 3 

doubting, inferior kind of men. But now I 
know it. They are tyrants at home under us, 
and they must be inferiors from home, in our 
presence : they can't help it." 

" Say, more charitably, Sir, that, as they imi- 
tate England, they must naturally be second to 
Englishmen. Reynolds long ago made an axiom 
of my proposition, when he said, l He who fol- 
lows must ever remain behind.' " 

" Burke, if you please, not Reynolds ; I 
know the opinion is against me ; as also is old 
Northcote, Sir Joshua's domesticated apprentice: 
no matter for all that ; I '11 have my own opi- 
nion ; but this is not to the point ; only I 
believe I am vexed enough to quarrel with 
doubtful claims of every kind ; what a name 
you Ve all got ! English-Irish, or Anglo-Irish ; 
why you make yourselves out nothing at all ; 
one ' does not know where to have you :' I 
wonder you never thought of having heard said, 
' between two stools,' and so forth." 

" You know, Mr. Gunning, I " 

*' Well, no matter, good-night ;" they had 

gained the steps before Morrysson's ; " I sleep 

here; so, touch my cane, — good-night ; but, do 

you know, I long to find out what the real Irish 

B 2 



4 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

people are like ; have you started any of them 
yet ?" 

" One or two," answered Gerald. 

" And what did you think of them ?" 

" I fear to shock your new predilection by 
telling." 

" Well, don't then ; for now that I recollect, 
I shouldn't care much for your opinion ; that is — 
don't be angry — that is, I 'd rather wait and 
form my own. And so I will. Ay, by green 
Ireland's patron saint, will I, — very shortly too. 
Yes ; and in the thick of them, down in the 
South. I 've taken my place in the stage, and 
start to-morrow morning. Good-night the third 
time, and get home as fast as you can. 1 ' 

" But you surely will allow me to go in to 
this hotel with you, for I, too, sleep here ?" 

" Do you ? So we must have stumbled on 
each other, at all events ; come along then ;" as 
a waiter opened an inner door. 

" And you have absolutely voyaged from 
England, Mr. Gunning, to penetrate, in a stage- 
coach, down into the wilds of Ireland, just to 
try what the genuine sons of Milesius are likely 
to be like ?" asked Gerald, as they rested, toge- 
ther, in a public room. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 5 

" Who told you that ? Not I, I 'm sure. I 've 
business here. Don't you know that my elder 
brother married an Irishwoman, or rather an 
English-Irish one ?" 

" Yes ; a daughter of Lord Dargle." 

" Very well ; she has lately died, good lady ; 
and of all things in the world, knowing that I 
was a poor dog enough, — (and, I suspect, at 
Dick's instance, though the fellow will never 
own it) — left me the portion -of her property 
which was settled on herself : and as it is in the 
shape of Irish acres, joining the estate Dick also 
got by his excellent wife, why I am rather bound, 
I take it, to come and have a look ; — to say no- 
thing of a necessity for condolence, and all that, 
now that poor Dick is so much alone : he has no 
children, you know ; else, I fancy, this bit of 
luck had never fallen to me." 

At length the friends parted, and Gerald was 
free to collect his thoughts in his own chamber. 
The occurrences at Mr. Gore's, connected with 
the terrors of the night, the conversation, the 
characters, and even his discourse on the way 
home with Mr. Gunning, began materially to 
confuse, if not to change some of his former 
theories regarding his paternal country. But 



b THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

upon that subject Gerald would now scarce in- 
terest himself. Maria Gore, her familiarity at 
one time, her slights at another; his puzzle 
about her, and her proposed puzzle about him ; 
her strange questions, in allusion to the Knight- 
lies; every body's questions in allusion to them; 
and, after hers, Flood's in particular; and the 
stare of surprise, really unaffected, as Gerald 
now believed, with which that gentleman had 
honoured him, previous to his last exit to seek 
Miss Maria in the back drawing-room ; all this 
occupied Gerald's heart and imagination, to the 
exclusion of every other question. 

After a good deal of consideration, if the 
work of his mind, upon this night, may be so 
termed, he rested in something like the follow- 
ing conclusions. His indifference to the Knight- 
lies had become known to Maria Gore, and, at 
the instigation of Miss Rhoda, and perhaps, 
slightly, of his demure sister, that young lady 
determined to vex him on the point. Being so 
intimate with Flood, she had enlisted him in 
the absurd plot ; and it was precisely within 
the range of his old schoolfellow's talent to 
relish the jest, and prove a zealous agent in 
promoting it. But Gerald was not disposed to 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 7 

spend his time in Dublin as the scape-goat even 
of the beautiful Maria, or of his oldest friend. 
He would take care how he ever again gave 
Miss Maria an opportunity to amuse herself, or 
her " dear Augusta 1 ' either, at his expense. As 
to Captain Flood, early the next morning he 
could be asked to explain the whole part he had 
taken in the farce ; his stare, his humoursome 
message into the back drawing-room, which had 
made the young beauty laugh so gleeishly ; and 
her final answer to Gerald's question, as to 
whether or not he had ever seen her before 
they met in Dublin. And here it will be per- 
ceived that Gerald's lurking curiosity, and his 
fascination, if not love, for Maria Gore, had 
some share in directing the suggestions of his 
sulkiness : and, in fact, after laying his whole 
train of operations for the next day, — embarkation 
for England forming the final one, — he caught 
himself breathing a very warm and emphatic 
sigh in the service of the lovely and charming 
Maria — if, indeed, she ivas his French vision ; 
for, strange to say, he almost unconsciously 
made that proviso. 

Before daybreak he was awakened by the slow 
stumping of feet, and the firm tap of a stick 



8 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

along the corridor, that ran by his chamber ; pre- 
sently the feet and the stick stopped at his door ; 
then he was startled by three abrupt knocks, 
as if given with the stick, and Gunning's voice 
sounded abroad — " Are you awake ?" 

" Yes, thank you? 

"Well, good-bye, then, I'm off: the stage 
starts in a few moments, from the office in the 
next street ; good-bye :"" and Gerald, grumbling 
much, was left to try for another sleep, if he 
could get it. 

But he could not. His brain filled again 
with all its vivid thoughts of the previous night, 
and he lay awake till it was time to get up, and 
then, allowing an hour for breakfast, to set out 
to seek Captain Flood. 

He had scarce arisen, when an attendant ask- 
ed admittance to deliver the following note: — 

" MY GOOD FELLOW, 

" The absorbing pleasure of encountering 
you upon Carlisle-bridge, the charms of your 
discourse since, and the serious pressure of pub- 
lic, indeed national events, contemporaneous 
with our meeting, very nearly altogether put 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 9 

it out of my head, I may venture to say, to hint 
or indicate to you, that for the last five days 
your warmest admirer has rested under a sug- 
gestion, or warning, from people who assert pre- 
dominance over him, to march, with his troop, 
to-morrow morning, at six o'clock, unto the re- 
mote and somewhat southern town of , and 

there to take up his quarters, until farther or- 
ders. Now, amiable Blount, as, after my re- 
turn from the interesting mansion of Mr. Gore, 
the hour seems too late to make you happy by 
a personal intimation of my sudden departure 
from Dublin, endeavour slightly to comprehend 
how matters stand, and waft me an imaginative 
adieu. Positively, I am rather led to expect 
that, in a very few days, Captain Rock and 
your poor friend are to become known to each 
other ; therefore, wish me well, and abound 
with affectionate ejaculations for the fame and 
fortunes of, 

M Your exceeding worshipper, 

" Charles Flood." 

" P. S. Permit a light hint to the effect that 
your sudden retreat, this evening, out of the 
b5 



10 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

front drawing-room amazed, grieved, caused to 
be astounded, him who would have died to 
keep you that moment at his side. 

" C. F." 

This absurd note fretted Gerald much ; the 
explanation with its writer, upon which he had 
so surely reckoned, was no longer within his 
reach. Would he follow Flood to the town of 

? He felt strongly tempted to do so. 

But no ; he grew so tired of Ireland and of 
Irish people, that he would content himself with 
writing a letter to his old schoolfellow, merely 
requesting the information he seemed to have a 
right to demand ; then hasten to London ; com- 
municate Augusta's position to her elder brother ; 
determine upon a reply to her strange epistle 
from Lower-Court, (to be jointly written by Lord 
Clangore and himself,) and in the mean time 
Flood's answer would duly arrive by post. 

Accordingly, Gerald sat down, and after some 
caution and effort got through two pages of a 
letter to Captain Flood, the first penmanship 
he had performed since his arm was broken. 
The waiter took charge of it for the post ; 
and, under his directions, Gerald then went 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 11 

out to engage, at the proper office, a berth in 
a packet for England. His late peevishness 
was not soothed by learning that the Holyhead 
packet had sailed many hours before : after 
farther inquiries, he heard that he might pro- 
bably be in time for the Liverpool packet at 
Dunleary. He hastened back to his hotel ; 
settled his not unreasonable bill ; took a hack- 
ney-coach ; bribed the wilfully-cool driver to 
trot his lean horses as fast as they could or 
would be exhorted to go ; and arrived at the 
point required quite in time to have the dili- 
gent vessel pointed out to him, a white speck 
on the verge of the horizon. " Time and tide, 
you know, Sir,' 1 smiled the boatman, intimating 
the old adage ; — " I know, thank you," said 
Gerald, and was driven back to Dublin. 

Now he had another evening to consume in 
the metropolis of Ireland, alone and unassist- 
ed ; for his bile rose against a thought of 
Stephen's-green, or of any one in it, not even 
excepting the most beautiful of " the three most 
beautiful creatures in Dublin. 1 ' At the first 
view of this prospect, Gerald resolved to go to 
sleep, the moment he should get reinstalled in 
his bed-chamber at Morrysson's. 



12 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Gaining the streets of the town, placards of 
the theatrical bill of fare for the evening caught 
his eye, and he changed his mind ; so far, at least, 
as regarded the place for going to sleep ; for 
Gerald had little doubt of being able to enjoy 
a comfortable nap in the back of a box in the 
Dublin Theatre Royal, just as easily as in his 
back bedroom at his hotel. 

Eager to avail himself of the proposed means 
for spending his evening, Gerald resolved to be 
in the theatre at an early hour. Mr. Morrys- 
son's cook, however, and his bottle of claret, 
sufficiently interested him until after the time 
at which, according to announcement, the doors 
were to be opened ; and even then, only for 
consistency's sake, he would not have left his 
warm fire-side and cheering glass, to encounter 
the chances of a half-filled, cold theatre. 

He soon found himself, however, before the 
then imperfected front and piazzas of the new 
theatre, in HawkinVstreet, late the fine pile 
of the Dublin Society, which that economical 
body sold for almost nothing to a London ma- 
nager, while they purchased, for forty thousand 
pounds, from the rich Duke of Leinster, his 
Grace's patrimonial and only town mansion — 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 13 

a building not so well suited to the manifold 
purposes of their institution : and thus, it might 
be said, public patriotism squandered public 
funds, in the one instance, without gaining any 
thing by the profusion ; and private patriotism 
divested itself of a place of address, in the 
second instance, without gaining much more 
than forty thousand pounds by the traffic. 

" Theathricle Obsaarver !" " Theathricle Ob- 
saarver !"" greeted Gerald's ears as he descended 
from his hackney-coach ; and looking around, 
he saw crowds of men, women, girls, and boys, 
flourishing on high the printed penny sheet, 
which, it is worthy of remark, suggested to a 
IiOndon plagiarist the similarly-named, and 
even similarly-mottoed digest of actors and of 
stage concerns, since and at present sold very 
extensively in Bow-street, JBrydges-street, Co- 
vent-garden, and along the Strand, every even- 
ing, from six to seven o'clock ; the only instance, 
perhaps, of English imitation of Dublin lite- 
rature. 

Gaining the bottom of a spacious sweep of 
steps which led up to the first- tier of boxes, 
Gerald's anticipations of a half-empty house 
began to fail him. The stairs were crowded 



14 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

with well-dressed men and women, standing still, 
until those who had preceded them should pass 
the ordeal of the pay-door. He concluded that 
some unusual interest drew a full audience upon 
this particular evening; and looking over his 
late purchase, " The Theathricle Obsaarver," 
found himself borne out in this judgment. In 
fact, the attractions of the evening were numer- 
ous, as he gathered from different paragraphs 
of the dramatic gazette. First of all, (for evi- 
dently it claimed to be so considered,) officers 
of the — th, Flood's regiment, after having 
ensured to themselves exclusion from private 
parties in Dublin by a want, or by the affecta- 
tion of a want of sufficient gallantry, commonly 
called good-manners, had come to the theatre, 
upon previous evenings, to stand on the stairs 
and in the lobbies, for the purpose of torment- 
ing all the Dublin beauties who passed in ; and 
many were the spirited reproofs they had met 
from the high-blooded friends and protectors 
of those beauties, until it became believed, as 
a kind of climax to their own well-known decla- 
rations of, " the — th never dance ;" — " the 
— th never drink lemonade," — &c, that " the 
— th never fight," either ; — and upon the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 15 

present evening, they were expected to be again 
encountered, playing the same stupid pranks, 
and subjecting themselves to the comment of 
being well qualified to insult a lady, but not 
so well disposed to afford explanation or satis- 
faction for the manful feat, or even to feel the 
rejoinder it provoked, in the way that gentle- 
men and soldiers generally feel it. 

Next, upon the list of attractions, were the 
following facts. A London female singer 
(since vanished from theatrical life) had lately 
made her debut before a Dublin audience, and 
quickly became a great and universal favourite. 
It happened that a poetical member of the 
University produced a very tragical tragedy 
(no one was left to give it out for repetition) 
upon the Dublin boards, and when he came to 
take his benefit night, he asked this lady to 
sing some cheering song, after the fall of the 
curtain, to try and do away with the baneful 
effects of his general massacre, but she would 
not. Thereupon, hundreds of his fellow-colle- 
gians proclaimed war against the Prima Donna, 
and repaired to the theatre, each night of her 
performance, armed with bludgeons, bed-posts, 
and, as they boasted, thigh-bones, procured from 



16 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

the College dissecting-room, proposing not only 
to raise such a clatter by means of their lungs, 
and the formidable weapons mentioned, as 
would prevent a note of her songs being heard 
beyond the orchestra, but determined to knock 
down whoever might feel inclined to take the 
lady's part, or to restore quiet and good order 
in the house. And they had been quite suc- 
cessful in both ways, upon the first night of 
the row, and this was to be the second night of 
their classic campaign against the promising 
female apprentice of a speculating music-master. 
The last attraction for the crowds of gentle and 
simple that continued to pour into the theatre, 
was the individual who, a few weeks before, had 
monopolized all the interest of the public ; name- 
ly, the singing-lady, herself; the perpetrator of 
the outrage (which her master would not let 
her avoid) against the dignity and literature of 
T. C. D. 

After making himself acquainted with these 
facts, Gerald moved slowly up-stairs on the 
outskirts of the crowd. He had proceeded 
but a little way, when a group of three officers 
of the — th appeared lounging against the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 17 

balustrades, and peering with half-closed, or 
widely-staring eyes, into the faces of every 
lady they chose to select for such a silly mode 
of annoyance ; while their legs and feet were so 
disposed as to place their spurs in wait for a 
stray flounce, or, perhaps, for an incautious 
ankle. A fashionable and delicate young 
female, who absolutely stumbled over one of 
their protruded limbs, burst into tears as she 
passed them. Gerald's half-Irish blood boiled, 
and he was springing up to say something very 
hostile, when one of the lady's male protectors, 
a young and handsome man, saved him the 
trouble, by stepping back, after he had left his 
party on the lobby. 

" It was you, Sir, who incommoded the lady 
that has just gone up," began the champion, 
taking out his card-case, and holding it in his 
hand, as he confronted the immediate offender 
of the group. 

The person he addressed only looked with 
an affectation of stolid surprise into the answer- 
ing faces of his friends, and then down the 
staircase. 

" You do not deny it ?" resumed the chival- 



18 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

rous catechist, u and I am at liberty to demand 
your apology to that lady, or to term your 
conduct gross and ungentlemanlike ?" 

Still no answer : the dandies began to speak 
with each other upon some indifferent topic, 
while the challenger held out his card. 

" That is my name ; I require yours," he 
continued. The bold dragoon at last raised 
his glass to his eye, and curiously scrutinized 
the card, at some distance. Then he half held 
out the broad top of his cap to receive it : 
the gentleman placed it thereon. He inclined 
the cap sideways: it fell off; and again he 
seemed attentively considering it as it lay on 
the dusty stairs. 

" Puppy !" cried the champion, " 'tis as 
honourable a name as any of your set ; and if 
by this you mean to treat it with disrespect, 
and to refuse your name in return, take from 
me, at least, a name you have earned, — coward ! 
— and let me farther inform you, that if I had 
a whip, I would flog you out of the theatre. 1 ' 

After his piece of indignant oratory, the 
young gentleman went to join his party. Ge- 
rald, following him, passed the gallant exqui- 
sites ; and while neither the reprehended person 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 19 

nor his friends seemed conscious that any thing 
unusual had occurred, this was Gerald's question 
to himself : — " Dare these fools play such a part 
in the lobbies of Coven t-garden or of old Drury ? 
I do not mean, could they do so with impunity, 
or with this stupid affectation of indifference to 
the anger of men every way their equals ; but 
would they have the heart to play it amongst 
Englishmen ? They would not. And why, then, 
amongst Irishmen ? — Because their national con- 
tempt for the country influences their personal 
estimation of its people. Because, high-blooded 
English aristocrats, as they are, all their here- 
ditary egotism fills them with the tranquil pride 
of a superior race of beings. For there can be 
no cowardice in it, after all ; there is not— except 
the cowardice of cruelty ; the idiots did good 
work in the Peninsula, and are ready to uphold 
their character the next opportunity. — Ay, Ire- 
land ! 'tis just an instance of the estimation 
in which you are holden by your neighbours, — 
your half-Irish, as well as your whole Irish, 
population, — and nothing more; if, indeed," 
continued Gerald, unconsciously expressing in 
its first defined shape a notion he had lately been 
vaguely conceiving— "if, indeed, it does not serve 



20 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

to supply an additional reason why all your child- 
ren, of every class and degree, should firmly unite 
in forming a national character, which would pro- 
tect you from such insults; instead of perpe- 
tuating, as they do, the sorry squabbles that de- 
prive you of the one, and ensure you the other." 
A loud uproar in the theatre interrupted 
Gerald's philosophy, as he looked round for 
a box-keeper to show him to a seat. He 
entered a box in the second-tier, of which 
all the places except one or two had pre- 
viously been filled by young men, armed 
with massive sticks, and mostly attired 
in heavy outside coats, buttoned up to their 
chins. They stood on the seats, before him 
and beside him, pounding the floor with their 
cudgels, and groaning, hissing, whooping, and 
roaring, " Off! off," while the young and in- 
teresting object of their dislike went through 
an exaggerated mad-scene on the stage, dressed 
in white, and her long hair let down, in equal 
portions, over each polished shoulder, accor- 
ding to the prescriptive mode of costume for 
female stage-madness, since the early days of 
Belvidera, at least. And, heaven knows she had 
reason to be mad in earnest at the persecu- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 21 

tion she was suffering ; for not a shriek of 
her modulated frenzy reached Gerald's ear ; 
although her widely- strained mouth and roll- 
ing eyes, and the expression of her attitudes — 
(little inferior, he thought, to the graceful 
energy of O'Neil) — plainly told her dramatic 
situation. The boxes opposite to him, at each 
side of him, and indeed the whole of the two- 
shilling-gallery, seemed occupied by young 
gentlemen similarly attired, armed, and en- 
gaged, with those amongst whom Gerald found 
himself; so that it was a grand, stunning, 
fiendish kind of uproar, kept up without an 
instant's abatement or variation. 

The performance appeared to be an English 
translation of a regular Italian opera. A knight, 
the hero of the piece, personated, Gerald be- 
lieved, by Mr. Horn, came out to relieve the 
mad heroine of her soliloquy, and began to 
sing to her. She replied, in all the natural 
effect of dialogue regulated by quavers and 
semiquavers ; still the noise went on vigo- 
rously ; not a sound could be caught from 
either. The knight lost his temper. With a 
sudden stamp, he wheeled round to the audi- 
ence, taking the lady by the hand ; and then 



22 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

he pulled off his fine helmet, and his lips 
moved rapidly, as if making a speech. Treble 
thunders roared through the house. He stamped 
again and led the lady off. 

The scene changed, new performers appeared, 
and at length, as if to rest themselves, and hus- 
band their powers for the re-entrance of the 
poor heroine of the evening, the champions of 
Trinity College literature grew a little quiet. 
In the pause, Gerald critically took a survey of 
the house. It reminded him of Covent-Garden,on 
a diminished scale ; with the addition of wreaths 
of shamrock running round the proscenium, and 
round the motto " Ceadmille phalteagh" that 
is, (translating from the pure Irish,) "a hundred 
thousand welcomes 11 — the motto tastefully put 
up by a cockney manager in something of the spi- 
rit of Will Boniface's welcomes to his guests, — 
" or," continued Gerald, pursuing this thought, 
" if not so stupidly conceived, it must have been 
conceived in humbug towards an Irish audience, 
who, according to this clever manager, or his 
cabinet, are eager to give three cheers for his 
hospitality, after purchasing it at the door. Yes, 
so it is ; every hoaxer of Ireland, and of Irish 
feeling, from the meanest to the highest, whe- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 23 

ther he speculate on pounds, shillings, and 
pence, or upon servile hands and hearts, thinks 
he has nought to do but to stick a shamrock in 
his hat, or give them a dinner or a dance, or 
promise to drink their healths in a hot tumbler of 
whiskey punch, and they will roar for him, he is 
sure, or fight for him, — yea, with one another, 
if need be, — and ask no better sport. And is not 
this, Ireland, another instance of the estimate of 
your claims in ' the sister island ?' And does it 
not contain another appeal to you, so to conso- 
lidate and sober down your aggregate character, 
as to present a moral front which such sneers as 
these durst not venture to sport with?" 

Gerald was again interrupted in his theories. 
While scarce a female of any rank appeared in 
the second-tier of boxes, the dress-circle bloomed 
and sparkled with Dublin beauty and fashion, 
attended by peaceable friends of the other sex. 
From the back of his noisy box, he saw into the 
back of one of those more orderly ones, and, 
over the heads of four rows of people, softened, 
and almost visionary, in the shade and the dis- 
tance, saw, too, a face which riveted his glance, 
and abstracted his attention from every other 
object and occurrence. The lady had turned 



24 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

her head, as if chidingly, towards that part of 
the house which again began to distract her 
study of the stage. Gerald quickly glanced to 
the features of her seeming companions on the 
same row, but none of them resembled those of 
the Gore family; " although there sits," he said, 
" ' the flower of her garden,' as Flood satirically 
called Maria, looking much more unlike herself, 
and much more like her fancied double, than 
ever before I thought she did." 

Two places were empty on her row, and she 
and her unknown friends sat a little parted from 
each other : the box-door opened, and three 
of the — th, perhaps the same individuals Ge- 
rald had observed on the stairs, entered, and 
straddling over the seat between her and them 
stood up before the whole party. An elderly 
gentleman, next to Gerald's " flower of her gar- 
den," arose at the same time, and seemed warm- 
ly expostulating with the intruders, who took 
no notice of his energy, except by turning round, 
and simultaneously mounting their eye-glasses, 
to pour in a volley of investigation almost close 
at the lady's nose. A cry of " shame ! shame !" 
escaped from the pit. Gerald loudly joined it. 
His belligerent box-companions, still at leisure 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 25 

to engage in any desultory row, during the ab- 
sence of the Prima Donna from the stage, more 
loudly seconded him. 

*' Turn them out!" continued "the many- 
headed monster of the pit." 

" Turn them out!" responded Gerald's allies; 
and, in the fervour of his indignation, " Turn 
them out !" cried Gerald himself. 

The lady got up, along with her party, and 
was the first to move towards the door, when it 
appeared that, from accident or design, a spur 
had grappled her by the flounce, and Gerald 
understood her gesticulation to be the accompa- 
niment of a request to its martial proprietor, to 
stoop and free her from the unwilling alliance thus 
formed between them. But even to this appeal 
the dandy and his companions remained ada- 
mant ; and while the disapprobation of the whole 
house gained an angry climax, Gerald burst out 
of his box, followed by the cheering crowd who 
had occupied it with him. 

In his haste, and his ignorance of the lobbies 
and staircases, he soon found himself alone, 
running along an empty and dark passage. It 
took some time to find his way back again to 
the lobbies, and still more to discover the box 

VOL. III. C 



26 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

he was so anxious to gain. A rumble of dis- 
cordant voices assisted him, however, on his 
way. He followed the sound, and now heard it 
illustrated by more than one hard knock and 
vehement thump. In a few seconds, his al- 
lies rushed past him, huddling the — th heroes 
towards the entrance to the theatre. He al- 
lowed them to pour on, and arrived at the box. 
Neither the lady who had caused the commo- 
tion, nor any of her friends, were to be seen 
in it. 

He hastened down to the hall ; many groups 
of ladies and gentlemen stood outside the en- 
trance-door, as if waiting for their carriages ; 
the ladies muffled in shawls or silk cloaks. A 
distant tumult at the extreme end of the piazza, 
seemed to indicate that " the Collegians'" were 
accomplishing their purpose of ejecting the — th 
men into the very street. And yet a single 
officer of that gallant regiment stood quietly at 
the backs of one of the groups that had attract- 
ed Gerald's notice, outside the door: and the 
person he seemed most anxious to be near to, 
was a lady muffled and hooded in a brown silk 
mantle. Gerald also stepped closer, and looked 
on observantly. This lady, of all her party, ap- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 27 

peared young; notwithstanding that her cloak 
disguised her figure, the air and character of 
youth played about her ; and she certainly 
leaned on the arm of the elderly gentleman who 
had remonstrated with the exquisites in the 
box. Gerald became still more attentive. 

In a short time he could perceive that the 
officer said something in a low tone at the lady's 
ear, to which her only reply seemed to be a 
closer muffling of her cloak. 

" If you are not known to that lady, you can 
have no right to address her, Sir," whispered 
Gerald, in his turn, at the ear of the supposed 
offender. The officer slightly started perhaps ; 
but, without a reply, quite turned his back 
upon his monitor. Gerald stood still, to note 
what effect his warning would produce. After 
an instant's pause, the military gallant cautiously 
moved his head, as if to observe the features 
and person of his self-constituted warder. Ge- 
rald looked away, not wishing to appear con- 
scious of the scrutiny. The next moment he 
resumed his watchfulness, and saw the officer 
gently tap the lady on the shoulder. At this 
he lost all self-command ; sprang to her side, 
and crying, " Desist, Sir P* raised his arm to 
c 2 



28 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

push the dragoon back. With the hand unoc- 
cupied by her elderly protector, she seized Ge- 
rald's wrist, whispering — " Arretez vous dans le 
nom (Tune des amies de lajeune et belle Justine.' 1 '' 

At the same instant, the officer of the — th 
turned, with a slight affected laugh, into the 
theatre, and, as he passed the lamp over the 
door, Gerald was almost sure he recognized 
Flood's features. Indignant, for many reasons, 
with his old class-mate, Gerald would have 
sprung after him, but that a carriage drove up 
close to " the friend of the young and beautiful 
Justine ; 11 and as she and her party prepared to 
get into it, he was prompted, by a still more 
lively interest, to venture a few words with the 
lady before her departure. " I hope that 
gentleman's rudeness has not much shocked 
you, 1 ' he said, still at her side, but deprived by 
the hood of her cloak from observing her fea- 
tures, which he was anxious to see. 

She answered in French, betraying, as her 
first French sentence had done, every tone o. 
the familiar of P£re la Chaise. 

" Fear nothing on my account — indeed, you 
had little to fear." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 23 

" Perhaps nothing, Madam : perhaps my in- 
terference alone has offended you." 

" Impossible; it was well meant." 

" But not as much calculated to please as the 
freedom it challenged," sulked Gerald. 

" Quite as much.' 1 

" Allow me to suppose, then, that the gentle- 
man has not the honour of being an object of 
great interest to l the friend of the young and 
beautiful Justine ?' " 

° He is nothing to me."" 

" Charming Maria I 11 continued Gerald, grow- 
ing ardent, in rather a desperate kind of way, 
as she prepared to mount the carriage - step, 
assisted by her elderly friend ; " answer me one 
other question, — give me time for one other." 

•' Though your mode of address is very 
strange, I will gratify you :" she spoke a word 
to her companion, and both stood still. 

" Why did you hesitate last night to reply 
to my message by Flood? — and what did you 
mean by vexing me about some puzzle or other, 
which he and you seemed to agree you had got 
me into P* 

After a considerate pause, she said — " Upon 



30 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

the whole of that subject I refuse to say any 
thing for the present." 

" But must you be as silent to-morrow ?" 

" I must." 

" Well, promise me only this, — promise to 
speak French to me to-morrow, if we should 
meet." 

" Again I am bound to answer — No ; — and 
now good-night." 

" Good-night, Lady of Riddles," said Gerald, 
taking her hand to assist her into the carriage ; 
and though his words were bitter, he uncon- 
sciously hazarded a very gentle pressure. 

u Good-night, Thane of Cawdor" she re- 
joined. 

The carriage drove off, while Gerald stood 
gazing after it in no slight emotion. Two dis- 
tinct feelings agitated him. His fancy or his 
vanity had suggested that, as Flood would say, 
the very most remote indication of a return was 
vouchsafed to his pressure ; and now he chilled 
at the thought that her quotation might mean a 
recurrence to her former prognostic in another 
country. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 31 



CHAPTER II. 

ABANDONING the idea of waiting at the door 
to meet Flood coming out of the theatre, which 
he had at first proposed to do, Gerald hastened 
to his hotel, and called for the English papers 
of that day, as also for the file of the last week, 
and with trembling hands looked over the an- 
nouncements of recent deaths. Nothing ap- 
peared to confirm his suspicions, or to bear 
out the sibyl-like salutation just conferred upon 
him, in the light, at least, in which he inter- 
preted it. And now he asked himself how he 
could for a moment have permitted the allusion 
to disturb him. When it had before been more 
broadly made, his brother's own letter exposed 
its absurdity ; and although sufficient time had 
since elapsed to allow of a possible return of 
Lord Clangore's distemper, without Gerald's 
being advised of the misfortune, still he could 



32 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

not contemplate any such result as that in- 
sinuated in the application to him of the wierd 
woman's first augury to Macbeth. Or, if his 
brother had indeed experienced a dangerous 
relapse, although the persons who surrounded 
him in London should not, in that case, know 
whither to direct a letter to Gerald, surely they 
would have sent one to Augusta; and she, 
aware of his continued sojourn in Dublin, would 
as surely have communicated the event to him ; 
and since she had not done so, she could have 
received no such intimation ; consequently there 
was no cause to render necessary such a one to 
her ; and, again, no reason for Gerald's fretting 
himself about the silly, if not heartless and cruel 
words which had at first startled him so much. 

He dismissed the matter from his mind, and 
amid a bustle of exceedingly vague and per- 
plexing notions of the lady who had given 
him so great a shock, fell asleep at a late 
hour. 

It was past noon when he awoke next day ; 
and, as had been the case the previous morning, 
an attendant knocked to give him a note ; Ge- 
rald asked from whom it came ? The man did 
not know. A country-looking woman, young, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 33 

and apparently a servant, had just left it below, 
without any explanation. Gerald stared at the 
superscription ; it was written in stiff characters, 
and slanted towards the corners of the note. 
He opened the singular document, and recog- 
nized the hand, or, at all events, the kind of 
hand, in which the mysterious letter addressed 
to him in the Rockite cabin on the coast had 
been written. 

" You did very wrong in not following my 
advice when I wrote to you before. Your 
stealthy escape from the cabin, and your en- 
counter with the wounded lad, placed you in 
great peril, and might have been attended with 
the worst consequences. Had you remained 
quiet, according to my directions, until three 
o'clock that day, the friend I promised you 
would have appeared, and ensured you some 
unexpected happiness ; besides, your arm need 
not have been broken, nor your mind since 
tantalized with uncertainty and doubt, on va- 
rious points. 

•* I now write to offer you new advice, whicn 
I hope you will more closely attend to, for your 
own sake. By the day after to-morrow some- 
c 5 



84> THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

thing may become known to you which must 
compel you to visit your sister at Lower- 
Court. If, however, you shall not be so com- 
pelled, do not hesitate, longer than that day, 
to repair to her, notwithstanding. Your hap- 
piness as well as hers demands the measure : 
and, for your farther inducement, learn, that by 
obeying these commands, all your present mys- 
teries are to be cleared up ; every one you want 
to see, to know, and to comprehend, placed 
fully under your observation ; and some indi- 
viduals whom you do not want either to see 
or to know, introduced to your unbounded 
love and confidence. 

" Meantime, hearken to my farther injunc- 
tions upon other matters. While you remain in 
Dublin, do not repeat to any living creature 
the questions you asked, last night, under the 
piazzas at the theatre : do not directly, or in- 
directly, allude to the subject they concerned. 
Much depends on that : when you re-appear 
to-morrow (for you cannot to-day) in Stephen's- 
green, speak, act, and even look, as if no such 
topic had ever interested your mind. In fact, 
you will be allowed no opportunity to behave 
otherwise ; and if you show a disposition to do 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 35 

so, prepare yourself to brave frowns and indig- 
nation which you cannot withstand. 

" I would counsel you on yet another point. 
You are angry with a very old friend, for many 
reasons; but particularly because you think 
he invented a story about leaving Dublin, yes- 
ter morning, while you saw him late last 
night. But on this account, at least, restore 
him to your good opinion. When he wrote to 
inform you of his intended route to the town 

of , he really was under orders to repair 

thither ; within an hour of the time at which 
he should have been in his saddle, contrary 
orders reached him not to move till this morn- 
ing; but now, indeed, he is on his march; I 
am authority for the fact. 

" Farewell. As you love your sister or your- 
self, implicitly obey the commands of this letter : 
commands, I say ; for she who saved you from 
the waves, who housed you, clothed you, gave 
you to eat and to drink, and smoothed your 
pillow, may surely use the word. 11 

Well ! if Gerald had ever before been in- 
terested by a letter, this one interested him. 
Who was its writer ? Certainly the individual 



S6 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

to whom, it could not be denied, he stood so 
much indebted for food, shelter, raiment, and 
good wine : and, as certainly, that individual 
must be Maria Gore: because with her he had 
conversed under the piazzas, and now no one 
else could allude to the fact. He remembered 
that the young lady had spent some time with 
the Knightlies; and during the latter part of 
that visit she had encountered him, no doubt, at 
the head of her Amazons, upon the shingles. 
His former notion, that his protectress was a 
female of humble rank in life, now gave way, 
not only under these argumentative associations, 
but also on account of the style and diction 
of the letter he held in his hand, which, not- 
withstanding the successful attempt to vulgarise 
the writing, bespoke a higher order of mind. 
He had caught a glimpse of her face on the 
shingles, then, although during his relapse into 
faintness, she afterwards contrived, obviously 
through motives of delicacy, to stay out of his 
view. And this explained the incongruity of 
his getting such a costly supper under the roof 
of the miserable cabin : — she had provided it. 
It also determined the question of his having 
first met her in France; for when he recognized 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 37 

her features on the moonlight strand, he did not 
then know her as Maria Gore, but as the lady 
of Pere la Chaise. But at the last conclusion 
offered by all his reasoning, Gerald's vanity 
sent most pleasing tingles through his frame. 
If any thing was evident in the whole case, it 
was this — Maria Gore loved him. 

No matter about her little evasions, and her 
little puzzles, (and Gerald now forgave her 
them all, nay even the cruel allusions to Lord 
Clangore,) from first to last her acts showed an 
affectionate interest in him and his concerns. 
And for many of those acts he owed her much. 
She had very probably saved his life. And 
must he not feel unboundedly grateful? Must 
he not warmly return her very flattering pre- 
ference? Nay, he did return it. He loved 
her dearly and deeply ; and he would prove 
that he did. He would snatch her, (poor, poor 
Maria !) he would snatch her, at once, from the 
domestic misery that surrounded her. He 
would request permission of Mr. Gore to ad- 
dress her ; yes, that very day ; Heaven alone 
could tell how long she might have a paternal 
roof to cover her head. Allowing for what- 
ever little harmless mysteries she chose to keep 



38 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

him in, he agreed, literally, to observe, indeed, 
her written commands of that morning; still, 
without breaking any of them, he might surely 
unbosom himself to her father. Oh, that 
dear, pressure of her hand at the carriage- 
door last night ! But hold ; — " of her hand ?" 
queried Gerald. And he got angry with him- 
self for the evident absurdity of doubting for a 
moment that it was Maria Gore he had seen at 
a distance in the theatre, and afterwards spoken 
with under the piazza. 

" I wish, however, I could ascertain two 
simple points connected with that last night 1 s 
adventure," added Gerald. — 

Mr. Frederic Augustus Gore was announced. 

" Now I can be satisfied at once," he re- 
sumed. 

The smiling and gracious young gentleman 
entered. He had been specially sent by his 
father and mother, to hope for the pleasure 
and honour of Gerald's presence to-morrow 
morning, at 's church, during the perform- 
ance of the marriage ceremony between Sir 
John Lumley and Miss Gore, and afterwards 
at breakfast in Stephen's-green. 

*' Miss Flint, you are a witch," cogitated 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 39 

Gerald, after he had expressed his ready assent 
to their polite invitation, and offered his best 
congratulations ; " and," he continued, " if you 
prove as correct in other good auguries, poor 
Gore will be soon relieved of some unpleasant 
inmates, at present in his house, and poor 
Maria taken out of immediate jeopardy." 

Mr. Frederic Augustus assured his "dear 
Mr. Blount," that his father would have per- 
sonally waited upon him, but that the bustle 
of the whole house, preparing for the sudden 
event, (it was, indeed, sudden and unexpected, 
but Sir John would have his way,) did not 
allow of the absence of any member of the 
family, save his useless self, Mr. Frederic 
Augustus. 

Gerald knew all about that. He also called 
to mind the warning contained in the note he 
had just read, to the effect that it would be 
impossible for him to re-appear in StephenV 
green that day, which seemed now fully ex- 
plained, by the fact of Mr. Gore's family, Maria 
particularly, being too busily engaged to receive 
the visit of an acquaintance. And as this could 
have been anticipated only by a member of that 
family, Gerald here arrived at another proof of 



40 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

the identity of his correspondent ; and in the 
course of conversation with his visitor, he pro- 
posed the intended questions which were to 
afford him downright certainty. 

" He had been to the theatre last night," he 
said, " and thought he saw Miss Maria Gore in 
the house ?" 

" Yes, 11 her brother answered, " Maria had 
gone in the vain hope of hearing the new 
singer. 1 * 

" With friends, or with her own family ?" 
again asked Gerald. 

" With friends ; none of her own family ac- 
companied her. 11 

" And, I believe, I afterwards saw her step 
into a carriage at the door, 11 pursued Gerald, 
exceedingly pleased : " Excuse me, but I am 
curious enough to ask if you happen to recol- 
lect whether or not your sister went out in a 
cloak last night, and what was its colour ?" 

" Let me see,"" paused Mr. Frederic Au- 
gustus, smiling rather expressively — " yes ; I led 
her to her friend's carriage, when they called to 
take her up, and I am quite sure she had on a 
cloak, a silk one, light brownish. 11 

Gerald, his eyes sparkling, begged to thank 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 41 

his young friend very much ; he was exceed- 
ingly obliged to him. 

" And how well your sister speaks French," 
he resumed, extending his questions to a point 
he had not at first thought of approaching. 

" 'Tis said so, by good judges, 1 ' assented Mr. 
Frederic Augustus. 

" And I venture to pique myself upon being 
one," said Gerald ; " she must have got her 
accent in Paris, surely ?" 

" Why, yes; Maria was in Paris for some 
time, certainly ; though with a set that her fa- 
mily did not wish she should accompany thi- 
ther, or, indeed, anywhere — the Knightlies." 

" Oh, confound the Knightlies ! no matter 
about them — but was this very long ago ?" 

" Not at all : just before, and indeed, at the 
time of Bonaparte's return from Elba." 

Gerald shook his young friend's hand— nei- 
ther he nor that young friend clearly knowing 
why — and then he professed himself immensely 
glad of his visit, on its own account, and hoped 
they might know each other better, and like 
each other better ; and as this was so busy a 
day in Stephen's-green, and the ladies neces- 
sarily closeted and plotting together, and Mr. 



42 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Frederick Augustus, as he had himself de- 
clared, quite useless in their councils, perhaps 
he would do Gerald the very great pleasure of 
taking dinner with him. 

" Certainly; 1 ' Mr. Frederick Augustus felt 
much gratified at the prospect of cultivating 
his dear Mr. Blount's acquaintance, and he 
would only just step back to tell his friends at 
home of his good fortune, and afterwards get 
through some few calls, and then he would 
be Gerald's own for the evening. 

They parted upon this happy understanding. 

To do fit honour to the palate of his very 
agreeable brother-in-law elect, Gerald sum- 
moned the waiter with his yard-long dinner- 
bill, and after solemn and acute discussion with 
that accomplished counsellor, ordered an ele- 
gant and ample board. At the appointed hour 
the young gentlemen sat down to dinner. Mr. 
Frederic Augustus praised the dishes in a 
knowing connoisseur style, and the wines com- 
manded his still more decided eulogy, and, 
somewhat to Gerald's surprise, (at first,) his 
more substantial patronage, too. But Gerald's 
new feelings, and his hospitable responsibilities, 
together with the gradual influence of the good 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 48 

liquor itself, soon made him forget his friend's 
liberal bumpers in his own. Upon that memo- 
rable evening, he drank half a bottle of sherry, 
half a bottle of champagne, and two glasses of 
port, during dinner, and his fair share of five 
bottles of claret afterwards — ten times more 
wine than he had ever imbibed at a sitting in 
his life before ; and it followed, in course, that, 
about twelve o'clock, he had opened his inmost 
heart and soul to his dearest friend ; obtained 
his generous wishes for success with his beloved 
sister ; filled a bumper to her health ; then to 
each other's immutable friendship; then, greatly 
to Gerald's sympathetic joy, Mr. Frederic Au- 
gustus proposed another bumper to Augusta 
Blount ; then disclosed an attachment for that 
enchanting creature which had long lain in his 
bosom, unbreathed to a human being in the 
world ; upon which Gerald pledged him his 
hand, that if the heavenly Maria only consented 
to smile upon him, he should in return have his, 
Gerald's, best word with Augusta ; and lastly, 
they embraced, and the waiter entering, found 
them shedding tears. 

Before this, however, Gerald had opened his 
purse, as well as his heart, to his dear Frede- 



44 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

rick, just to enable him to get rid of a cursed 
dun, whom he did not wish his father should 
know any thing about : and when the young 
gentleman delicately accused himself of trespass- 
ing in such a kind of way, his host, with a hic- 
cup or two, spread out on the table the remain- 
ing portion of the bundle of notes Flood had 
lent him, and extending his arms, and sitting 
back in his chair, cried — " Have all / have, my 
dear Gore ! How can you — (hie) — make one 
word of this trash — these — (hie) — these paltry 
rags between us ?" 

To his regret, however, though not to his 
disadvantage, his dear Gore really would not be 
Gerald's debtor for more than about fifty pounds, 
along with what he had already borrowed ; and, 
sighing loudly over the hesitations and degene- 
racy of the too-cautious friendships of the day, 
Gerald put up his diminished roll of " paltry 
rags.'"' 

How the night ended he could not tell. Short- 
ly after the scene of tears, Mr. Frederic Au- 
gustus, his sister, the decanters, the candles, 
and every other person and thing, faded from 
Gerald's mind and vision, and he awoke at an 
early hour of the morning to groan and shudder, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 45 

in reality, over his errors and debauch of the 
night, and to detest Mr. Frederick Augustus, 
who, he now well remembered, had not been 
half as intoxicated as himself, and yet who had 
declared a deathless attachment for Lady Au- 
gusta Blount, and borrowed about a hundred 
pounds of her brother. Burning blushes cover- 
ed Gerald's cheeks, when he remembered that he 
had not only permitted such a person to pro- 
claim his speculating love for his sister, but had 
actually engaged to urge the young gentleman's 
suit with Augusta. 

As to his own passion for Miss Maria Gore, 
irresistibly, though very unreasonably, that also 
seemed to wane in proportion to his change of 
sentiments towards her clever brother. And 
at first, such was the case without any seem- 
ing provocation ; soon after, however, Gerald 
thought he discovered a marked blemish in her 
character, and one that called upon him to cor- 
rect his extravagant admiration for the young 
lady — " Which was not admiration, after all,'" he 
continued, " but a kind of fidgety interest, pro- 
duced by a doubt — a — I don't know what." 
Here, however, was Gerald's demur. Maria 
Gore's father and mother were surrounded by 



46 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

dreadful embarrassments ; every article of fur- 
niture in their house was watched by bailiffs, 
under execution ; the unfortunate Gore, himself, 
was watched by another bailiff, after having 
been arrested ; nothing could present a more 
afflicting picture of domestic misery ; nothing 
could be more calculated to appeal to the feel- 
ings of a child, particularly of a daughter ; in 
the midst of such circumstances, and aware of 
them, as of course, she was, — how, then, could 
Maria Gore exhibit, not merely smiles and 
cheerfulness, but the almost levity of which 
Gerald now accused her ? — how could she find 
heart, (if heart formed any portion of her,) 
to set Captain Flood upon drawing caricatures ; 
to league with him in laughing at the massacre- 
panic of the night before the last ; to titter with 
him, in the back drawing-room, over the notion 
of whatever silly "puzzles" she contemplated to- 
wards himself, Gerald ? Did not all this pro- 
claim a want of feeling, of amiability, of con- 
duct, which must totally unfit her for fireside 
happiness ? 

But what was Gerald to do? — By his pro- 
fessions to Mr. Frederic Augustus, at least, he 
stood committed. Nay, if his memory proved 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 47 

not very treacherous, he feared he had even 
gone so far as to engage his dear Fred, to 
open the affair to his father. And if the will- 
ing Mercury only recollected things as well as 
Gerald did, (of the converse of which there 
seemed no reasonable apprehension,) it would 
scarce be doubted that, before this time, he had 
faithfully discharged his trust. 

Gerald was interrupted by a statement from 
his attendant to the following effect. " Mr. and 
Mrs. Blake, having engaged themselves to ride 

to 's church in Sir John Lumley's carriage, 

had sent theirs, with their best compliments, to 
wait on the Honourable Gerald Blount ;" and it 
was at the door. He hastened down-stairs. 

The message seemed to import that he should 
find the carriage empty : when he got into it, 
however, this was not the case. Miss Flint sat 
in the corner next the door, holding herself 
back, as if to escape his notice until he should 
enter ; and then, gleeishly sinking her head 
between her shoulders, and holding up her fin- 
ger to her nose, she giggled out — " Think of 
this ! — we two going to church together ! and 
nobody the wiser, only Sam, on the box !" 

Gerald, wishing her in his heart any where 



48 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

else, expressed much gratitude to Mr. and Mrs. 
Blake for having provided him with so agree- 
able a travelling companion. 

" My gracious! you 're out ; 'tisn't that at all ; 
how slow you are at a joke ! No; but 'twill make 
you die laughing ! I was tramping along in my 
clogs — see \" — she held them dangling in her hand 
— " for every body knows /'m not worth a car- 
riage, and for that good reason don't sport one, 
not like other people that do, and are no more 
worth it than myself — think of that ! — but on I 
was tramping, and not liking the walk, (for the 
streets are quite puddle,) when the Blakes' car- 
riage passed me, empty; and after bidding Sam 
good-morrow, and asking him to stop a bit, he 
tells me they had sent it for you ; and then, 
says I to myself, wait now, till I have a joke 
out of Mr. Blount, and a laugh at 'em all, in 
spite of 'em ; for you must know, they all told 
me I couldn't have a seat to church this morn- 
ing in any of their carriages or things. Between 
ourselves, they're beginning to cut me, for a 
reason they have, — just for fear, I'd cut them" 
(winking) ; " and besides, they suspect I know 
a little too much, maybe; but no matter ; all's 
one for that : who '11 care most about it, I 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 49 

wonder ? And so, * Sam, good boy,' says I, 
* this is lucky for me ; you see what a puddle 
the flags are ; and Mr. Blount is my very parti- 
cular friend, and will be very glad to find me 
in the carriage, instead of finding it empty ; so 
let me in ;' and so he did, and I bid him for his 
life to say nothing to you till you made me out 
yourself — hi, hi ! — and here I am, after making 
you stare like any thing ; and going off to see 
dear Selina married, in Mrs. Blake's fine car- 
riage, that she would as soon see down the Liflfy 
as me in it. I told my mind about Blake re- 
fusing to wag a finger for poor dear Gore, and 
she heard of it, and hates me like pison ; let 
her ; here are you and I, snug, whether she does 
or no — hi, hi! — think of that I" 

During the short pause that ensued, Gerald, 
too chivalrously deeming himself called on to 
say something, very disingenuously declared 
that Miss Flint only spoke the fact when she 
assured Sam how happy he would be to meet 
her. 

" You needn't tell me — I know it very well. 
I liked you the first time we met, in London, 
and I saw you liked me ; and I have shown how 
much I think of you since, depend on it ; you 

vol. III. D 



50 THE ANGLO IRISH. 

know more of my mind on a great many things 
than a great many people that I have been 
brought up with ; and why shouldn't you ? 
Nothing could be handsomer than your dona- 
tion to our society, — that is so sure you '11 be such 
a friend to it in every way ; to say nothing of 
your birth and your talents, and your being a 
good and a clever creature, entirely ; — and so, 
I made little ado in opening my mind to you 
the other night, just to give you a hint, for your 
good, that would show you what kind of people 
you got in with here in Dublin ; — and didn't 
I ? And was I much out in what I said about 
that snappish, hoity-toity lady, Selina ; and her 
old Adonis, Sir John, eh ?" 

" Certainly not ; your penetration quite sur- 
prised me" replied Gerald. 

" Well ; wait, now ; I have another little 
whisper to give you, that I got, last night, from 
a little bird of mine. The last time I opened my 
mind to you, I told you, you know, that poor 
Gore would not give Selina to Lumley, unless 
Sir John settled as much on her as would take 
him out of all his troubles ; and sure enough 
the fond old creature has done what they asked 
of him, and, so far, so good ; but would you 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 51 

believe it ? It 's now another point if Selina will 
do as much as her father hopes, though neither 
her father nor mother suspects any thing, nor 
no one else but you and me, and my little bird 
that I told you of: only this much I just say ; 
that, whether there has been any underhand 
agreement between her and her future lord and 
master — who is no fool, after all, except on her 
account ;— or whether it has come into her head, 
of her own accord, that his estate can't afford 
such a pull on it, and leave them as well off as 
the pride of her heart wants to be, for the here- 
after ; however this may turn out, in the long- 
run, I can tell you what (as I said) her own fa- 
ther couldn't tell you ; and this is it ;— ever 
since the marriage settlements were drawn up, 
Selina has employed an attorney of her own, 
under the rose ; and he has been down to visit 
two of Sir John's estates, and afterwards was 
closeted with her, incog. ; and, last night, my 
sister's husband told my sister, and my sister 
herself told me, that he met this attornev at 
dinner yesterday, and sat beside him ; and, as 
they are great friends, if the cat wasn't quite 
let out of the bag, one of her paws was; — 
and I M make no wonder at your hearing some- 
D 9, 



52 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

thing in an hour or two that will look very odd 
to you ; only, I am sure of one thing ; — every 
body will do their best to get poor Gore out of 
the clutches of the bailiff that is now taking 
care of him, before the rest of the creditors send 
in detainers ; indeed, so far, the business has 
been well managed ; and then, if he is made a 
free man, and gets as much as takes him and 
his poor dear wife, and their idle son, to France, 
out of harm's way, and receives yearly remit- 
tances afterwards — to no great amount to be 
sure, as France is a cheap place*; — and the house, 
and the furniture, ay, and the carriage too, left 
to pay off the present executions ; why, if this 
is done for him, what need he complain, after 
all ? Tell me that ! People must take care of 
themselves, you know ; and he ever and always 
was an improvident man to his poor family, and 
are they to suffer for him ?" 

f You have made no arrangement for Mr. 
Gore's youngest daughter, Miss Flint." 

"Ah, my poor Maria ! what is she to do? 
No, indeed ; I never thought of her going to 
France with them ; I don't think they 'd take 
her ; they don't like her ; neither father, nor 
mother, nor brother, nor sister likes her ; they 
never did ; she has something in her quite dif- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 53 

ferent from them all. And then she took up 
opinions of her own, lately, on the Castle poli- 
tics, and the people of the country — the Pa- 
pists, and such poor creatures, you know — and 
used to speak them out plump, no matter who 
happened to be by; and got in with the Knight- 
lies — a bad set, though they have your poor 
sister among them — don't be angry with me; — 
and worst of all, was better liked, for the last 
year or so, by the men, than Selina; a grand 
offence; though how could she help it, I'd be glad 
to know ? They kept her back long enough, in 
all reason, till she was one-and-twenty ; though 
I don't say that putting forward your little 
frumpish misses of from sixteen to nineteen is 
doing a wise thing, and therefore won't blame 
her mother and sisters for that ; not a bit ; but, 
as I was saying, one way or another poor Ma- 
ria was the black sheep of the family, and no 
one envied her life among them ; indeed 'twas 
well known that they never made her one in 
any of their secrets ; never opened their mind to 
her ; and I shouldn't at all wonder if, at this 
moment, she is quite ignorant of the bailiffs 
being in the house — and — " 

" Indeed !" interrupted Gerald ; " I 'm very 
glad of that." 



54; THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" You are ! why so ?" 

" I 'm very much surprised, I mean ; 'tis so 
very strange." 

" Is that all ? my goodness gracious, if you 
didn't make me wonder ! but no, indeed ; de- 
pend upon it, they keep all these things from 
poor Maria, fearing she might blab before peo- 
ple she sometimes goes out with in Dublin, 
against their will ; maybe that 's the reason." 

" People her family do not know ?" inquir- 
ed Gerald, with an object in his question. 

" Yes, the Knightlies and their friends." 

" Pray, Miss Flint, can you say if she has 
lately been out with any of that set ?" 

" Yes — let me see — yes, to be sure ; the 
Knightlies themselves were in town until the 
evening before the last, and she went to the 
theatre with some of them." 

" Then," thought Gerald, " the elderly gen- 
tleman upon whose arm I saw her leaning must 
have been my great fright ; it is strange I 
should not have recognized him ; meeting him 
but once, and so long ago, however, may have 
quite put him out of my head ; though I don't 
see how that could distinctly happen, either." 

" But if Miss Maria Gore does not accom- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 55 

pany her father and mother to France, what is 
she to do, Miss Flint ?" 

" God knows, poor thing ! maybe her sis- 
ters, much as they dislike her, will have her 
from one to another, till she gets settled ; they 
can't leave her unprotected, for their own sakes ; 
and then she has other friends amongst us all, 
and we won't see her badly off, if it comes to 
that pass. I always liked Maria better than 
Selinaor the other, though they didn't think so; 
because they being her elders, and out before 
her, one was obliged to be civil to them, just 
to keep the family on one's hands ; but I did, 
indeed ; ay, in spite of her dry jokes on myself, 
sometimes ; poor dear girl, she had no harm in 
'em — but, gracious me !" half screamed Miss 
Flint, as the carriage stopped, " here we are at 
the church-door, and every one gone in before 
us, and we '11 be too late for dear Selina, as sure 
as a pin — think of that P" 

Gerald, ashamed of his situation, held Miss 
Flint's clogs at the carriage-door, as, tucking up 
her garments, she bustled down. And he en- 
tered the church with a perilous return of all 
his interest towards Maria Gore, joined to the 
deepest sympathy for her sad and peculiar po- 



56 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

sition. If Miss Flint's divining powers were 
still to be relied on, she stood acquitted of his 
late accusations of want of filial, indeed of com- 
mon feeling, and, at the same time, exposed to 
a future of wretched humiliation and suffering. 
" What ! Maria Gore thrown upon the benevo- 
lence of her estranged sisters, and of Miss Flint ! 
— but, tush," he continued ; " as yet this is all 
according to Miss Flint : let us see." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 57 



CHAPTER III. 

A scenic description of Miss Gore's mar- 
riage with Sir John Lumley is not to be ex- 
pected. Abler pens than mine have often dwelt 
upon the interesting incidents which character- 
ise such a tender and awful ceremony. A few 
things connected with it shall, however, be no- 
ticed. 

Mr. Gore stood by, leaning on the arm of 
(as he accounted for him) " a distant relation 
who had been all his life at sea, till he came 
very suddenly to visit him and his family ; a 
most excellent creature, and well esteemed in 
his profession, although its mannerism followed 
him into society, and made him a little awkward, 
and very silent, lest he should commit himself." 

Gerald glanced at poor Gore with pity, al- 
though with some contempt. Pride, triumph, 
and hope, lighted up his eye, as he witnessed the 
d 5 



58 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



ceremonial which made his favourite daughter 
Lady Lumley, and promised him summary ex- 
trication from his tangled mesh of difficulties 
and miseries. Towards the conclusion of the 
marriage, a tear — (welling, Heaven only knew 
from what source of mixed emotion) — dimmed 
the eye's brilliancy ; the fever-flush deserted his 
cheeks; and his lips, at last not curved into 
smiles, grew dry and quivered. When his 
daughter finally became a wife, and when he 
stepped forward to salute her — (after first look- 
ing for consent into the bailiff's face) — his fore- 
head fell on her neck, and his sobs were heard 
through the church. 

Mrs. Gore stood near him, meantime, smiling 
as usual, although tears streamed silently down 
her cheeks also, from the moment the ceremony 
began. 

Maria Gore was one of Selina's bridesmaids- 
Gerald observed her attentively. She seemed 
very grave, and looked pale, as if struggling with 
suppressed emotion. Her eyes rested on her 
sister, who took no notice of her ; perhaps they 
had had a quarrel before they came to church- 
When it was her turn to salute the new-made 
bride, she grew still paler, drew in her under 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 59 

lip between her teeth, and then threw her arms 
round her sister ; and as she turned away, Ge- 
rald saw that profuse tears had at last burst out. 

Mrs. Blake looked straight into an empty pew, 
from first to last, occasionally shrugging up her 
shoulders at the cold of the church ; and, when 
led by her husband to Selina, held out her own 
cheek for a kiss. 

The bride herself seemed to have been mar- 
ried in a fit of indignation, just kept under, and 
no more. She returned all the salutations (ex- 
cept one) of her friends, like an offended queen ; 
but her cognizance of that one, (Miss Flint's,) 
showed more of her ordinary nature. Bathed 
in showers of sympathy, and of every thing else 
that was to be expected, Miss Flint, still holding 
her clogs dangling by their latchets from her fin- 
ger, sprang at her " love, Selina," and dragging 
down her head with one hand, and holding her 
tight round the waist with the other, inflicted, 
like Petruchio, 

" Such a clamorous smack, 

" That at the parting, all the church did echo j" 

while, in the rage of her embrace, her wet 
clogs left certain very obvious marks of close 



60 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

acquaintance upon Lady Lumley's lace-dress, 
and even upon the satin under it. She was 
literally pushed away by the bride's strong 
though beautiful arm. 

" The happy pair," accompanied by all their 
friends, returned to breakfast at Stephen's-green, 
Gerald's mind filled with Maria Gore, and with 
her recent and deeply-interesting change of 
character. 

Mr. Gore's colour, and his smiles, and his 
good spirits, quite rallied at the breakfast-table, 
which was splendidly " furnished forth." He 
said good things, he told good stories, he laugh- 
ed loud ; but Gerald saw that whenever he put 
a cup of tea or coffee to his lips, his hand 
shook fearfully. It was something more than 
happiness too, or something different from it, 
which fed his flashing glances. 

And those glances often visited Gerald with 
a peculiar meaning, which the object of them 
failed not, in tribulation of heart, to interpret 
in a certain way. They also wandered, from 
time to time, to Maria Gore, who sat far away 
from Gerald, still looking profoundly serious. 
Gerald made but an indifferent breakfast. 

While some of the party yet sipped from their 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 61 

cups, Miss Flint among the number, Mrs. 
Gore arose, and after looking at Maria, left the 
room. Her youngest daughter followed. By 
mere chance Mr. Gore then remembered that he 
had a word to say to Gerald, and both stood up 
and repaired to one of the remote windows. 

" My dearest boy," said Mr. Gore, trembling 
all over, as he took Gerald's hands, " allow me 
to ask you if, when you made your most flat- 
tering proposals through my son, last night, 
you were aware of my poor Maria's portionless 

lot r 

" Quite," answered Gerald, trembling also. 

" But you could not have guessed the pre- 
sent dreadful situation in which her father is 
placed ?" 

f* With deep regret, I had previously learned 
it to its full extent. * 

" Ay I" cried Mr. Gore, starting, as his eye 
glanced to Miss Flint ; " and who was so con- 
siderate as to disclose it to you I* 

" Excuse me ; I am not at liberty to answer: 
but I knew it." 

" You knew of the — the executions ? v 

" I did." 

" And," continued Mr. Gore, while his voice 



62 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

faltered, and at last failed him, — " of — the— of 
this man ?" nodding his head backward. 

" Yes ; of that fellow." 

" Give me your arm, then." 

They walked out of the breakfast parlour toge- 
ther, and ascended to the drawing-room. Maria 
Gore stood alone near the fire-place, one arm 
folded under her bosom, the other motionless at 
her side. She had been looking down as they en- 
tered, and did not now raise her head, but only 
curtsied. 

" Are you quite prepared for us, Maria, my 
love ?" asked her father. 

" I am, Sir," she answered, in a low but firm 
voice. 

** Here, then, comes Mr. Blount, himself, to 
try if he cannot prevail on you to be more ex- 
plicit than you were with me in our conversation 
of this morning." 

<c Stop, father,' 1 she said, speaking louder, 
and looking up; Mr. Gore was retiring; — "you 
know, Sir, I told you that my explanation would 
be given to Mr. Blount, in answer to his very 
flattering intimation, while you stood by, or 
not at all." 

" Well, my love, well." Mr. Gore stepped 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 63 

back, and as he passed close to her, " perverse, 
unaccountable girl," he added, between his 
teeth. 

" I have already declared to you, Sir, that I 
entertain no unfavourable opinion of Mr. Blount, 
but the contrary ; that, in fact, I respect and 
esteem his character and talents." 

" To be sure, my treasure ; all this has been 
gone over and over." 

u I have also declared in answer to your 
questions, that it is not because I am pre-en- 
gaged in any other ' love-affair,' as you called 
it, Sir, I must decidedly reject the honour of 
Mr. Blount's advances." 

" Pho, pho ! of course, my dear child — of 
course ; and since you have said so much, 
surely you cannot expect us to be greatly 
alarmed on the score of whatever other reason 
you may conjure up; but there is a reason, 
Maria, and a solid one, why, for your father 
and mother's sake, you should waive all girlish 
refinings and hesitations, and meet us, in this 
matter, just as promptly — I may say, abruptly, 
as we come to meet you ; ay, and our excel- 
lent young friend knows that reason, though 
you do not, Maria." 



64 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" You mistake, dear father ; I do know it, al- 
though not from any confidence placed in me 
by my family ; although my informant is al- 
most a stranger ; and although she whispered 
the question that led to my discovery of your 
unhappy situation, only within the last hour, 
at 's church." 

" She !" cried Mr. Gore — " 'tis a woman 
then ?— Miss Flint !" 

" Miss Flint, Sir." 

" I will have her sent out of the house, this 
moment — the base gossip P resumed Mr. 
Gore, again moving to the door ; " but no, no ;" 
checking himself, " that would be but an im- 
potent show of authority, under the circum- 
stances. Maria, you do know, then, how abso- 
lutely necessary it becomes — (I must speak 
very, very plainly, my child — ay, even before 
Mr. Blount) — how absolutely necessary it be- 
comes that — in fact — you should avail yourself 
of this most honourable opportunity to be pro- 
tected against the future — and perhaps, — per- 
haps — " his voice trembled — " perhaps to help 
your unfortunate father out of his tremendous 
difficulties, by sharing with him some — some — " 
" Dearest father, say no more — " she wept 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 65 

profusely — " tremendous must your difficulties 
be, indeed, to call for this no less tremendous 
humiliation — and, after all, this unnecessary 
humiliation. 

" Maria !" exhorted Mr. Gore, in rising 
passion, M what folly — what fiend puts this 
obstinacy into your head ? You esteem and 
respect Mr. Blount ; you are engaged in no 
other affair of the heart ; and yet — " 

" I can never become his wife." 

" Provoking girl ! why so ? give your im- 
portant reason in one word ; — come ! you have 
promised to do so." 

" I have ; and I will do so, father ; I can 
never become Mr. Blount's wife, because"— 
she knelt at his feet — " because I am already 
the wife of another/' 

With quickly-uttered ejaculations, both gen- 
tlemen started back. But Mr. Gore's voice 
rose highest. 

"Impossible!" he exclaimed; "quite im- 
possible ! 'tis only an invention to make me mad !" 

" I have never uttered a falsehood to you, in 
my whole life, Sir — 'tis the very truth ; I am a 
married woman, kneeling for your forgiveness 
and your blessing." 



66 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" For my curse ! if indeed I must believe 
you. Disobedient, unnatural girl ; married to 
whom ? when ? how ? how long ago ?" 

" I was married, the night before the last, 
after my return from the theatre, but before 
my return to your house." 

" Merciful Heaven ! I will not credit it ! 
How, I ask you, could it have happened with- 
out my consent ? Stand up and answer me !" 

She arose, and said, " I am of age, and my 
husband procured a license. 1 ' 

"Your husband! God Almighty! — and to 
whom do you give that name ? what fellow is 
this, who, aware of his own unworthiness, base- 
ness perhaps, dared not ask you of your father P 11 

" He does not merit one word of your de- 
scription, Sir ; and it was not because he feared 
you would reject his suit, that he prevailed up- 
on me to become his wife in secret." 

" Creature ! let me hear no more of your 
fulsome, your indelicate praises of him ; but 
give me his name, at once !" 

" There, Sir, you will excuse me ; I am un- 
der a solemn promise not yet to divulge his 
name." 

" And you refuse me f° 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 67 

" I must, or break almost an oath to my 
husband, Sir.''* 

" Not caring how you madden your father ! 
Lost, degraded — " 

"No, my dear father — not degraded, Sir," she 
interrupted ; " there you mistake, indeed." 

" Then why would he have you hide his 
name ?" 

" I fear I can never tell you, Sir, the reason 
for that ; 'twas a prudent, if not a generous one ; 
and yet, Sir, generous my husband can be, has 
been, and may yet be ; nay, but that your afflict- 
ing want of confidence kept me ignorant of the 
full extent of your present dreadful trials, I am 
convinced he would not have wished me to 
enter into a private marriage, — nor asked your 
permission for an open one, without n 

" Pshaw ! he is a fry of those Knightlies." 

" He is not, Sir : and now that I at last know 
of your difficulties, I am just as sure — that 
although I cannot name him without his per- 
mission, it is only necessary for me to ask that 
permission in order to obtain it ; and so, if you 

allow me, my dear father P 

" Dear father! — dear d n! — Look 

there !" he pointed to the half-open door, at 



68 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

which was seen a man's figure. " Do you know 
who darkens the threshold of that door? — Do you 
really know that, this moment, I am watched in 
my own house— no, not my own house — I have no 
house — but dogged from room to room by a com- 
mon ruffian, a catchpole, a bailiff? — Look round 
you ! Do you really know that every thing your 
eye falls upon, that piano, that table, that chair, 
that miniature of your mother — Oh heaven of 
heavens .' — and instead of being in a situation to 
take me out of this hell of troubles, at all events 
to console me, you stand there, you, armed 
with your own disobedience to give my heart 
the very last blow ! Come !"— He seized her 
wrist, having wrought himself into a frenzy of 
passion ; " you shall not stand there to kill me 
outright! — Nay, while this house remains even 
nominally mine, you shall not disgrace it with 
your presence ! — off to your bravo, your hus- 
band ; he is your protector now ! but first come 
take leave of the mother and the sisters you 
have shamed !— come, I say !" 

" Father, dearest father !" she sank again on 
the carpet, " do not treat me so ; I do not quite 
deserve it ; I have been wrong, but not so very 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 69 

wrong ; and on such a day as this is, and from 
such a house as this is, do not, do not expel me! 
oh, my dear father, my heart is not, never was 
dead to a daughter's feeling for you, and for 
your misfortunes ! and if my husband — " 

" Damn him ! mean, obscure fellow, who- 
ever he is, damn him ! — Come ! I insist ! Do 
not make me force you !"• Force her, however, he 
almost did across the room, until at last she 
walked with him. " Give way, fellow !" he cried 
to the bailiff at the door, and, through it, and 
down-stairs he still led her ; Gerald following, 
in horror, grief, and consternation. 

" A hackney-coach, Sir P continued Mr. 
Gore, addressing a servant as he stepped to the 
parlour, — " Come, Madam !" he flung open the 
door, and appeared before the bridal party, 
pale and seemingly almost insane with passion, 
while he still held Maria tight by the wrist; 
" here, my good friends, — here, I have brought 
you another new-married lady — a dutiful, pure- 
minded, youngest daughter, who, because she is 
of age, as she says, thought no more than a 
license necessary to get joined in holy wedlock 
to some low, intriguing wretch that she fears 



70 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

even to name to her family. Ay, indeed, 'tis 
so," with tones of bitter mockery, as Mrs. Gore 
and her two elder daughters expressed their 
amazement in abrupt ejaculations. " The 
night before the last, — and after the play, — 
and God knows under what roof, by way of 
her Hymeneal temple," — this delicate, this 
high-minded young lady changed her maiden 
name and became a most right honourable wife ! 
Look at her ! does she not wear her new dig- 
nities well ? does not her brow look matronly 
already ; and her glance, her air, and bearing, 
seem quite ennobled ? See ! see what an impor- 
tant personage we have had among us, una- 
wares, ever since after the play, the night before 
the last ! Where are her happy mother, and her 
admiring sisters, to salute her — ay, to bow down 
to her ? Where are all the honours she should 
get, in return for all the honours she gives ? 
Ignoble creature!" he continued, again bursting 
out in fury, and dropping her hand, " this 
moment leave our presence ! — hide yourself in 
your chamber till your hackney-chariot draws 
up at the door, and then — " 

" Mother, mother !" she cried, running across 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 71 

the room, and falling helplessly at Mrs. Gore's 
knees, who sat weeping on a sofa. 

" Do not touch her !" screamed Mr. Gore, 
addressing his wife, as she stooped down to 
embrace her daughter. " I command you, 
Madam, to give her no parting kiss, — no part- 
ing hand ! get up and go to your chamber !" 
stamping at Maria ; " get up, or I will drag 
you up !" 

He walked towards her. She rose to her 
knees ; clasped those of her [mother fervent- 
ly ; kissed her feet ; ran to her sisters and 
brother, and separately embraced them ; and 
all this without a word ; and so rapidly that 
her father could not interrupt her. Then she 
looked round for him, and in another instant 
was clinging to his knees also, as she cried, 
" Still, still, your blessing, Sir, before I go !" 

" Blessing! 1 ' he shook her off; " my curse, 
you mean, and — " 

Before he could pronounce another word, Mrs. 
Gore sprang up screaming, fell on his neck, 
and put her hand on his mouth. At the same 
time, she turned her lips that Maria might kiss 
them ; the signal was quickly understood and 



72 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

answered ; then her mother motioned Maria to 
leave the room, and was obeyed. 

" I will shoot her at my feet if she again 
appears before me ! I will, by the heavens !" 
exclaimed Mr. Gore, in a paroxysm of rage. 
— " And now, Selina, 11 he continued, turning to 
Lady Lumley, and endeavouring to assume a 
calm tone, " you are my last and only hope." 

" I understand you, Sir," said Selina, " and 
we shall arrange every thing in another room. — 
Come, my love," to Mrs. Blake ; and both 
ladies arose. 

" Why needs she accompany us ?" demanded 
Mr. Gore, in an expression of face that vaguely 
foreboded something. 

" It may be as well that my sister witnesses 
our interview, Sir ; I should like the approval 
of so near a member of my family. 11 

He stood still, and looked expressively at her. 

" Selina, I do not like this beginning : it 
promises no good ending. Why should you 
wish her countenance in what you are about to 
do, unless you intend to do as she has done 
before you? But come, I will not anticipate." 

"Better not, Sir." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 73 

The father and the two sisters left the 
apartment. We follow them into a back 
parlour. 

" Who is this ?" asked Mr. Gore, as he 
entered the room, pointing to a gentleman fas- 
tidiously dressed in black, who stood up from 
a table and bowed profoundly. 

" My private solicitor, Sir," answered Selina. 

" Oh, — oho ! I beg the gentleman's pardon, 1 ' 
bowing even lower than his new acquaintance 
had done, " and yours, Lady Lumley," repeat- 
ing his obeisance; " I should have remembered 
that new dignities require new attendants, ay, 
and new respect. 'Tis all quite right; just as 
it should be : yes, the draft, off-hand, which 
you were to oblige me with, as a simple gift 
from daughter to father, must now necessarily 
assume the shape of some important legal docu- 
ment, technically drawn up by your private 
solicitor, and demanding a formal acknowledge- 
ment from Gervis Gore, Esquire. To be 
sure it must — if, indeed, you doom me to no 
more than that ; let us see :" he effectually 
curbed himself, and walked steadily to the 
table from which the attorney had arisen : — " of 

VOL. III. E 



74 THE ANGLO- IRISH. 

course, now, this gentleman and I settle the 
matter between ourselves ?" 

" If you please, Sir ; I have acted under his 
advice, and abide by his arrangements." 

" Yes, Sir," said the solicitor ; " and by the 
advice of the best counsel, after making all the 
necessary inquiries, beforehand, as to the ex- 
tent to which Sir John Lum ley's property, 
real and personal — " 

" I think I comprehend, Sir," interrupted 
Mr. Gore ; " pray, do not distress yourself by 
superfluous explanations ; let us to business at 
once. Take your chair, Sir, and you will 
oblige me. So 1 ' — Mr. Gore sat to the table 
along with the solicitor — "here are our docu- 
ments, I see ; very good : how do we begin ?" 

" Gubbins!" called out the attorne}', speak- 
ing towards the hall : Mr. Gore's legal attend- 
ant of the last few days entered. 

" We begin this way, if you have no objec- 
tion, Sir. Gubbins, you are aware that Mr. 
Pierce, the solicitor in this writ, and your 
employer, empowers me to settle the debt, and 
discharge you ?" 

The bailiff assented. 

" Then you may go home; here is your war- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 75 

rant to do so, under my name, and here I hold 
the amount of the debt, costs and all, which I 
will hand by and by to Mr. Pierce ; you have 
received your own money, day after day ?" 

" All, except that day's money,'" the man 
said. 

" There, then, and leave the house. 1 ' 

" Good-morning, Mr. Gore," said the bailiff, 
as he shuffled off. 

"A very good-morning to you, Mr. Gubbins," 
answered Mr. Gore, " and many, many thanks 
for your obliging attentions. — Well, Sir," 
turning to the solicitor, " what is this ?" as a 
folded paper was placed at his hand. 

" A draft on the National Bank for two 
hundred pounds, Mr. Gore." 

" For two hundred pounds," repeated Mr. 
Gore, deliberately — " good." 

" To which Mrs. Blake, out of her own pri- 
vate purse, joins one hundred more, at my in- 
stance," said Lady Lumley, putting down a 
note to the amount she mentioned. 

" Thank you, my love," resumed Mr. Gore, 

bowing his head, and smiling, over-graciously, 

to Mrs. Blake ; " 'tis your first kind help, and 

I value it accordingly. Well ; these three hun- 

e2 



76 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

dred pounds will scarce pay the executions now 
in the house, I fear, Sir ?" 

" It does not seem advisable, upon mature 
consideration, to meddle with them, Sir," replied 
the attorney. 

" That is, they must take their own course, 
Sir r 

" Yes, Sir." 

" That is, again, my house and furniture, my 
carriage and horses, are no longer mine, Sir ? M 

" If you glance over this deed, Sir," tempo- 
rized the attorney, " you will find it a set-off 
against the momentary and inevitable disadvan- 
tages of your present situation." 

" A set-off! what a happy word ! — a set-off, 
indeed, for me, when it no longer pleases the gra- 
cious authorities who decide my fate that I shall 
stay in my own house, in my native country, 
perhaps, — a set-off! ha, ha! — well, on with busi- 
ness, however; your deed, Sir! many thanks. 
So, so !" he muttered over the first part of it ; 
then read aloud ; " ' And the said Selina, Lady 
Lumley, hereby covenants and engages for her- 
self, her administrators, executors, or assigns, 
to pay to the said Gervis Gore, Esq. for and dur- 
ing his natural life, the aforesaid yearly sum of 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 77 

three hundred pounds sterling, if it shall please 
him, the said Gervis Gore, Esq. to live out of 
the j urisdiction of the laws of these realms of 
Great Britain and Ireland, and so keep his 
person — dutifully honoured and revered by her, 
the said Selina, Lady Lumley, — free of all arrests 
and incarcerations on account of his numerous 
debts yet unliquidated, and' — and so forth, 1 ' re- 
sumed Mr. Gore, laying down the deed ; " all 
very good." 

"It was to be expected, indeed, that these 
arrangements would please you, Sir," said the 
lawyer. 

" To be sure, Sir; they do, indeed, exceed- 
ingly please me ; I am even grateful, to an un- 
bounded degree, to my affectionate and careful 
daughter, Selina, Lady Lumley ; indeed I am. 
And so, the sooner I leave Dublin, with my 
wife and son, the better, I suppose ?" 

" You will yourself perceive the absolute 
necessity of such a step, Mr. Gore. We have 
all done our very best to keep your late arrest 
from the ears of " 

" Oh, I know, Sir ; of my other • numerous 1 
creditors, lest detainers might drop in ; I know, 
and again thank you all from my heart.' 1 



78 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" But now, Mr. Gore—" 

" You cannot answer for what may happen 
in the course of the day, and therefore I must 
make my set off instanter; — and I will, Sir; 
which promise, I dare say, ends our business, 
Sir," rising : " and now, Sir, good-day to you." 

" Good-day, Mr. Gore ; and I hope you are 
satisfied with my part in the transaction." 

" My dear Sir, delighted ! your conduct re- 
flects the highest honour on your professional 
character, and I foretel that you have only to 
go on just in the same steady, respectable, clever 
way and — stop, Lady Lumley !" he cried, mo- 
tioning her back with his arm, as, followed by 
Mrs. Blake, she walked towards the door ; the 
sisters, in evident alarm, stood still ; — " in the 
same steady, clever way, Sir, and mine will not 
be the only father's heart you must assist in 
breaking ; mine not the only family that, for 
your six-and-eightpence, you must succeed in 
confirming in warfare against each other — " 

" What, Mr. Gore !" interrupted the attorney. 

" Begone, rascal !" thundered Mr. Gore, as 
he dashed the door in his face. Then he 
suddenly turned round, and thrusting his hand 
into his bosom, confronted his daughters. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 79 

For more than a minute he stood before them 
in silence, his face livid, his eyes rolling, his 
teeth set, his frame shaking, and gradually in- 
creasing in its tremor, until he staggered, and 
almost reeled. 

" Monsters !" at last said this domestic Lear, 
" I cannot call ye women, much less daughters! 
For the last four or five miserable years, ye have 
seen me willingly buffet a sea of difficulties and 
humiliations, merely to keep up the show of a 
station in society from which ye might step to 
the rank and affluence ye now hold, — and the 
very ruin I dared for your sakes, ye at las- 
leave me to deal with as I may. But to you, 
Selina Lumley, to you I would particularly speak. 
Your cold-hearted sister made me no promise ; 
you did. You did, and you deliberately break 
it. Listen to me then. May all the promises 
which have ever been made, and which ever 
may be made, to you, be broken to you, as you 
break that. May every tongue lie to you, every 
heart be hollow to you. May all the promises 
of the pride of your own hard and haughty 
heart prove false to you. You hope for a fu- 
ture of earthly triumph in the world ; may it 
turn into poverty as literal as mine ; into shame 



80 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

and suffering more abject, and more friendless. 
Oh, that I pray for you, indeed, and in that 
curse, inhuman daughter, I curse you ! From 
smiling eyes, from honied flatterers, from seeming 
friends, but above all, — if, indeed, your age- 
stricken, debauch-worn partner is doomed to be 
a father, — above all, from children, from the 
children of your bosom, may you meet a re- 
quital for this falseness to me !— God of nature 
and of justice, hear my prayer !" 

She turned her back and rang the bell, call- 
ing out at the same time, " Sir John Lumley P* 

" Ay, Sir John Lumley !" echoed her father, 
opening the door, and holding it in his hand — 
" And here he comes, — and your mother too. 
She wishes you to lead her out, Sir John ; her 
carriage waits, no doubt ; do take her hand — 
and while her father flies like a felon to hide his 
head in a strange country — at her command — 
expatriated, outlawed by her — let her pass her 
bridal-day, and her sweet honeymoon, as sweet- 
ly and as tranquilly, or as riotously, as her heart 
can wish. Pillowed on your bosom, Sir John, 
and lulled by the recollection of her father and 
her mother struggling in poverty, and of her 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 81 

father's curse mounting up for her to God — let 
her be very happy." 

" What !" cried Mrs. Gore ; " must we leave 
our house 7" 

" We must ; this instant, too — you, our son, 
and I — so they order it, my love. Put on your 
warmest things ; 'tis a sharp day." 

" Mother, farewell,''' said Lady Lumley, as 
she passed her, leaning on Sir John : Mrs. Blake 
had already gone out with her husband and 
entered her carriage. Mrs. Gore averted her 
head, and rushed by her daughter up-stairs, mak- 
ing no answer to her adieus. The bride con- 
tinued her way through the hall. Her father, 
now sitting stunned in a chair, heard her car- 
riage drive off. 

Mr. Frederick Augustus Gore entered the 
room where he was, and, unobserved by him, 
looked over the deed which lay on the table, and 
put it into his pocket, together with the draft 
for two hundred pounds, and the bank-note for 
one hundred, which were beside it. 

" Have all our bridal party gone away, Fre- 
derick ?" asked Mr. Gore, after a pause. 

" All, except young Blount, and he seems to 
e 5 



82 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

have something to say to you, Sir : he saw Ma- 
ria before her departure " 

" And Maria, too, has left us ?" interrupted 
Mr. Gore — " she took me at my word ?" 

" He saw her, father, and, I believe, received 
a message for you." 

" And you are sure that every other guest 
has quitted the house ?" 

" Except me," said Miss Flint, appearing — 
" and you know I never was the person to for- 
sake a friend in distress." 

" Begone, idle gossip !" — Mr. Gore stamped 
passionately. 

•* Oh, if you tvill snap at one in such a way," 
answered Miss Flint, rapidly hurrying to the 
hall- door, which was open — " think of this !" 
she continued, and they heard her pattering off' 
on her clogs. 

A hackney-coach drew up to the door. Mr. 
Gore rose hastily. 

** Come, Frederic," he said, " where is your 
mother ?" 

Mrs. Gore re appeared, dressed for a jour- 
ney. He offered her his arm, and, followed by 
their son, led her into the hall. The servants 
grouped with the keepers, who had come in 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 83 

upon the execution, but who, till this moment, 
were contented to stay out of sight, in a remote 
and obscure part of the house, appeared stand- 
ing on the stairs. Mr. Gore bent his head, and 
increased his speed. 

Mr. Blount, father," said his son, behind him. 

" Where is he ? I forgot." 

Gerald presented himself at the door of the 
breakfast-parlour, and in a disturbed and sym- 
pathising voice, prayed to say one word with 
Mr. Gore. 

" Lead your mother to the carriage — the 
hackney-coach, I mean, Frederic," said Mr. 
Gore, and, while his commands were obeyed, 
he stepped into the room with Gerald. 

" I will not say a word about your situation, 
Mr. Gore ; 'tis too dreadful to speak of ; but 
your daughter, Maria, has charged me with a 
message to you." 

" Well, Mr. Blount." 

" Her first duty, she says, will be to acquaint 
her husband with your afflictions ; and she con- 
fidently promises that you shall receive, in con- 
sequence, a letter from himself, of which the 
signature will not displease you, nor the pur- 
port seem ungenerous. Meantime, she parts from 



84 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

you in love and sorrow, only, and humbly begs 
that you will accept of this, — " presenting him 
with a pocket-book — " her husband's first gift to 
her, until both shall have an opportunity, by 
learning your address, of more properly show- 
ing their dutiful feelings." 

" Why, here are three hundred pounds," said 
Mr. Gore ; " do you know where she has gone, 
Mr. Blount ?" 

" No, Sir ; your daughter did not inform me." 

" But she went all alone ?" 

" Not alone, Sir," answered Gerald, looking 
peculiarly disturbed ; " a lady came to take her 
from your door." 

" A lady ? that 's strange. Well, God bless 
poor Maria. I was too hasty with her. She 
was the best of them, after all. Mr. Blount, I 
thank you for this kindness, and for much more 
that went before it. And as soon as I can sit 
down to write to you, though Heaven knows 
when that will be, or where, you shall receive 
my address, in care for her. Now, farewell. 
We must not stop talking here in this house, — 
this desolate house. Come. But stop ; I will 
be just to you, as well as thankful. These 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 85 

three hundred pounds nearly cover an old 
debt—" 

" Mr. Gore, Mr. Gore,' 1 said Gerald, with 
much energy, " do not so afflict me ; do not sup- 
pose me capable of — put them up, Sir, put 
them up ; things will all come right again, some 
day ; and then, you know — pray, Sir, put them 
upT 

Mr. Gore, who had not wept that morning 
at all his domestic trials, now burst into tears, 
as he grasped Gerald's hands. 

" Come, Sir, Mrs. Gore waits," continued 
Gerald, offering his arm. His unfortunate 
friend allowed him to walk him out into the 
hall. Upon the steps, leading down to the 
street, Mr. Gore looked back, and made signs 
of adieu to one or two servants. His eye then 
caught the brass-plate which bore his name upon 
the hall-door. He sprang back into the hall, 
went behind the door, unscrewed the plate, 
snatched it off, thrust it into his pocket, and 
after again shaking hands with Gerald, stepped 
into the hackney-coach, and was driven with 
his wife and son out of Dublin. 



86 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER IV. 

After Mr. Gore and his two daughters had 
returned from the breakfast-parlour, Gerald sat 
among the remainder of the bridal party, still 
much stunned with the effects of the recent 
scene. When his presence of mind began to 
rally, it only made his situation more uncom- 
fortable, by representing him to himself as the 
direct cause of all the vehemence he had wit- 
nessed, and now as the object to be stared at, 
and perhaps frowned at and hated, amid the 
family whose festive day he was unfortunate 
enough to overcloud in such a manner. The 
reflection that the people thus at his mercy in 
their joys and sorrows, were almost strangers to 
him, added peculiar impatience to Gerald's 
mood ; and following up the retrospect hereby 
presented, he could do little less than de- 
nounce his ill-staried arrival in Ireland, the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 87 

accursed stage-coach and babbling driver, to 
which and to whom he jointly attributed the 
breaking of his arm, that had first detained him 
in the country; the trifler Flood, the needy, 
wretched, Irish Mr. Gore, and the coqueting, 
hoaxing, and also very Irish beauty, by whose 
combined endeavours he had been seduced into 
a continued sojourn in Dublin, even after he 
could have escaped from it. As to Mr. Augus- 
tus Frederic, and the wine-bibbing night he 
caused Gerald to spend, and the hundred pounds 
it incidentally cost him, and the degrading errors 
it plunged him into — above all, the monstrous 
one of charging his watchful fellow- reveller with 
the love-message which brought down upon his 
head the thunder-clap of this morning — bah ! — 
he had not words nor patience to embody his 
utter aversion and disgust of the whole finish- 
ed masterpiece of Hibernian character, manner, 
and adventure. 

Oppressed by the double anxiety of escaping 
from the presence of the mad family, and from 
Ireland altogether, Gerald now only sat debat- 
ing whether he would go through the martyr- 
dom of taking leave of Mrs. Gore, and the 
friends who surrounded her, and depute his 



88 THE ANGLO-IBISH. 

parting respects to the bride of the morning, 
and to her father, or get up at once, and, un- 
noticed if he could, run out of the house. 
Strong as was his sense of politeness, it barely 
enabled him to decline the latter course ; and 
well as he prepared himself for the odious scene, 
he proved barely able to go through with it. 

When Mr. Frederic Augustus, smiling pa- 
thetically, held out an eager hand, in answer to 
his grave bow, he could scarce keep his brow 
or his tongue quiet, and finally, he almost rushed 
through the door at Miss Flint's sudden ap- 
proach, and her M Oh, Mr. Blount, you 

poor fellow V 

" 'Tis done, however, 1 ' said Gerald, gaining 
the hall. 

A female servant tripped down-stairs, making 
a sign, gained his side, looking about her cau- 
tiously, and put into his hand a slip of paper, 
on which were pencilled these words : 

U For goodness' sake, and for charity's sake, 
come up to the drawing-room to me, and take 
charge of my parting message to my father : it 
is absolutely necessary that he should receive it, 
and you are the only person under this roof to 
whom it can well be confided. Maria ." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 89 

Pity, mingled with remorse for his recent un- 
qualified censure of a being so very peculiarly 
situated, and perhaps flattered vanity at the 
confidence placed in him, assailed Gerald's heart, 
and he unhesitatingly obeyed the summons of 
the note. 

Its writer stood cloaked and bonneted in 
the middle of the room. She had been weep- 
ing, but, it would seem, tried to dry up her 
tears and compose herself at his approach. The 
pocket-book, afterwards presented by Gerald to 
Mr. Gore, was in her hand. With apologies 
for the trouble she put him to, the afflicted 
young lady then delivered her message. Gerald 
received it seriously and respectfully, and en- 
gaged to convey it to her father. 

" And now, Mr. Blount, 1 ' she continued, 
" accept my sincere apologies for much greater 
inconvenience which I have helped to cause you. 
In good-humoured lightness of heart, uncon- 
scious of the hidden misery around me, and, be 
assured, not meaning or wishing to obtrude my- 
self on your interest, I certainly became a party 
to a little plot against you. But we must not 
say farewell to each other till I at least remove 
a delusion which I directly, though not by direct 



90 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

words or actions, assisted in promoting. Indeed, 
I should think you scarce require, at present, to 
be undeceived in the silly matter I allude to. I 
see a peculiar meaning in the studious regards 
with which you honour me. After your second 
vision, at the theatre, the night before the last, 
of the real object of your interest, your waver- 
ing notions of identity become more fixed, and 
it is hardly necessary for me, though highly 
complimented by being generally called some- 
what like that charming lady, to inform you, 
that you and I never met till my father present- 
ed you at the carriage-door in Sackville-street ; 
never met in Paris, or on the French coast, or 
on the Irish coast." 

She correctly divined Gerald's thoughts. 
Hardly, indeed, did he now require her as- 
surance. If the face he had seen in the theatre 
was unlike Maria Gore's, Maria Gore's at pre- 
sent was unlike it ; and Gerald admitted that 
he was quite undeceived, adding how much 
he wondered at himself for allowing his mind 
to entertain the mistake. 

J* Do not be too severe on your own mental 
capacities," she resumed ; f* you at first admitted 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 91 

it with difficulty, and at no time really enter- 
tained it. And your doubt sometimes occurs : 
I have myself experienced something of the 
kind. Last year I met once or twice, in Eng- 
land, a gentleman, who was regularly intro- 
duced to me, and whom I often heard speak. 
Returning to Ireland, I became acquainted 
with another gentleman, just sufficiently like 
the former to make me observe the similitude 
at the first look. We grew to be intimate 
acquaintances, and day after day his points of 
resemblance to my English friend seemed 
stronger; the differences between their fea- 
tures, person, voice, and manner, melted away ; 
I often caught myself confounding the one with 
the other ; and it was but lately that their ac- 
cidental contact, side by side, here in Ireland, 
enabled me to correct the error of my memory. 
Observe, this happened with the certainty to my 
hand, if I had used it, of two distinct indi- 
viduals. But, as in your case, had I only 
casually seen the first gentleman, and lost 
sight of him without knowing his name, and 
then became acquainted with the second, and ex- 
periencec 1 from him a judicious attempt to 



92 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

make me think he was that first, beyond 
doubt I must have yielded, at least as far as 
you did, to the delusion." 

" But why was I marked out for such cruel 
tantalizing P" asked Gerald, gently and good- 
humouredly. 

" Blame me for the first part of it, Mr. 
Blount, and me alone, though others must 
share your censure for the continuance of the 
jest. I knew of your first interview with my 
original and masterpiece, almost as soon as it 
had occurred. This made me look curiously 
at you the moment my poor father brought 
you to the carriage. When, in return, you 
fixed your regards on me, and particularly 
when you spoke about Pere la Chaise, I re- 
collected of whom it was supposed I was such 
a bad copy ; and, merely for the sake of having 
a laugh upon paper with your dear, dear 
sister, Lady Augusta, took it into my giddy 
head to humour your doubt ; so far as, with- 
out false words or indelicacy, I might do so. 
In reply to my letter of that evening, Augusta 
highly enjoyed your dilemma, and urged me 
to keep you in it. Previously, I had engaged 
another in the plot." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 93 

" The arch-traitor, Flood ?" asked Gerald. 

" Yes ; your old and sincere friend, Captain 
Flood ," answered the young lady, slightly 
colouring. 

° I am bound to think," continued Gerald, 
" that Augusta really gave you instructions, by 
letter, to call on me to explain why I declined 
the visit of Mr. Knightly, and that eldest son 
he has got ?" 

" Certainly. 1 ' 

" And why I never answered a letter from 
them which I never saw ?" 

" That, too. Augusta, angry with your 
supposed offences, and with your neglect of 
her letter, would not ask these questions of 
you, herself; preferring to have me propose 
them, if I should meet you here, where she 
presumed you must be visible ; I had her 
wishes to that effect before I saw you." 

" And you seemed angry with me, your- 
self, because I would make no apology to your 
friend P 

" Yes, on her account, and because sharing 
her conviction that you were aware of facts 
which would have made your conduct, at the 
time, exceedingly unamiable." 



94 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" My conduct, how ?" 

" Towards the Knightlies, to be sure ; but 
before your sudden escape that night from this 
drawing-room, I discovered that we had both 
wronged you ; that you were not possessed of 
the facts necessary to shape your conduct ; and, 
at the same time, I also saw new facilities for 
surrounding you with increased mystery, still 
assisted by your sister and others. 1 ' 

" And you advised her accordingly ?" 

" Early next morning." 

" Well, and now I throw myself upon you 
for a solution of this fresh puzzle." 

" Indeed, Mr. Blount, my heart and my spi- 
rits are far from prompting me, in my present 
situation, to continue any piece of fooling with 
you ; yet I fear that I am not at liberty to ex- 
tricate you from your difficulties. Dear Au- 
gusta has bound me by a solemn promise to 
keep you ignorant of what we all mean, — until 
you repair to Lower-Court." 

" Oh, I thank Augusta very much. But 
Flood can and must resolve me; I'll set off to 
him." 

" I venture to promise you a journey for no- 
thing ; unless, indeed, you take your old class- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 95 

mate, as I am sure you will not take him ; par- 
ticularly when you recollect that he but faith- 
fully keeps a lady's secret." 

" Which I am sure he can do," said Gerald, 
venturing a slightly expressive look at Flood's 
advocate, and again his companion seemed 
a little disconcerted, while he continued half 
bitterly, half in jest ; " No matter then : I 
remember, that another person was indignant 
at my want of admiration for those wor- 
shipful, all-pervading Knightlies ; ay, and 
pointed out my lack of heart because I would 
not fall down to them : of course, she — for I 
speak of a lady — meant, like you and Augusta, 
that I knew the ' certain facts,' which now it 
seems I did not know, and do not know, and 
cannot know, unless I repair to Lower-Court : 
but I must and will, without any such alterna- 
tive ; 'tis but seeking out the lady in question, 
who abhors secrets as much as others love them; 
yes, Miss Flint ! to you I go." 

" And would it not be as well if, indulging 
your charming sister in her little harmless plot 
against you, Mr. Blount, you just accepted her 
affectionate invitation to the country ?"" asked 
the young lady, in a continued gravity, which 



96 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Gerald, by his gradual assumption of badinage 
that he did not feel, had hitherto vainly en- 
deavoured to divert. 

" Well, and if I am fairly answered one other 
simple question, I may begin to prepare my 
mind for much of female despotism." 

" I believe I anticipate you, but can afford no 
hopes ; your question, however ?" 

" Who is my Genius, at last ?" 

" No: I foresaw it; that question, of all 
others, I am not permitted to meet ; but I can 
add, that your sister will personally resolve it 
also." 

" Just say if she is French, or English, or 
Irish r 

" Pray, Mr. Blount, do not press me upon a 
subject which, every thing else apart, ill accords 
with my predicament this moment. " 

" Only this, then — and answer me if you can 
— I did see her on the shingles ?" 

" You did." 

" And to her I owe my accommodation of 
that night ?" 

" To her. 1 ' 

" And she penned the note I found in the 
cabin ?" 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 97 

" No : but farther on this point I must be 
silent." 

" But it was she, not you, I saw the night 
before the last ?" 

" I was in the theatre that night, but me you 
did not see. Farewell, Mr. Blount ; the carriage 
that bears me from this house — and from my 
family — draws up near the door;" — Gerald had, 
indeed, noticed that a grave-looking carriage 
just then stood still in the train of Sir John 
Lumley's and Mr. Blake's. 

" I have certainly seemed forgetful of your 
individual feelings, by my questions, and, per- 
haps, particularly so by my manner of putting 
them ; yet, believe me," said Gerald, changing 
his tone and manner, " not so really forgetful on 
the subject as I wished to seem; and now do 
not deem it merely impertinent, in a very sin- 
cere, if not very old friend, if he hopes, with 
all his heart that your immediate protectors 
are in all respects what you would wish them 
to be." 

" Oh, indeed, indeed they are : — see .'—quick- 
ly answering my hasty message, sent just before 
you came up-stairs — one of them appears this 
moment on the carriage- step ; — thanks, dear, 
VOL. III. K 



98 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

dear girl V* continued Maria, kissing her hand, 
while she again wept, to the friend she spoke of; 
— " No, my love ! do not venture in !" — her 
visitor was tripping up to the hall-door — •* but 
the spirited creature will come to me — she has 
not caught my signals." 

" Farewell, then !" said Gerald : Maria pre- 
sented her hand — " happiness to you ; and per- 
mit a last word upon my own affairs : I do not 
now require Augusta's help to guess the name 
of your double ; every thing at last convinces 
me that I have been haunted by her manager- 
in-chief, Miss Knightly." 

" Well, well, that is to be decided ;" a light 
foot came up-stairs, — " stop a moment, yet: — 
ah, dear girl !" as a young lady bounded into 
the room ; and the friends warmly embraced. 
The new-comer was not beautiful, but her 
figure was good, her stature imposing, and 
her quick blue eyes, and high, country colour, 
rendered her striking. She wore a riding-ha- 
bit and a man's hat, and held a whip in her 
hand. 

" Come," she said, after their embrace, 
" come with me out of this churlish house; I 
was just mounting little Cathleen, to have one 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 99 

good canter round the Phoenix, before leaving 
Dublin for the delightful hills and fields, but your 
note made me send her back to her manger, 
and order the carriage to take me to you : — so, 
come, I say, and now no cantering, and no 
Phoenix, but out of this dull town instantly. 1 ' 

Gerald had not a high opinion of the 
" spirited creature," upon whose protection 
Maria had thrown herself; she half seemed an 
Irish fox-huntress. 

" Do you catch the likeness ?" asked Maria, 
in a low voice, suddenly approaching him. 

" Where ? what do you mean ? — to you ? in 
this lady? Yes; you are tall, and have blue 
eyes in common ; but that 's all." 

" I must present you, though your introduc- 
tory and your parting-bow are destined to be 
made together : first, farewell, again ! — come, 
my dear," she took her friend's arm and was 
passing out, when both stopped on the threshold 
— "but I am guilty of an omission ; this gentle- 
man and you ought to be acquainted — so, Mr. 
Blount, Miss Knightly." 

Miss Knightly bowed low, smiling very tor- 
mentingly; the next instant she and her com- 
panion turned down-stairs, and before Gerald 
F 2 



100 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

** was himself again," they had entered the 
carriage, and were driven quickly from the 
house. 

" What ! she ! she, my Ariel ! she, my very 
dream of grace and beauty ! — No ; I erred in- 
deed ; and thank Heaven I did ; thank Heaven 
-'tis no Knightly. Ay ; as her friend evidently 
meant, my conjecture was soon to be decided, 
indeed. But lo ! the prime minister, and prime 
befooler of my rational sister, Lady Augusta 
Blount ; and my early competitor in donkey 
equestrianism. Yes ; the bold, forward child, 
Miss Rhoda, matured into this sun-burnt, wea- 
ther-rouged, rustic Amazon, — or, if it must be 
so, this ' spirited creature.'' 

" What is to be done with Augusta ? And 
who can my guardian-angel be, after all ? — I '11 
go down amongst the people in the parlour, 
again, horrid as is the enterprize, just to see if 
Miss Flint knows ; and to be sure she does — " 
here Gerald erred — " or at all events, she can 
explain the other foolish riddle about the ' cer- 
tain facts.' " Accordingly he was on his way to 
the parlour, when Mr. Gore's voice, loudly 
echoing his daughter Selina's call for Sir John 
Lumley, arrested his steps ; and the rapid oc- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 101 

currences which followed, completely put Miss 
Flint out of his head. 

We have seen him deliver Maria's message 
to her father. After Mr. Gore's departure 
from the house, Gerald, much depressed by 
the last sad scene he had witnessed, walked for 
some time about the streets, in a vague and 
melancholy mood. 'Tis unnecessary to say if 
his own concerns partially engaged him. The 
reader will solve the question when he is in- 
formed that Gerald bent his steps, about four 
o'clock, to the houses of some common ac- 
quaintances of his and of Miss Flint, hoping to 
learn that lady's address. But those acquaint- 
ances, though amongst her most intimate ones, 
after successively pausing, and saying, " Let us 
see," as if it was quite a new question to them, 
declared that they really did not know where, in 
Dublin, Miss Flint lived ; it was very strange, 
seeing her so often, and, indeed, for so many 
years ; but they really did not. And, in fact, 
Gerald's inquiries proved fruitless. 

The next situation he appears in, is purchas- 
ing a map of the county in which Lower-Court 
is to be found. We then follow him to the 
office of the night-coach that is to start at 



102 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

eight o'clock in the evening, and pass, at about 
five, next morning, within a few miles of his 
sister's residence. And here Gerald engaged 
his seat, and then repaired to his hotel to study 
his map. Now he ascertained from the scale, 
that the by-road, leading off the high-road to 
Lower-Court, measured only three miles; so 
that, after leaving the coach at its angle, he 
could walk on, and surprise Augusta with an 
early visit. Besides, a village marked very 
respectably on the map, was to be met half- 
way ; and if the morning proved bad, or the 
by-road difficult, though, again, the map made 
a different promise, perhaps he could there get 
a post-chaise, and pursue and conclude his 
short journey in a comfortable manner. He 
gained some perhaps as necessary inform- 
ation. From Lower- Court, the by-road, now 
turning, and running parallel to the coach- 
road, continued, for about two miles, to the 
house occupied by Lord Clangore's English 
agent, and then passed one in which, as Gerald 
concluded, dwelt his Scotch steward, Mr. Bignel. 
Gerald had made a bad breakfast ; now he 
made as bad a dinner ; that sensation known to 
all, though perhaps few can define it, the sensation 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 103 

of going away (if the indication shall be un- 
derstood), spoiled his appetite. It was great re- 
lief to him when the time arrived for proceed- 
ing to the coach-office. 

He found himself the only inside passenger, 
at starting. At a house in the outskirts of 
Dublin, the coach stopped, however, to supply 
him with a fellow-traveller. A burly, elderly, 
but respectable-looking man, came out of the 
hall-door, great-coated, and handkerchiefed al- 
most up to the eyes. He was attended by ser- 
vants male and female, who carried various small 
packages, besides a trunk and a bag, and fol- 
lowed by another gentleman, and by a lady, 
and by masters and misses of different ages. 
It appeared that Gerald's future acquaintance 
had been dining, and waiting for the coach, at 
this house, and that now, his host and hostess, 
and their equally hospitable progeny, flocked 
to their threshold, to wish him good bye and a 
safe journey. Many were the adieus, indeed, 
given and received ; many were the " best 
loves," and the " best regards," with which the 
traveller was freighted by old and young, to 
his own family, who, reckoning the names 
mentioned, would seem to outnumber even 



04 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

their town friends. Then he got into the 
coach, and received at the door, and stowed 
away on both the seats, and under the seats, 
and in the pockets, his dozen little packages, 
which might be made up of sundry nic-nacs 
ordered by his wife, or sued for by his children, 
and, through forgetfulness or hurry, not pur- 
chased till his seat had been taken, and his 
trunk and bag crammed almost to bursting 
without them. The coach had proceeded a 
good way from his friend's house before the 
careful gentleman finished arranging them all 
to his satisfaction ; and at last saying to Gerald, 
" Your servant, Sir," he lolled back in his 
corner, and settled his head for going asleep. 

Gerald wished that he could study the fea- 
tures of his coach-companion, who seemed to 
promise a display, should the opportunity turn 
up, of original Irish character. But his hand- 
kerchiefs, and his broad-brimmed, pressed-down 
hat, had quite hid the gentleman's face while 
the blaze at his friend's hall-door might have 
revealed it ; and now the scantily-lighted out- 
let through which they continued to pass, left 
them in almost total darkness. Gerald then 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 105 

wished the gentleman would speak, instead of 
setting in for a sleep, which, from the tranquil 
and matter-of-course preparations for it, might 
very probably last till morning. And perhaps 
it would have done so, had not the coach sudden- 
ly and violently jolted over an inequality in the 
suburb street, and caused the elder to waver 
towards the other corner, as he said — " No use, 
I see, on this pavement ; I must wait till we are 
rolling over the road, in earnest." 

" How like St. Giles's," remarked Gerald, 
looking out through the window, and willing 
to provoke his fellow-traveller into farther dis- 
course : H that is, so far as the scattered dull 
lamps will let me see." 

'* You'd admit a full likeness, in broad day- 
light, Sir," assented his companion. 

" With sorrow, if I was an Irishman," re- 
sumed Gerald. 

" As so you ought," said the gentleman. 

11 It is an Irishman I hear admit so much ?" 

" To the heart, Sir." 

" And you really do not patronize the 
economy of that London-Irish settlement, 
Sir?" 

f 5 



106 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

*' I would be one of a conspiracy to set fire 
to it," answered his new acquaintance. 

" With the hope of improving it, Sir?" 
smiled Gerald. 

" No, Sir ; Irish though I am, you have not 
caught a bull by the horns so soon." 

" In what view, then ?" 

" Tn a good many. First, to rid myself of 
a living subject for every-day taunt from Eng- 
lishmen, who perhaps are too hasty in consi- 
dering it as such, after all ; next, to force my 
cockney fied fellow-countrymen and fellow-coun- 
trywomen to seek out some less abominable 
hot-bed of vice and demoralization ; next, — but 
I hope these two reasons are enough, Sir." 

" But is it not a living and most eminent 
subject for the remarks you allude to ?" urged 
Gerald. 

" Before I answer you, Sir, I put in my 
national claim to ask you a few questions of 
my own. You can tell me, I suppose, why the 
streets of St. Giles's are permitted to remain 
in a litter ? why those, whose duty it is to see 
all the other streets of London visited by the 
scavengers' cart, leave those to their fate ? I 
hope you can also inform me how many Eng- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 107 

lish — how many London teachers of the worst 
and lowest London vice, have establishments 
among the Milesians of St. Giles's, instructing 
them, as, at their successive, and indeed first 
arrivals from Ireland, they did instruct them — 
to graft much of their present conduct 
upon the primitive habits imported from their 
native villages or wilds ? Next, Sir, no doubt 
you are prepared to say to what degree the 
avoiding antipathies of the more respectable 
of the lower order of Londoners may, or may 
not, have produced the necessity that keeps 
those poor people clanning together, deprived 
of immediate example for improvement ? and 
next, you will surely tell me why the law of 
England directly encourages them in the very 
worst kind of immorality ?" 

" What law of England .->" 

" That, according to which a marriage be- 
tween Catholic and Catholic, in England, if 
celebrated by a Catholic clergyman, is pro- 
claimed null and void, Sir." 

" And there is such a one, Sir?" 

" Why, yes : here, in Ireland, a Catholic 
priest is recognized by the statute as a legal 
agent in marrying two of his own flock ; he is 



108 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

only guilty of felony when he marries two of 
different persuasions ; but in England his mi- 
nistry is not at all permitted. A well-schooled 
London-Irish hod-carrier, who has 'gone to the 
priest/ as they call it, with some unsuspecting 
fresh-faced girl of his country, just come over, 
can turn her adrift at his pleasure. I have seen 
many instances of the kind; the Roman Catholic 
clergymen of the rankling metropolis can supply 
you with more ; and the police offices, and the 
records of infamy and misery, with more still. 
But, after all this explanation, you have yet to 
answer my Irish questions, Sir. 1 ' 

" Suppose I am not able," said Gerald. 

" See there, then," remarked the gentleman, 
again about to make himself comfortable in the 
corner. But another jolt — it was the third or 
fourth — seemed to exhort him to continue. 

" After all, I am not ashamed of my slovenly 
compatriots of St. Giles's, in one respect. 
They are many thousands ; friends of theirs 
about Chelsea, and other outskirts of London, 
are thousands more ; and yet few of them ap- 
pear, from time to time, before your sitting 
magistrates, charged with their proportionate 
share of the different crimes which are com- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 109 

mitted in your Babylon — Lord Liverpool has 
remarked as much — and with the blackest of its 
crimes they, thank God ! never stand charged, 
either there, or here: — why? because they are 
absolutely ignorant of its nature, here; and have 
no name in their language for it ; and Peel ad- 
mitted that." 

M But it would be a blunder, indeed, if they 
have no name for the rows and the uproars, in 
London, which disgrace them and their country, 
and shock the English people.'" 

*' Again, I beg to put by your new point, till 
I give way to a little more Irish egotism about 
ray countrymen in your capital. Apart from 
St. Giles's, and its very humble community, I 
am still less ashamed of specimens of a higher 
class, whom we constantly send over to you. 
For example : — some of the editors, and sub- 
editors, of your daily press, a majority of its re- 
porters, and a good many of the contributors to 
your periodicals, are Irishmen, mostly real Pats 
— I mean Papists, as you call them. And not now 
considering the perfection to which they hare 
brought their reporting profession, and the great 
respectability they have thereby conferred upon 
it, nor the talent they show in the other depart- 



110 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

merits mentioned — not now debating these points, 
because we do not want them, I would invite you 
to recollect, for a moment, the sterling moral 
and social habits and principles, which alone 
could have enabled this numerous class of 
Irishmen to make themselves useful amid the 
jostling competition of London, and to this day 
keep> their private character untouched by public 
odium, or even by public inquiry of any kind." 

" All very fair, 1 ' Gerald said ; but he pressed 
his query about the fighting in St. Giles's. 

"Ay, just as they go on here, at fairs, and 
every where else ; I admit all that — won't de- 
fend a bit of it ; and yet, Sir, to your surprise, 
don't care one little harmless blow of a shillelagh 
about it. 'Tis very wrong, to be sure, but as 
incidental to the neglected state of society in 
which they first acquired it, as prancing is to a 
half-broke colt. In an improved position of 
Ireland, it will wear down ; ay, in her very 
next generation, please God ; — and so long as 
it continues, I thank the stars of my country 
that there is nothing unmanly in it ; and that 
it is not pugilism either— no doubt you stare, 
Sir, if I could see your face, but I am quite 
in earnest — I hope that cold-blooded prize-fight- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. Ill 

ing may never become a national sport, as you 
define it, in Ireland ; may never take place 
of even our pate-breaking cudgel-play, which 
has the merit of a cause for contention, if it has 
no other." 

" Or an imaginary cause," observed Gerald. 

" Or an imaginary cause," assented the Irish- 
man ; " it does as well for my point ; our com- 
batants may set to work under a delusion, in 
some cases ; still they are really vexed with 
each other ; their blood is up ; they do not 
shake hands to admit mutual and perfect good 
will, and then pound one another into jelly, or 
kill one another for a wager; — ay, kill ; for the 
yearly deaths by pugilism in England, are a set 
off to those by the shillelagh in Ireland. v 

" I am delighted to find a gentleman so 
truly national," smiled Gerald ; u you will not 
admit a single point against your green Ire- 
land." 

" Not a single one, — to an Englishman deter- 
mined that I should, Sir," replied his com- 
panion good-huniouredly. 

" Come, I compel you to one : you have 
agreed with me that the likeness was strong 
between St. Giles's and the outlet of your 



112 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

metropolis, which we just now cleared — why 
does it exist ?" 

" That outlet," answered the gentleman, in a 
low, impressive voice, " once formed part of an 
extensive, comfortable, and neat district, occu- 
pied by people who derived their means for 
keeping it so, from their manufacture of articles, 
which a certain political measure put an end 
to the demand for."" 

" What political measure, Sir ?" 

" The atrocious act of Legislative Union, 
Sir. v 

The adoring girl, who is told that her idol 
is a demon, would scarce feel more shocked, 
and, indeed, indignant, than did Gerald at this 
bold censure upon a measure which he had al- 
ways regarded as the result of the greatest 
state-wisdom, and as pregnant with incalcu- 
lable blessings to Ireland. It had been his 
father's pride, as well as the stepping-stone to 
his success in life ; it was the highest feather 
in the cap of the distinguished minister, Ge- 
rald's guardian, friend, and official principal. 
His brother took it up and identified himself 
with its spirit, and its workings. None of Ge- 
rald's political friends had ever impugned it. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. US 

To be now abruptly, and perhaps rudely, told 
that it was an " atrocious act," offended, and 
vexed him sorely. After an expressive pause, 
during which he looked hard at the companion 
whose face he could not see — " Good-night, 
Sir," he said, and he fell back, in his corner. 

" A very good-night, Sir, and a pleasant 
nap," returned his polite companion ; " and you 
are quite right, for here go our wheels over 
the smooth road at last." 



114 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER V. 

But Gerald was nothing the better of the 
kind wishes expressed in his regard. He did 
not sleep. The passing outrage upon his poli- 
tical creed at first kept him restless. '* Yes," 
he argued, " I have before me, at last, a speci- 
men of a real Irish declaimer, Milesian, Papist, 
and with a great O to his name. Here is 
one of the overweening nationalists that, by 
decrying every thing English, and blindly wor- 
shipping every thing Irish, keep this country 
from the great assimilation with her superior, 
which can alone ensure her respectability and 
happiness."" And Gerald went on to re-arrange 
his former opinions on the subject, which recent 
events had put out of their places ; and, a 
little in spite to his fellow-traveller, he resolved 
anew to hold firmly by them all. Nay, he 
even wished to torment and overpower him with 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 115 

them, if, indeed, the old gentleman would 
awaken out of his second sleep, and give the 
opportunity by talking politics again. That 
sleep seemed, however, a hopeless one for 
Geralds view. Nothing could break it up; 
neither the horn of the guard, summoning 
ghastly-looking creatures, in successive villages, 
to be ready with fresh horses, or to receive 
their mail-bags from Dublin ; nor the change 
of noise that occurred, when the coach suddenly 
clattered off the smooth road upon the pave- 
ment of a street ; nor yet the change from going 
fast, and being shaken violently, to a stand-still 
at the window of a village post-office, although 
sudden rest and quietness, when one sleeps 
amid the motion and rumble of a carriage is 
as great an interruption to repose, as is a sud- 
den uproar when one sleeps in one's motionless 
and silence curtained bed. 

In fact, hours wore away, and Gerald heard 
nothing from his companion, except a snore, 
that often strove for predominance with the 
horses' hoofs and the coach-wheels. 

During this pause, Gerald's momentary vex- 
ation gradually wore away in recurrences to his 
more immediate and important affairs, and he 



116 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

soon cared little whether or not the declamatory 
Irishman woke up till the end of his journey. 
Just at this moment of indifference to the event, 
it occurred, however, exactly as more conside- 
rable events happen in life when we least expect 
them, and after we have tired ourselves waiting 
for them. Though Gerald could not distinctly 
see his movements in the thrice-dark night, the 
gentleman seemed to shiver a little, as if he had 
got chilled ; and then it farther appeared that 
he snatched off his hat, and replaced it by a 
white night-cap, dimly hinted to Gerald's eye 
amid the surrounding gloom. Having made 
these improvements in personal comforts, he 
shrugged himself into his corner again ; but 
suddenly bent forward with another slight 
shudder, and quite pulled up the hitherto half 
raised glass. 

Gerald thought this unceremonious, and 
indeed so expressed himself. " You will ex- 
cuse me, Sir, but I am hot, and half-suffocated ;" 
and he proceeded to let down the glass to its 
former position. 

" And I am cold, and half-frozen," said the 
assiduous sleeper : u so, what are we to do ?" 

Gerald was conciliated by the tone and words 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 117 

with which his briskness was met, and going 
halves with his own ill-humour and the occa- 
sion, replied, " If your cloak does not keep you 
warm enough, you can have mine, Sir." 

" But not put up the glass ? Well, young 
gentleman, I give way, though, were it daylight, 
you would call me your senior by nearly thrice 
the number of years you have yet lived." 

" And were it daylight, Sir, you would see 
that I am an invalid, lately escaped from very 
trying illness and sufferings, and not worth con- 
tending the point with." 

" Indeed ?" questioned the other, stooping 
over and trying to peer into his features, per- 
haps for an illustration of Gerald's avowal — " I 
am very sorry, Sir, that I should have raised 
the trifling question — in reality 'tis of no import 
tome — lam in sturdy health, thank God! — and 
have been so as long as I can remember, — and as 
indifferent as Marcus Brutus to the ' idle wind' 
— so, never mind me, but take care of yourself, 
by all means. Don't you think you ought to 
use your cloak yourself? The night air may 
hurt you more than the closeness of our atmos- 
phere, if the glass were down, could annoy 
you." 



118 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Peace was now made ; once more they chatted 
freely together; and the elderly gentleman be- 
came amusing, as if he thought " to sleep 
no more,'' and make an effort for his invalid 
and sleepless companion. His tone, to Gerald's 
surprise, changed even into more kindness than 
his admissions of ill health warranted : nay, into 
a l'espectf ulness, or, at least, a considerateness, 
for which he could not at all account. Mean- 
time his respect for his accidental associate also 
increased, keeping pace with the good feeling 
called up by the stranger's attentions and man- 
ner, and he endeavoured to make himself re- 
sponsively amiable. A score of different topics 
were exhausted, before they a second time disa- 
greed, and then (Heaven knows by what by- 
ways they arrived at it) their stumble was over 
the theory that Gerald had so much at heart. 
Thus they immediately approached it. 

" Yes," (Gerald speaks,) " I am, indeed, as 
sorry as you or any Irishman can be, that your 
great question has again failed r 11 alluding to a 
recent vote in the House of Lords : — " for I con- 
sider it the first step to be taken towards a re- 
sult which would ensure the future happiness 
and success of your country, 11 and he stated his 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 119 

favourite plan of perfect assimilation between 
the two islands. 

The stranger remained silent some time, and 
then said, — " Well ; and it would be my first 
plan, too, to have us all made English-Irish.'" 

There was a subdued something about the 
expression of the words, totally different from 
the speaker's former mode of delivering himself, 
which struck one of the thousand hidden or for- 
gotten strings of associated thought, and made 
Gerald's mind start. He surely had heard that 
voice saying those words before, but where, or 
when, was a question ; and it engaged him until 
his companion continued, very tranquilly, and 
perhaps somewhat sneeringly, only that the sneer 
was good-naturedly, or else cleverly kept down — 

" That is, Sir, it would be my first plan for 
curing all our evils, — if I saw any chance of its 
success ; if it had not failed already; failed a hun- 
dred times, during the last seven hundred years, 
and upwards; failed with all possible appliances 
to speed it on, such as it cannot now muster ; 
failed with attempts at extermination by fire and 
sword, by chicanery and intrigue, by famine and 
pestilence ; failed with attempts at colonization, 
even by Scotch experimentalists; failed with 



120 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

attempts at proselytism by " drum ecclesiastic," 
by the kidnapping, demoralizing, odious system 
of charter-schools, by burning mass-houses, 
by priest-hunting, and by laws passed amid 
assenting cheers, that might have found an echo 
in Pandemonium ; failed altogether, and at each 
failure more decidedly than at each previous 
one. And, as such is the fact, I give up the 
old plan for a new plan." 

* What is it f* asked Gerald. 

" One by which every other country has got 
on, that ever has got on. One, by which alone 
mighty England has got on, and could have got 
on, though she is not in the habit of recom- 
mending it to our adoption. One, you may 
anticipate, very little like yours — the unsuccess- 
ful experiment of eight hundred years. In fact, 
Sir, since we plainly see that Ireland cannot be 
made English, suppose we just allow her to 
make herself what she is every day becoming in 
spite of us— Irish ?" 

" What she is every day becoming ?"" echoed 
Gerald. 

" Precisely, Sir : at this moment, she is more 
Irish than she was a fortnight after the visit of 
the heartless, hoaxing, eye-poking-out and limb- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 121 

chopping Norman ; to say nothing of any later 
period of her history. The sojourning strangers 
in her soil, those who openly call themselves so, 
are numerically less, opposed to her real people, 
than were, in proportion, the few needy adven- 
turers he left behind him, to the then aborigines 
of the country. And that people now amount 
to numbers fitted to form a great nation ; and 
they are at last united, firm ; talky, if you like ; 
but still firm ; reflective, and full of purpose ; 
united by a riveting of every link of the social 
chain ; united in religion, — or at least their fel- 
low-countrymen who join them in purpose, care 
nothing for the difference, — and above all, Sir, 
they are — United Irish." 

" For a struggle by arms ?" asked Gerald. 
" I do not say that ; but I will say — for be- 
coming a nation, free, and able to work out its 
own resources. This freedom includes, of course, 
escape from the remaining fetters of the statute- 
book, but by no means can be limited to that 
single advantage. And this freedom, I repeat, 
Ireland will arrive at, in spite of us all. In 
spite of herself; she cannot help it. When once a 
country has come to a certain step, she must go 
farther ; there is a moral necessity — a necessity 

VOL. III. G 



122 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

sown in the elements of human nature, then 
manifesting itself — that she should. Every 
country that ever gained that certain step, has 
done so ; Ireland has gained it, and she must 
do so." 

" And now, your certain step, 11 said Gerald, 
almost stunned, if nothing else, at the boldness 
of this doctrine. 

" Consciousness of moral power, Sir," answer- 
ed his lecturer ; " consciousness of moral power, 
derived from education amongst the higher and 
middle classes, and by their communings with, 
and their example to, the lower classes ; by in- 
crease in wealth, and by fame in liberal profes- 
sions and pursuits, the result of that education ; 
by successful rivalry in wealth and talent with 
those who would keep her down ; and I must not 
omit, although I still call it up in a moral view, 
by comparing themselves and their country with 
their antagonists, and with other countries, — 
ay, and by comparing numbers with numbers.' 1 

" And if not by a warlike coup-de-main" 
continued Gerald, " Ireland is, I suppose, to 
be made pure Irish by a perfect union (one even 
more perfect than your present one, to ensure 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 123 

the result) of all her people, of every religious 
and political cast ?" 

" It does not seem so. But no matter whe- 
ther it does or not. Such a literal union is not 
at all necessary. The single party who abso- 
lutely cry out against the approaching crisis are 
as unimportant and as undistinguished in moral 
power — that is, in wisdom or talent, in place 
or in fame, as they are numerically ; and they 
will soon grow less so than they are, and, finally, 
become as unnoticed in Ireland, as the few 
hundred thousands of Roman Catholics are in 
England, or their political (though not religious) 
pendants, the Huguenots in France. Some of 
our anti-Irish threaten to leave us, in the very 
first stage of our progress towards nationality. 
If they keep their word, so much the better; 
if they do not, again, I say, no matter. Whe- 
ther they go or stay, their national existence 
will be destroyed ; I do not mean by any spe- 
cific means of annihilation directed to them, but 
as a matter of course, according to the nature 
of things ; necessarily, of itself." 

" Then, Sir, your object is to be won rather 
by disunion than by union ?" 
g 2 



124 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Not by it ; because no one who seeks our 
object wants to work with it, or, indeed, wishes 
for it, — only if the party insists on it, (and they 
will; in fact, it is inevitable,) then our object must 
be won, notwithstanding that partial disunion, 
without caring for it, without thinking of it. Yes, 
indeed, Sir, you are quite right. Ireland must, 
at last, become a nation in the teeth of that dis- 
union, as far as it goes ; and those who made it, 
and who obstinately and foolishly keep it up, 
must abide the consequences. They have made 
their bed ; let them lie down on it. They have 
spurned every opportunity of getting on along 
with the Irish people, when both might have 
gone on well together, to the end of the world ; 
and now the Irish people will get on without 
them ; ay, and worse than that ; shake them 
off, and leave them behind on the course. 1 ' 

" Excuse my ignorance, if I admit that I do 
not know what political opponents you thus 
doom to destruction. 1 ' 

" To political oblivion, rather." 
" Well, any term ; but who are they ?" 
" Descendants of colonists, English and 
Scotch, who, to this day, in addresses presented 
to the throne, call themselves colonists, and de- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 125 

cline the name of Irishmen — these, in the first 
instance ; next, descendants of colonists, who 
openly advocate or encourage anti-Irish mea- 
sures of any kind." 

" Your English-Irish, in fact," commented 
Gerald. 

" Even so, if you like the phrase ; for I cer- 
tainly do mean all persons who would strive to 
make Ireland English ; and, lastly, I mean all 
pretended English-Irish friends of the people, 
who, to carry a county, or a town, or, perhaps, 
with a commendable foresight towards cherish- 
ing their Irish estates, (though I pronounce 
them in no danger,) give a vote, now and then, 
upon the great wrangling question, (as you 
would throw a piece of bread to a hungry mas- 
tiff, or to a critic, merely to pass him by,) and 
afterwards zealously, though perhaps covertly, 
engage in one or all of the absurd schemes for 
provincializing Ireland: such as converting, 
transporting, or unhousing a million at a time of 
her population. Long ago, Sir, such half mea- 
sures, and such half Irishmen, might have suc- 
ceeded in recommending themselves to our ge- 
nerous credulity ; but even the burnt child now 
teaches us a lesson." 



126 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" My good Sir," said Gerald, "you certainly 
have arrived, by this account, at a most sudden 
importance : my only wonder is, that, till within 
the last forty or fifty years, you never thought 
of taking any great steps towards it." 

" Do not wonder, Sir; but, if you please, 
blame yourselves for the phenomenon, and ad- 
mit beforehand a remarkable want of political 
sagacity in making us what we are ; since, as is 
argued, you never contemplated, at the time, 
making us the much more that we are doomed 
to become in spite of you." 

" Pray explain, Sir." 

" Why, Sir, you had us bound hands and 
feet, gagged, interdicted from reading and writ- 
ing, thinking and praying. Had you left us 
so, you would now find us so : terror, ignorance, 
the immorality engendered by a want of free 
approach to the observances and comforts of 
religion, and, above all, the uninterrupted in- 
fluence of perfect slavery and conscious self- 
abasement, must have unfitted us for a struggle 
against you, or fitted us only for one that free 
'blood-letting' (as Bacon called it, when con- 
sulted upon our symptoms, some hundred years 
ago,) would have got down. And since, indeed, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 127 

it has all along been your object to keep us 
from growing into a nation — I merely argue the 
thing logically — such ought to have been your 
part. But, with that object in view, you incon- 
siderately and inconsistently broke half of our 
shackles, ungagged us, allowed us to read and to 
write, to pray and to think ; to make money ; 
to stand before the world in professions ; and 
you deemed, that by leaving the other half of 
the shackles still rattling about us ; by barring 
your Universities against us, no matter how we 
availed ourselves of your permission to become 
learned and wise; by blocking up the bench to 
our successful lawyers ; the army and navy to 
our brave soldiers and sailors, the senate to our 
aristocracy, or to our popular men ; by these 
reservations, Sir, you calculated that still we 
should remain powerless and but half free. Yet 
surely here was a great lack of that political 
foresight which spans the future workings of its 
measure by aids from a philosophical, a common- 
sense calculation of the essential tendencies of 
man, derived from his position. The whole 
slave may be kept stationary, the half freedman 
never. And by half freeing us, you taught us 
to cry out for perfect freedom; nay, should 



128 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

you disregard our voice, you taught us how to 
obtain that first blessing with our own moral 
energies. You ensured it to us. You opened 
our eyes to the past, the present, and the future. 
You put a light into our hands, not indeed to 
dispel the darkness in which we mutely and 
passively crouched, but certainly to make it 
* visible.' You led us out of the valley of 
bondage, if not into the plains of freedom, cer- 
tainly to a height from which, for the first time, 
we saw their teeming promise, each following day 
inhaled their fragrance, and imbibed the inevit- 
able ambition to rush down and mingle with 
their favoured possessors. That, joined to your 
theory that we never must so rush down, was a 
great mistake. As well might you say to the 
hill-stream ' descend not,' to kindled flame f as- 
cend not, ' to the fledged bird ' fly not,' to the 
budding tree ' bloom not, nor yet bear fruit.' 
Streams may be pent up in the low grounds for 
ever ; flame, if never kindled, will never aspire 
to heaven ; that bird, if you clip his wings, and 
keep them clipped, will never fly ; that tree, if 
it bud not, neither will it be fruitful ; but once 
in motion on the hill, once kindled, once fea- 
thered, once budding, the water will find its 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 129 

way down, the fire will find its way up, the 
bird will emerge into his freedom of air, and 
the tree will yield its matured fruit." 

" Perhaps; if not diverted aside, or quenched, 
or caught on the verge of the nest, or torn up 
by the roots,' 1 said Gerald. 

" I grant you ; but Ireland is no longer to 
be so dealt with. Fair promises or half mea- 
sures can no longer ' divert' her ; and the 
hand of physical force alone can impede her 
launch from the nest, or quench her, or tear 
her up ; and this, your only available hand, 
you must not use, for she will not afford you 
the opportunity ; and an unarmed people — one, 
at least, so near you, and before the world's 
eye, you will hardly endeavour to exterminate. 
You live too late for that." 

" I am not one of those who, under any 
circumstances, or at any time — " began Ge- 
rald — his lecturer anxiously interrupted him. 

m I do not believe — suppose you are; in that 
point of view I never saw your character, not- 
withstanding the brisk twist you just now gave to 
my string of metaphors. No, Sir; nor can I even 
believe that one-third of the people of England 
entertain such a hopeful scheme ; are capable 
g5 



130 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

of entertaining it : and hence, apart from the 
hazard of the attempt — for there would be a 
hazard, after all ; and apart from the ques- 
tion of other neighbours approvingly looking 
on at your enterprize ; and apart from the 
execration with which the voice of the world 
would greet it — hence is my confidence that 
England plans no exterminating crusade against 
us. How, then, are we to be stunted in our 
growth into a free and flourishing nation ? 
Shackle us, and gag us, and so forth, again ? 
Still more improbable. Impossible. A rebel- 
lion amongst us, from one extremity of the 
land to the other, would not, could not, be 
punished by the re-enactment of one repealed 
penal statute. You did not, durst not, so take 
vengeance for the wild insurrection of ninety- 
eight ; and what was out of the question thirty 
years ago, is now more remotely out of the 
question. You durst not, for many of the 
very reasons which stand against the fire and 
sword policy ; and for more than those. And 
here, I ask again, how will you stop us? 
Bundling up your assimilation theory, and 
your conversation theory, and your depopula- 
ting theory, like so much lumber; throwing 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 131 

them, in the name of good sense, quite over- 
board ; and getting things before us as they 
really have been, and therefore are, and must 
be — how — I repeat my words, over and over, 
for there are no better — How WILL you 
stop us ?" 

" Oh, Sir,"" replied Gerald, " I make allow- 
ances for the zeal with which, as an Irishman 
and a Catholic, you state all this matter ; but to 
many of your assumptions, whence flow your 
conclusions, I must, in the first instance, object. 
The aggregate national influence of all the 
descendants of English and Scotch in Ireland, 
is not so unimportant as you would represent 
it: in property and intelligence they outweigh 
the native people ; and even in numbers they 
are formidable. You also suppose for your 
friends superior talent and fame ; pardon me, 
if I have always been led to consider that in 
such instances, as well, indeed, as in all others 
which confer respectability, the English-Irish 
portion of your whole population had the ad- 
vantage.' 1 

" You make more than one mistake, Sir, 
which I crave your permission distinctly to 
point out," resumed the gentleman. 



132 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" When I spoke of an anti-Irish party here, 
who were insignificant, and to be treated accord- 
ingly, I did not mean the majority of the de- 
scendants of English and Scotch, now living in 
Ireland; I could not mean so, for that majority, 
though not pure Irish in blood, are so in feeling 
and in national identity with the people. After 
you have been some time amongst us, Sir, 
(which I hope may be the case,) you will meet 
many Protestant-Irish gentlemen as zealous as 
I am to see Ireland free and national, although 
Catholic. You will find Protestant wealth, and 
property, and title, and education, animated by 
this zeal, and swelling the common cry for free- 
dom and a country. Of course, we deduct so 
much of Protestant influence and respectability 
from your English-Irish, or anti-Irish list, and 
add it to our mere-Irish one. Then as to 
the question of the comparative intellect of 
the Catholic people and their Protestant abet- 
tors on the one hand, and of the headstrong 
party alluded to on the other, look into our 
literature, Sir, attend a Catholic debate in Par- 
liament, attend our Four-Courts in Dublin, and 
I leave you to your own conclusions. Taking 
into account how lately Catholic talent has been 



THE ANGLO IRISH. 138 

permitted to force itself into fame, and how un- 
interruptedly this handful of their sworn foes 
have enjoyed all the faculties for arriving at men- 
tal perfection, I am, indeed, surprised to find dis- 
crepancy upon the side where it appears so evi- 
dent. But we should, however, consider, that 
fifty years of pushing on, freshened by novel 
excitement, and inspired by noble objects, is 
worth centuries of narrow-minded resistance, 
which implies standing still, and perhaps more 
than that — perhaps occasionally falling back ; 
and thus we might account for the wonder ; and 
hence, probably, tyrants, or national monopo- 
lists, are always less enlightened than the people 
whom they would crush, or exclude from privi- 
leges common to all." 

" Well, Sir," said Gerald, " admitting your 
last statements, I acknowledge myself appealed 
to for a re-consideration of some former opinions 
on this subject ; you will permit me to appre- 
hend, however, that your religious zeal may 
still unconsciously induce you to exaggerate the 
advantages of your present position. 1 ' 

" I have helped you to correct two mistakes, 
Sir, built upon my conversation with you ; I 
will help you to correct a third. Since the first 



134 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

dawn of the Reformation — I must conclude ra- 
pidly, for we approach the turn off the high- 
road, at which, you say, we are to part — since 
the first dawn of the Reformation, my family 
have been Church of England Protestants — I, 
my wife and children, (a goodly flock, I promise 
you,) firmly adhere to the same creed ; and I 
beg to add — still more abruptly — for here the 
coach stops, and you get down — that for two 
hundred years, my predecessors held, here- 
abouts, what I now hold, an independence, 
though not a princely one, of Irish acres, upon 
which, should your views and leisure permit, I 
can assure you an Irish welcome, whenever you 

do me the honour to inquire for that name " 

and the gentleman, stooping across, touched 
Gerald's fingers with what he felt to be a card, 
which, making due acknowledgements for it, 
my hero transferred, in the dark, into his 
pocket. 

" And certainly, Sir," he added ; " the very 
last avowal you have made supplies the most 
cogent hint I could receive, as to the propriety 
of looking closer at all your opinions and 
statements ; it is a powerful comment upon 
them." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 135 

" I am glad you think so ; glad that any 
thing is likely to induce a stranger, newly ar- 
rived from England, to study us here, just as 
he finds us," said the gentleman. 

The coach-door was pulled open, and the 
guard appeared with a lantern in his hand, to 
say that Gerald's luggage was put down on the 
road, waiting for him. 

" Good-bye, then, Sir," said Gerald ; " and if 
I tarry in your neighbourhood, I shall scarce 
forget your kind intimation." 

" Nor I, should you appear, the spirit in 
which it is given — good-bye, young gentleman ;" 
and he once more made himself up in his corner, 
like a man that still had to travel many miles 
farther. Just then the guard thrust his lan- 
tern into the coach, to enable Gerald to arrange 
his cloak on his arm, and the dull light, strik- 
ing obliquely upon the stranger's face, momen- 
tarily revealed certain strong-marked, smiling 
features, which Gerald vowed to himself he had 
before seen, though he only presumed where. But 
ere he could farther debate the point, the guard 
withdrawing his lantern, urged him to descend, 
and Gerald soon found himself standing alone 
with his portmanteau at the closed door of a 



136 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

cabin, which formed the angle of the by-road 
leading to Lower-Court ; his departed guardian 
of the night having advised him to deposit his 
luggage in the lowly abode, till he could send 
for it in the daylight. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 137 



CHAPTER VI. 

" This is a pretty situation for me," said 
Gerald, standing inactive at the cabin-door. 
The proceedings of the guard had been so ra- 
pid and arbitrary, that he had not had time nor 
presence of mind to suggest any thing for him- 
self, nor yet to make some necessary inquiries. 
" Of itself, a very capital situation ; but taken 
with the chance of my again becoming an in- 
mate of a Rockite cabin, and ' the great Cap- 
tain,' as every body says, so active in this 
neighbourhood, it grows still more interest- 
ing. Here I cannot remain, however, in the 
dense cold of the morning ; and forward I must 
not march till there is light to see my way :" 
so, putting his thoughts into acts, he knocked 
at the frail and chinky door. 

Without hearing any stir inside, a woman's 
voice reached him, in Irish ; it would seem 



138 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

that she spoke from her couch. Gerald, winc- 
ing at the abhorred language, which he had 
once thought Welsh, slowly explained, in hopes 
that his deliberate pronunciation might be un- 
derstood. He was a traveller, he said, and a 
stranger, quite unacquainted with the country, 
and he had to walk up the by-road after day- 
break, and till then, would thank her for per- 
mission to sit down, and stow his portmanteau 
in a corner. 

" By all manes, Sir, a-voorneen,"" was the 
second answer; and then, while it might be 
supposed that the woman of the house got 
up and dressed herself, an infant, which per- 
haps, had been sleeping with her, began to 
scream violently. The mother, in her most 
soothing tones, tried to quiet it, but without 
effect; and, amid its incessant expostulation, 
the creaking door opened, and Gerald entered 
the cabin. 

Here, the darkness did not prove absolutely 
impenetrable. A girl of about five years old 
knelt, resting on the palms of her hands, at the 
hearth, and by her puny yet well-trained puffs, 
had already spread the latent spark of a sod of 
turf, intentionally left over-night in the ashes, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 139 

to be ready for morning. Two younger chil- 
dren sat, half-dressed, by the embers, anxiously 
awaiting the promised flame ; and still the vo- 
ciferous infant, careless of all things but the 
absence of its mother, peremptorily called for 
exclusive attention from a corner. 

The woman officiously took Gerald's portman- 
teau, and placed it aside. Next, she rubbed a 
three-legged stool, and adjusting it at the 
hearth, invited him to sit. Her accent was 
kind, and, Gerald thought, peculiarly plaintive; 
it was also tolerably good, that is in its imita- 
tion of an English one ; and her language was 
proper and decent. Her next proceeding con- 
sisted in sending the little human bellows to 
try and " pacify " her infant brother or sister 
on the straw coucli in the corner, while the 
mother, kneeling at the embers, turned herself 
into a human bellows of greater power, and 
much more promising effect. 

In a short time, indeed, the well-practised 
animal-machine produced a good blaze amongst 
the turf. By the light thus afforded, Gerald 
perceived that he sat in the most wretched and 
worst-appointed Irish cabin that had yet come 
under his observation. The last rain must 



140 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

have found ready way through the thatched 
roof, for the clay floor was puddled, and the 
puddle rested in little holes and cavities. He 
turned his glance to the woman who still per- 
formed bellows at the hearth. Her side-face, 
glaring in the blaze, fixed his attention. It 
was handsome and young — not more than three- 
and-twenty. 

" Here is a good fire now," said Gerald ; 
" do not trouble yourself any more. 1 ' 

" Thankee, Sir," she said, standing up. 

" And are all these fine little things yours ?" 
pursued Gerald. 

" Yes, Sir, praise be to God." 

" You have been a very young wife, then." 

" Musha, very, Sir ; but all 's for the best." 

f* You have not lost their father, I hope ?" 

" No, Sir, not out and out, entirely, the 
Lord be praised, Sir." 

Gerald's next question included more than 
interest for the poor family. In fact, the cir- 
cumstance of finding this cabin without a male 
inmate, as he had found a former one, pressed 
upon his private feelings. 

" And where is he ?" asked Gerald. 

" Anan, Sir?" 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 141 

The question was more carelessly repeated. 
" The poor father o' them, Sir ?" Evidently 
she was taken off her guard. A third time 
Gerald made his inquiry. 

" Avoch, Sir, he 's only gone a little way, for 
the night, on a matter o' business, to try an' 
bring home their breakfast, maybe; I expect 
him after the daybreak." 

" No doubt you do," thought Gerald. 
" And sure that's nigh-hand," she continued, 
looking out at the door. 

" Then it announces my hour for leaving 
you ; at least, I cannot stay much longer : shall 
I be able to get breakfast at the village on the 
by-road ?" 

The young woman assured him accommoda- 
tion there fit for the King of England ; but 
she offered no refreshments herself, not even a 
potatoe. " She has it not to offer," concluded 
Gerald, and he was right. 

Again he proposed a question : " Is Captain 
Rock near us at present ?" 

She started and grew pale, stammering out — 
" Who, Sir ? Captain who, for God's sake ?" 

As in a former case, Gerald repeated his 
words. 



142 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Myself does not know who you mean, Sir, 
a-voorneen ; sure, it 's little poor cratures like us 
ever knows or hears of captains, or curnels, or 
generals, or great people of the kind." 

It was a badly-acted equivocation. Gerald 
saw that, for some reasons best known to her- 
self, she dreaded admitting to him all know- 
ledge of a personage, with whom, nevertheless, 
she was not unacquainted. He did not, how- 
ever, embarrass his hostess any farther on the 
subject, but in his own mind decided that the 
sooner the broad daylight would permit him 
to leave the cabin, the better for all parties 
concerned. 

All this time the infant had been screaming, 
and its mother now ran to the straw-bed, 
lifted it up, sat on a second stool, and laying 
it on her^lap, drew to her a wheel, and began 
to spin; her ingenuity divided between her 
handicraft work and her endeavours to soothe 
and please her cross child. Both occupations 
ended in nothing. Her ill-conditioned off- 
spring would not abate a key or a note of its in- 
dignant remonstrance, although, speaking flu- 
ently to its unconscious ears, she tried it with 
coaxing, kissing, threats, promises, and at last, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 143 

notwithstanding that she was a meek creature, 
with a whipping : and the bad flax, which she 
would fain spin into fine thread, as if in league 
with the last pledge of her wedded love, kept 
snapping every moment. 

And yet, by a renewed conversation with his 
fair and perplexed young hostess, Gerald fovind 
that neither the cross child, nor the frail flax, nor 
any thing else in the world, could really put her 
out of humour. She and her husband were very 
poor, she admitted, and for some time had been 
so ; " but all was for the best, under God." Now 
and then she sold winter apples, and a bit of 
soap, and a few " haiperths" of tape and thread, 
and three or four tobacco-pipes. Although the 
flax was bad, she could get twopence a-day for 
spinning it, from six to six ; she should be a 
rich woman if her husband could find work, or 
if she could possibly make as much as would 
lay in one good heap of turf, or if she had half 
an acre of ground, at the value ; but, even as it 
happened, " every thing was for the best." 

" Altogether," ruminated Gerald, " I have 
never before imagined a model of poverty, meek- 
ness, contentment, and industry, united in one 
person." 



144 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

** And yet, 1 ' addressing her, " you have been 
better off, I dare say ?" 

" Musha, yes, Sir," — she dropped her head, 
and her voice changed, — " only we didn't meet 
with the best of friends ; but I blame nobody ; 
for if I did, I ought to blame them that the 
likes o' me and Mickle has no right to blame, 
at the first setting out ; every thing happens ac- 
cording to God's will, and is for the best." 
" What work can your husband do I* 
" Field-work now, Sir ; that is, he '11 soon be 
able for it, when he 's quite over the misfortune 
that got him discharged from his last calling, 
and, by the same token, that sent us out of a 
snug cabin into this poor one ; our third remove 
in the world, Sir, and worse than the other 
two." 

" What misfortune do you mean ?" 
" His thigh, Sir ; he broke it in bits." 
" And from what calling did this accident 
get him discharged ?" 

" Faix, Sir, from one that was better than 
the field-work will ever turn out for us, though 
it kept the poor boy a great deal away from 
me. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 145 

" He was a driver of a public coach ?" inter- 
rupted Gerald. 

" Musha, and he was so, Sir,'' answered the 
woman, stopping her wheel, and looking with 
great interest at him. 

" And his name, Farrell ?" continued Ge- 
rald. 

"Blessed saints!" ejaculated the young 
woman, starting up — " and so, it 's you, Sir, 
whoever you are, come back to see us again, as 
you said you would to Mickle, that day, on 
the road ? It 's you that talked kind to him, and 
gave him good advice, and the twenty goold 
guineas, and he lying on his back in the strange 
cabin? — the guineas that sent the poor boy home 
to us, and helped us to nurse him, many a long 
day, and paid all our rent, and every thing else 
that we could never pay, only for them, until a 
week ago, when they run out to the last shil- 
ling ? It 's yourself, Sir, isn't it ?" 

" I am certainly the person," said Gerald, 
inclined to smile at the last question, u who had 
the pleasure of doing your husband a trifling 
service upon the day you allude to." 

" Trifling, Sir ? it saved all our lives ! — May 
the Father o' mercies, that put it into your 

VOL. III. H 



146 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

heart that day, reward you for it !" — she knelt 
down, her vehemence at last arresting the cries 
of the infant on her left-arm — " May the blessing 
of his young wife and the young mother of his 
four darlings, be in your road for ever ! — och, 
amen, amen, I pray the good God." 

Gerald was not now disposed to smile ; he 
rather felt his eyes infected with the tears that 
streamed copiously from hers. At the same 
time he made the involuntary reflection, that 
in all this there was unalloyed nature and 
feeling, such as he had never before witness- 
ed. " They are a fresher people than the 
French or the English, in every way," he con- 
tinued. 

" But there was your own arum, Sir, a-vour- 
neen ; your own arum ! how is it ?" asked 
Moya Farrell, standing up. Gerald assured her, 
quite well. She pressed her question, warning 
him to answer her in downright truth and since- 
rity. He renewed his assurances. 

"Oh, then, the Lord be praised! — ay, 
though it's sooner come round than Mickle's 
itself, the thigh I mane. — Was there ever any 
thing to equal it ! To have you standing before 
me, Sir ! and my poor boy not in the place ! 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 147 

But you '11 stop awhile, won't you, Sir, a-vour- 
neen, to let Mickle see your face ? och ! and he 'd 
rather look at it, this morning, than at the sun's, 
if it was summer ! and you '11 never think that 
it 's in hopes of gaining by it, I mane, Sir, — 
or—" 

" Indeed," interrupted Gerald, " I never 
will think any such thing of him or of you ; I 
cannot await his return, however ; 'tis now light 
enough for my walk to the village, and I must 
leave you, with thanks for your accommodation; 
but very probably you will hear of me again ; 
meantime, pray take care of my portmanteau. 
Now, good-bye ; — stay ; I must kiss that chub- 
by fellow that keeps looking at us so stedfastly." 

While making his adieus to the wondering 
boy, Gerald unostentatiously put into his hand 
an earnest of his breakfast at least ; the mother 
did not notice the proceeding. Then, stepping 
over her sad threshold, amid all her regrets and 
lamentations, and her promises that the port- 
manteau should be as safe " as a chalice on the 
altar," and her earnest prayers for " luck and 
grace in his road," Gerald resolutely proceeded 
on his pedestrian journey. 

In fact, he had no wish to meet Mr. Mickle 
H 2 



148 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Farrell a second time, particularly under the 
present circumstances. At their last parting, 
Gerald had been led to conclude that, notwith- 
standing his specious statements, the ex-coachee 
was an active, though concealed Rockite : and 
his wife^ embarrassment when questioned, a 
few moments before, as to his absence from 
home, and her evident alarm, and bungled 
equivocation at another question, convinced Ge- 
rald that, notwithstanding the good advice 
admitted by Michael to Moya, and his yet 
lame thigh, to boot, the discontented young 
man had spent the very last night in Rockite 
conclave, at least. Gerald therefore would 
avoid personal contact with his former fellow- 
sufferer, however strong and sincere Michael 
Farrell's gratitude might prove. He pitied from 
his heart the early sufferings of the young 
couple, and again, and more than ever, accused 
himself of having, in a great degree, caused 
them : the character, the person, (though in no 
unlawful way,) and the manner of Moya, fur- 
ther interested him ; and he certainly would see 
more into their condition, and gain authentic in- 
formation of their past life, after his arrival at 
Lower- Court : but for the present Gerald walk- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 149 

ed as fast as he could away from their humble 
residence. 

He was doomed, however, to meet Michael 
Farrel before his arrival at Lower-Court, as 
well as a good many other people, some of 
whom he could not have possibly expected to 
meet. 

The by-road did not turn out as well in the 
reality as it had promised on the map, being 
deeply indented with ruts, strewn with large 
stones, and ankle deep almost at every step. 
The Irish mile and a half, which were to deliver 
Gerald up to comforts of the village half-way 
on to his sister's residence, seemed, under all the 
circumstances, as long as four English miles ; 
and when tired, and angry with Hibernian road- 
bills, and land measurement, he at last gained his 
first proposed halting-place, nothing helped to 
recompense Gerald for his unusual drudgery. 
The village, supposed so respectable, was point- 
ed out to him by a peasant, partly lying in a 
hollow, at the foot of a steep hill, from which 
Gerald looked down upon it, partly stretching 
up an opposite eminence, the whole composed 
of thatched cabins. Separated from it, stood 
a single slated house, which our traveller 



150 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

supposed and hoped might be the head inn, but 
the man by his side told him that it was only a 
new school-house, " built (to use his language) 
by the Orangemen and the biblicles, to coax 
the little childer of the place from their fathers 
and mothers, and try to make black Protestans 
of them." 

Gerald slowly descended to the group of 
cabins. Of an old woman, who was drying flax- 
seed before her door, he asked where he could 
find an inn. 

"An inn, Sir?" she said, as if the term 
proved too high-sounding for her ; then check- 
ing herself, for the honour of her village, she 
directed Gerald to a near cabin, upon the wall 
of which was a sign-board, having BrienvBoru 
(a great favourite with publicans of the neigh- 
bourhood, as he had been of their province) 
painted thereon in all the impressiveness of 
Prussian-blue armour, regal, red lead mantle, 
sceptre in hand, crown on head, and long white 
beard flowing to his breast. 

But Gerald could get nothing under the aus- 
pices of the conqueror of theDanes. The landlady 
had no bread; and as her proposed guest would 
not consent to substitute potatoes for breakfast, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 151 

she unwillingly forwarded him to " the house 
with the two chimblies,' 1 at the opposite side of the 
village, where Mrs. Bridget Hogan could " make 
off a loaf for him, and every thing else." 

Smiling, half-bitterly, however, at Moya 
FarrelPs guarantee, that his accommodations in 
this village would prove " fit for the King of 
England," Gerald proceeded to Mrs. Bridget 
Hogan. Meantime, he did not quite dislike his 
novel situation. Unknown, unsuspected, and 
without fear of contact with dangerous charac- 
ters, he rather congratulated himself upon the 
coming opportunity of studying real Irish 
persons and things, for the first time in his life, 
closely and peaceably. He determined to be 
very observant ; nay, he would use a pocket 
note-book and a pencil upon the spot, when- 
ever circumstances might require particular 
attention. And this proved an unwise resolve 
for him. 

Arrived at Mrs. Bridget Hogan's, Gerald 
certainly found that she could supply him with 
bread ; ay, and with tea, also, and fresh eggs, 
and new butter, and " the best o' crame :" and 
so, placing a seat for him in the middle of the 
apartment, she set about keeping her pleasant 



152 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

promises. Gerald unbent from his usual man- 
ner, and tried to be very civil in what he hoped 
might be an Irish way ; and this, too, was the 
result of a plan, cleverly suggested by his pru- 
dence to meet his situation ; and, so far, it did 
him good, for his landlady seemed very amiable 
and obliging. 

Looking around him, he felt desirous of at 
once carrying into effect the resolution we have 
just seen him form ; and accordingly, his note- 
book was placed on his knee, and his pencil 
pared. He wished to get a close, graphic 
description of the apartment in which he was. 
At his first glance forward, however, something 
occurred to flutter him in his purpose. A grey- 
headed man now appeared sitting in the gloom 
of the capacious chimney-recess, who, although 
he smiled continually, and looked very good- 
humoured, yet eyed Gerald keenly ; and not 
only were his glances disagreeable to the ama- 
teur, but Gerald inwardly started, as he asked 
himself, " Am I under some nervous delu- 
sion ? or is there a duplicate face of every face 
in the world ? and have I met and forgotten 
some one face, that is now reproduced in my 
mind, and confounded with that of the watchful 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 153 

old fellow, yonder ? or, worse than all, have I, 
as a kind of animal instinct on my nerves would 
hint — have I really encountered those features 
before now, upon some occasion of danger, 
when they wore a very different expression ?" 
Gerald argued thus, however, without showing 
any discomposure. After a moment's pause, 
too, he proceeded in his note-taking, passing his 
eyes over those of the elderly peasant with a 
careless confidence; and it gradually seemed 
that Gerald was mistaken in conjuring up a 
bugbear out of his silent observer. 

A second time, however, he was interrupted, 
though more agreeably, in his task. Nance, 
the landlady's daughter, came in from the 
fields, where she had been working, and took a 
seat near the man on the "hob." The girl 
had a pair of sparkling black eyes and pretty 
weather-tanned features, and the brown hair 
that burst from under her ungraceful cap was 
curling and glossy. Gerald perceived that 
she looked at him with intense wonder. He 
returned her regards perhaps oftener than 
was necessary for the business he had in 
hand, and by the silent converse of eyes, so 
popular between men and women all over 
h 5 



154 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

the world, they soon became friends. In fact, 
after about his sixth glance, Gerald's lip 
teemed with a smile, and Nance's eyes were 
ready to flash into the first outbreak of coquet- 
ish laughter. Indeed, for modesty's sake, she 
was obliged to turn away her head. 

" Yes," said Gerald, nodding playfully at 
her, as he again looked up, " you are right ; 
I am drawing your picture — many a less hand- 
some one has been taken — and I will thank 
you just to keep looking at me, steadily, and 
sit still, without laughing." A useless ad- 
vice, as he knew it would prove ; for the girl 
now broke into hearty laughter, at the same 
time blushing till she grew really handsome. 

By this little subterfuge Gerald considered 
himself enabled to go on with his still-life 
sketch, and accordingly wrote as follows : — 

" I am in a mud-floor cabin, but one of 
larger dimensions than is generally met with in 
this country. I see into two inner-rooms, 
furnished with rude bedsteads, covered with 
patch-work quilts. Another door, closed, at 
the end wall, near the fire-place, seems to lead 
into a third bed-chamber. There is a wheel- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 155 

barrow turned up against the wall behind the 
entrance-door ; two wicker-work hampers, used 
for carrying turf from the bogs (as Nance in- 
forms me), hang near it ; and at hand is the 
pig's trough, her mess ready mixed in it — 
(while I write, the pig comes in, quite conse- 
quentially, and munches her food with grunting 
satisfaction ;) farther on, I see a heap of bog- 
wood (Nance again) inclosed by a ridge of 
turf; the remains of an old buskin dangles on 
the wall near the chimney, as a receptacle for 
odds and ends ; and over it is thrown a linen 
cloth, ragged at the edges, used for hands, 
pots, glasses, tea-cups, or any thing that may 
require such nicety. The chimney extends the 
breadth of the gable wall, only excepting the 
space occupied by the third door, before men- 
tioned : and from the iron crook suspended in 
its cavity, hangs the huge black kettle that 
simmers over the turf blaze to make my tea. 
And here come in my figures, — Nance, and that 
smiling old fellow,— confound him ! she look- 
ing like a hope of something I am to get, 
(I don't say from her,) and he like a remem- 
brancer of something painful that has happened 
to me. 



156 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Hitherto I have been facing the open door 
of the cabin. Now I turn round on my wooden- 
seated chair. Upon a kind of wicker dish, 
also used as a strainer, and called skeeck, 
(Nance still, of course,) appears the overplus 
of potatoes allowed for madam pig's breakfast, 
put by with housewifely care for her dinner. 
Pots, of graduated sizes, black as turf-smoke 
can make them, succeed; some hanging, some 
piled against the wall : next, a broken bellows ; 
and next a wooden implement, shaped like an 
artillery-man's spunging-rod, used for pound- 
ing potatoes and herbs into a human mess 
called — what, Nance ? — ' Caulcannon, Sir j 1 and 
the pounder itself ? — ' Musha, Sir, don't be 
joking us; thoorgeen, Sir;' (and with exquisite 
coquetry, Nature's well-taught child drops her 
chin on her breast, giggling, and shooting off 
at me an up-glance of destructive efficacy : I 
still pretend that my questions, and my studi- 
ous looks around, are only breaks in my occu- 
pation of taking her picture.) Midway down 
the side wall, are two sets of shelves, having 
drawers beneath, one set larger than the other ; 
and they display four cups and saucers, of 
different sizes and patterns; delft bowls and 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 157 

basins ; a few plates of the same material, still 
ill-matched ; three little stone bottles, once 
filled with " Warren's jet blacking," and still 
wearing his label ; a metal egg-cup, a — (here 
Nance stole round, at first without my notice, 
and gave a shy look over my shoulder to see 
what I was really about ; but, no matter how, I 
paid her for her peeping ; and now she retires 
again to her hob, laughing merrily at the joke. 
Query ? does not my assumption of Irish good- 
humour sit prodigiously easy upon me ? and, 
query again, how do I like it ?) — To conclude 
my sketch ; under the drawers of the larger 
set of shelves is a deal-table with cross legs, 
holding brown crockery-ware, and wooden 
dishes ; and under it, again, is a great com- 
mander-in-chief of all the pots of the establish- 
ment. From all which it is evident that I sit 
in an Irish cabin of no ordinary degree, and 
that Mrs. Bridget Hogan, so denominated, very 
respectfully, by her humble competitor of the 
Brian Boru, is a person of some consequence. 

" While she bustles about me, preparing my 
breakfast, I must note her proceedings; and 
also sketch herself, as well as her house — and 
that first of all. 



158 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" She wears a faded-green stuff gown, that 
has no forepart; a blue woollen-cloth petti- 
coat ; a blue apron, dotted with white spots, 
tied so determinedly round her plump form, 
just at the hips, that similar shapes confront 
each other ; her black stockings are darned 
with white worsted, and her feet thrust into 
very old slippers ; her linen cap, secured tight- 
ly under her round chin, surrounds a clever- 
looking, fresh-coloured, and jolly face, whence 
that of my friend Nance inherits its black eyes, 
and its roguish character. And Mrs. Bridget 
Hogan, according to her grizzled locks, may 
be near fifty ; but there is no wrinkle to denote 
such an age. 

" Now she throws the tea-leaves, or what- 
ever leaves they may be, out of the block-tin 
teapot, opposite the door : by their tenacity to 
the interior of the vessel, I judge they have 
been a considerable time in it ; and it seems 
difficult to eject them. And now she fetches 
muddy water from (as she says) the well, and 
proceeds to wash a cup and saucer in one of 
the black pots. — Mem. Not half as hungry as 
I was one hour ago. — Her authoritative ac- 
cents call Nance into requisition ; I pause a 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 159 

moment ; Nance retires into one of the bed- 
rooms; I hear her sweeping the clay-floor 
with a worn-out, grating broom ; she re-ap- 
pears, and I am summoned to my breakfast. 

" With closed door, I resume at my break- 
fast-table, certainly as anxious to describe the 
appointments of the meal as to eat it. I have 
salt in a wine-glass without a pedestal; the 
metal egg-cup is placed at my hand, together 
with a metal spoon of all-work ; my tea-cup 
boasts red flowers running round it, and rests 
in a saucer exhibiting three blue dogs pursuing 
a blue hare. As much exceedingly brown 
sugar as my landlady judged might just sweet- 
en two cups of tea, appears on another saucer ; 
and on another still, half of a small print of 
butter, with evidence that Mrs. Bridget Hogan 
had severed it from its brother-half with her 
fingers, unwilling to trust me with the whole. 
M The best o' crame" is served in a little 
copper-coloured jug — I hope it keeps Mrs. 
Bridget's promise, but I won't look into it; 
for the really fresh eggs that, to my surprise, 
lie on a really nice table-cloth, and the loaf of 
brown bread, that must be available in its 



160 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

heart, at least, (and I will cut boldly,) half 
tempt me to forego some of my misgivings in 
the kitchen, and to recollect, that, after an in- 
different breakfast and a worse dinner, yester- 
day, I have tasted no food for the last fourteen 
hours — so — " 

" The eggs quite a treat — the heart of the 
brown loaf sincere ; but my tea — atrocious. 
All Mrs. Bridget's distillation has not taken 
away the smack of the abominable water that 
was the basis of the fluid. The sugar does 
not help to purify it ; and, both these conside- 
rations apart, I cannot, as the black lethean- 
looking stream issues from the tea-pot, help 
calling to mind the convictions that some time 
ago took place against certain concealed mur- 
derers, who vended deadly nightshade for 
congo-tea. 

" So, I have done breakfast, resting on the 
eggs and brown bread ; and now take a glance 
round the bed-room which has served me for a 
parlour. It is whitewashed, or pretends to be, 
rather; for the wash seems to have been laid 
on with a bundle of rods, so streaky and par- 
tial is its effect. Besides being a sleeping- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 161 

apartment, the chamber appears selected to 
hold the principal treasure of the house. At 
one end, resting on the floor, is a great deal 
chest (I have seen its like before); upon 
it is piled another of less dimensions ; upon 
that a trunk; and still upon that, a curious 
black box, or perhaps casket, which, like 
Hudibras's dagger, is little for its age ; over- 
head—" 

But here Gerald was interrupted in his note- 
taking, by a conversation in the outer-room, 
which first aroused only his curiosity, but 
finally impressed him with more serious feelings. 



162 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER VII. 

Gerald has himself informed us, that he 
left behind him, in the kitchen, Mrs. Bridget 
Hogan, her daughter Nance, and an elderly 
peasant, whose connexion with the family he did 
not know. They, and some new comers, were 
the speakers in the ensuing conversations. 

" Come here, Larry !" bawled the landlady, 
at the entrance-door, to some one passing by : 
" What 'i the new hindhrance between you and 
that Bignel V 

" Why," answered Larry, in a smart, sharp 
tone, that Gerald judged to proceed from a 
hardy fellow of forty, who might do a rash 
thing without considering the consequences, — 
" Why, because I won't send the childer to 
his school, he wants to take the bit of ground 
from me, though he let it to me for two 
years." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 163 

" Did you make the bargain before wit- 
nesses ?" asked Mrs. Bridget Hogan. 

" Ay, did I ; before Shaun Goff and Peery 
Mallay." 

" Shaun Goff you may count all as one as a 
dead witness, by rason he's in foreign parts." 

" That 's a truth," said the staggered Larry. 

" But Mallay will come to the fore for you ; 
won't he, Larry ?" 

" By gonnies ! Peery wasn't, as I may say, in 
a manner, entirely present at the bargain ; but 
when he was working for Bignel, some time 
after, says he to him, * Mr. Bignel,' says he, 
' for how long a time did you let the ground to 
Larry O'Dea V — * For two years,' says Bignel 
to him." 

'* At any how, Larry, I 'd see the divvle to 
fetch him, afore I 'd give him a sod of it." 

" After digging and breaking my heart in it, 
late and early, and making fresh fences," con- 
curred Larry, " and now he wants to give the 
good of all I done, for a few pounds more a 
year, to some stranger — maybe, one from his 
own half-starved country; for I'm sure that's 
what he 's about, only he puts it all on the 
childer not going to be made Scotch Protes- 



164 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

tans of, just as he turned out the poor Farrells 
for the sake o' the crony of his that 's on his way 
to us at last, as I hear." 

" We all know that," interrupted the land- 
lady, *A and expected, beyant, to-day, or in the 
evening; only he has friends may ax him to 
stop a bit on the road, Larry — " sinking her 
voice. 

" And there 's a good look-out for him, Mis- 
tress Hogan ?" demanded Larry. 

" Never fear that." 

" And the May-Boy among 'em ?" 

" Hushth !" whispered the landlady; and 
Gerald could imagine her pointing at his door. 

" But your own May-Boy, ould Dinny ?" 

" Come in, Larry ; here I am," answered a 
hoarse voice that Gerald traced to the hob. 

" And ar'n't you soon for a walk ?" asked 
Larry, his tones now sounding louder, as he 
had entered the kitchen. 

" Maybe so, avich ; only first I wish we could 
hear tidings of that gossip of ours, you spoke 
of?" 

" Poor lame Mickle, the poor boy ?" 

" No one else." 

" But is'n't he in it ?" 



THE ANGLO-IRISH, 165 

" He says, no ; he came to see us, last night, 
at a friend's place, but it was only to prache 
a sarmon to us against our evil ways ; and then 
he left us, to go a start farther, on Jim Mul- 
laly's car, — for he's not able to use * shank's 
mare yet, — and make a noration to a few more 
friends, a little way off." 

" That 's quare ; what 's come over him ?" 

" The priest, I'm thinking; or as good a 
hand," sneered the old fellow ; and Gerald felt 
complimented upon the ultimate success of his 
efforts to reclaim Michael Farrell, which now ap- 
peared evident in the admitted reluctance of the 
young man to countenance whatever scheme of 
fierce revenge was in progress. 

" Sure," continued Larry, " if the Scotchman 
that 's to the fore, and the other that 's coming 
among us, happens to get a visit from some dis- 
tant relations of theirs, this night, or any other 
night, it will be as much or more on Mickle's 
account, than on any other of our own ; though 
there's not one of us but has a little compliment 
to pay at his dour. Bignel came into the field, 
a while agone, while I was burning the weeds, 
and he kicked the fire. 1 ' 

* His own legs. 



166 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" I M kick his skull about the ground, the 
rascal P" said the old sinner. 

"An' I gave him one peg (blow), at any 
rate." 

" Musha, did you, Larry ? it was a pity you 
didn't give him plenty when you went about it, 1 ' 
said Mrs. Bridget Hogan. 

Larry went on in a triumphant tone. 

" When he kicked the fire, I took one o 1 the 
sods, and I put it down at his feet. * And will 
you kick that again, Misther Bignel ?' says I ; 
he did give it another kick, and so I gave him 
one clipe under the ear, in the right place." 

" Was it with your fist you done it ?" asked 
the silver-headed sire. 

" Yes ; but I 'm sorry I didn't split his head 
with the shovel." 

" Oh, if you had a gun then, Larry !" said 
Gerald's gentle Nance. 

" I was over talking to Bignefs wife, after 
you gave him the blow, Larry, just to make an 
excuse for laming if the bidder for Farrell's 
farum is expected in the course o' the day, and 
she tould me Bignel went to swear again you." 

" Arra! did she?" asked Larry, in a terrified 
tone. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 167 

" She did ; and the Peelers will soon be look- 
ing for you." 

M Why, then, by gonnies ! if they send me to 
gaol, Bignel will come and saze the ground." 

" Don't wait for em," advised old Hogan. 

" What else ?" demanded Larry. 

" Go wait for some one else, along with some 
one else." 

* And will you follow us, Dinny ?" 

" Whether or no, it's your only way, Larry : 
and then, if it plaises God that ye meet BignePs 
crony coming to visit him, why ye can just see 
the crature safe to Bignel's own threshold, and 
the both can be axed for a favour on your 
account as well as others. 11 

" Musha, I don't know what to do — I was 
never out afore ;" and Gerald heard Larry^ 
nails in perplexed contact with his head. 

" Well, don't then ; — have you the pipe and 
tobaccy, Larry ?" 

" Divvle a pipe or tobaccy have I." 

" / have a pipe" said the old fellow jeeringly. 

" It's asy to get a pipe, but not so asy to fill 
it," answered Larry, standing up. 

11 Don't be going, Larry ; what a hurry you're 
in P said the landlady. 



168 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Oh ! faith, I must be off:" and Gerald 
heard the tormented Larry make a sudden and 
hasty departure. 

" Larry's heart fails him," resumed Mrs. 
Hogan. 

" I think Bignel will have the ground," 
laughed her husband. 

" Ye want him ; and I '11 step over again 
to Bignel's wife, and tell her to send a threate- 
ing message to his dour, and maybe that would 
make him do the right thing," continued the 
landlady. 

" There's enough to be at the christening 
without him, if we only had Mickle," observed 
Dinny. 

" Oh ! he^ll come, when he sees ye bent on 
it. But, tell a body, Dinny, does any o' your 
gossips know the kind of a looking crature 
that 's expected at Bignel's ?" 

" I b'lieve not, Bridget ; nor whether he 's 
handsome or ugly, young or ould ; but that's 
no hindrance; sure he's easy to be guessed by 
the road he comes." 

" There's more than one road, Dinny." 

" And there is friends of his on every road," 
answered Dinny. 

" Do you think it 's walking he 'd come from 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 169 

the high road this way ?" questioned the land- 
lady, again sinking her voice. 

" Maybe so, by the divvle's stick, Bridget." 

It is to be observed that hitherto none of 
the speakers hesitated to converse at their ordi- 
nary pitch of voice, although, with the excep- 
tion of Larry CDea, they must have recollect- 
ed Gerald's proximity in the bed-room. We 
may conjecture, however, that judging of his 
appearance and manner, they set him down as 
a stranger totally unsuspicious of their secret 
practices, if not totally ignorant of them, and 
therefore not at all likely to comprehend the 
jeer and technicality in which they wrapped their 
meaning. And, indeed, had Gerald been such 
a stranger ; had he previously known nothing 
of Bignel and of Michael Farrell, they must 
have proceeded on safe grounds. 

After Mrs. Hogan's last question, and her 
excellent husband's reply to it, Gerald heard, 
however, little more than close and earnest 
whispering ; and that little he would have pre- 
ferred not to hear. 

" Pictur ! no such thing," were words which 
reached his ears from Nance, after her mother 
had whispered some time. 

VOL. III. I 



170 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Well, if it 's he, I believe I saw him afore," 
he next heard the old fellow say; and in the 
more prudent tone which followed, he seemed 
explaining where and how. 

" Here 's the boy can make sure, then, v 
resumed Mrs. Hogan, walking to the door. 

Other persons now entered the kitchen, work- 
men from the fields, as soon became evident to 
Gerald, expecting their noon-tide meal of pota- 
toes. Preparations were made for their reception, 
and in a short time, talking loudly, and stamp- 
ing heavily, they sat down to their (at least) 
smoking board. Amid the jumble of voices, a 
shrill, youthful one particularly interested Ge- 
rald's ear. He listened attentively, breathless- 
ly, and had already identified the speaker, 
when, at Mrs. Hogan 's admonition, " Get up, 
avich, and see what the gentleman wants in the 
next room," he prepared himself for a crisis. 
The mother and son whispered a moment at 
his door ; it was then pushed suddenly open, 
and the lad whom Gerald had first seen in the 
sea-coast cabin, and afterwards encountered, 
nursing his hurt arm, in the field within the 
bridle-road, certainly stood before him. 

They glanced, for an instant, at each other, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 171 

but both showed presence of mind. Gerald as- 
sumed a commonplace questioning stare, and 
the intruder an humble, stupid one. His mo- 
ther had sent him to see what his honour wanted, 
he said. Gerald very coolly replied that he had 
called for nothing ; and with clumsy apologies, 
and a clumsy bow, his old acquaintance retired, 
shutting the door, however, still closer than he 
had found it. 

" And the old genius of the gloomy hob was 
his fellow-sleeper P Gerald cogitated, very cor- 
rectly : "What eyes I have! what a memory! 
Not a face I meet but I blunder about ! Oh ! 
why could I not assure myself of the presence 
of that demoniacal sire of Rockites, when I first 
entered this Irish den !" 

What was to be done ? Sooner than run the 
evident risk of being mistaken for the bidder 
over Michael Farrell's head, had he not better 
avow his real name? That avowal would also 
be sufficient to save him from the dudgeon of 
the young brigand, who had formerly taken him 
for a magistrate come to arrest him. But 
would it, indeed ? Had these people sufficient 
confidence in the name to allow Gerald to re- 
main possessed of a secret which involved the 
i 2 



172 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

lives of the father and son together ? Rather, 
did they not hate him and his brother for ne- 
glecting them, as they said, and for sending an 
Englishman to be their agent, and a Scotchman 
to be their steward ? And, apart from their 
personal cause of quarrel with Gerald, would 
not their spirit of Rockism prompt them, of it- 
self, to offer him some outrage? But, both 
incentives taken together, what had he to hope 
by declaring who he was ? 

How could he even prove his assertion ? 
And here Gerald got another fright. The let- 
ter which Flood had addressed to him at Mor- 
rysson's he put into his pocket immediately after 
reading it ; had not since taken it thence ; and 
now he felt for it, as a voucher of his identity, 
if indeed his real identity was to be admitted. 
The letter was not forthcoming. He searched 
every pocket. He had it not : and if lost since 
he left the coach, and found by a Rockite, thus 
the Honourable Gerald Blount must become 
well known, whether he wished it or not, while 
delivered into the hands of the Philistines. 

The workmen made an end of their meal be- 
fore Gerald made an end of his disturbed reve- 
ries. He heard them pass the threshold of the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 173 

open door, one by one. He listened again, and 
assured himself that Mrs. Bridget Hogan's son 
remained behind them, speaking in a low tone 
with his father and mother. Would he at once 
boldly walk out amongst them ? Ere he came 
to a decision, a new visitor paced into the 
kitchen, bidding its inmates good-morrow, in a 
high, peculiar, sonorous accent, that told Gerald 
he was of a rank superior to those he accosted ; 
and their zealous and humble replies, and the 
dusting of chairs that took place, proclaimed 
their admissions of his superiority. Having be- 
come seated, he inquired if Mrs. Bridget Hogan 
had perused the last little book he lent her. The 
landlady said, not quite, yet ; but that it was 
worth its weight in gold; and she begged his 
honour would leave it with her till she finished 
it : and here Gerald imagined the hypocritical 
face of the dame, hinted by her tone, and per- 
haps her wink aside. 

The new-comer then addressed himself to the 
man of the house, and asked him if he could 
read. Dinny professed his regret that he could 
not. 

" Well, then, Dennis," continued the querist, 
" you curse and swear a great deal, and for the 



174 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

purpose of demonstrating to your understanding 
the very great offensiveness of that sin to the 
Lord of heaven and earth, I have here a few 
anecdotes that I shall read for you. And the 
first of them will show what it is you pray for, 
when you use the common and every-day ex- 
pression of ' Damn me V Listen." 

This speech, and the following extracts, were 
spoken and read in a deep, full, preaching tone. 

" When the sinner makes use of the phrase 
'Damn me' — thus he prays: — 'O bountiful 
God ! I beseech thee to shut me out for ever 
from thy blessed presence; to exclude me for all 
eternity from the joys of Heaven, shared by the 
saints before thy throne, and which thy own 
Word promiseth to those who walk in the ways 
of peace and blessedness V And that is not all : 
for thus further the sinner prays — 'Lord, plunge 
me for all eternity into the fires of hell : enchain 
my soul and body in everlasting torments ! — 
steep me, for ever and ever, in the fire that 
quencheth not — to which the fury of the hottest 
furnace is no more than are the snows of the 
mountain-top amid the blasts of the bitterest 
winter !" 

He paused, and a general " Lord save us, and 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 175 

forgive us, poor sinners that we are!" was sent 
forth by the hearers. 

" Upon my sowl, Sir J" began the landlady— 

" Oh, shame, Mrs. Hogan," interrupted the 
lecturer. 

" I ax your pardon, Sir." 

" Ask not my pardon, Mrs. Hogan ; ask par- 
don of Him who gave you the soul to swear by." 

" Well, and I do, Sir ; but I was only going 
to say, that if you stick to Dinny, you'll whip 
him up to Heaven in no time." 

" You speak in too much praise of my poor 
exertions, Mrs. Hogan : but listen still. The 
next anecdote will show you the tremendous visi- 
tations of God upon those who indulge in the 
abominable habit of cursing and swearing gene- 
rally." 

" ' A wicked and immoral shoemaker, re- 
siding near to Pimlico, in the vicinity of Lon- 
don ' " 

" All the ways to London, your honour !" 

" Yes ; but pray listen : — ' was much ad- 
dicted to the cruel and sinful practice of causing 
cocks to fight one with another ' " 

" The baste !" said Nance. 

" I Upon a certain day, while engaged in his 



176 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

inhuman sport, he lost, as is generally the case 
with gamblers, all he had earned by the lawful 
practice of his trade for the week before, and 
he cursed, "Damnation to his soul !" if he would 
ever again make a bet on cock-fighting. Some 
time after, he happened to be in the city of 
York, upon business of his calling. As he 
walked about the suburbs, he came up with a 
crowd who surrounded two fighting-cocks, and 
the Tempter drew him to look on, as a spectator. 
While he looked, his old weakness strongly 
assailed him, and he suffered himself to become 
greatly interested in the success of one of the 
poor birds. A fellow-gambler near to him cried 
out, * Three to one upon the red f thereby de- 
signating the cock opposed to that which the 
shoemaker thought so well of — * Done V said 
the oath-breaker, also elevating his voice ' " 

" By gor ! he had spirit in him, any how, and 
he desarved to win, 1 ' interrupted young Hogan. 

He was, as Gerald supposed, silenced by a 
look; for the reader resumed, so soon as the 
stifled laugh, succeeding to the interruption, 
had subsided. 

" ■ Done V said the oath-breaker, also elevat- 
ing his voice ; and he put his hand into his 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 177 

pocket to draw forth the money, when his eyes 
closed, his limbs shook, and heaving a deep 
sigh, he fell lifeless ; a dreadful and memorable 
example to the wicked !' 

" So, Dennis, you see what may come of your 
immoral habit of cursing and swearing.' 1 

" Sure enough, Sir, it's a bad thing to do ; 
and I must try and drop it, in time, faith." 

A general discussion ensued between all the 
listeners, fully condemnatory of the sin. Each, 
in his or her own way, seemed disposed to give 
it up, principally because nothing could be got by 
it. For instance, young Hogan thus argued : — 

" And that 's why it 's one o' the worst sins, 
your honour. Staling isn't half as bad. If I 
stale one o' your honour's sheep to-night, I can 
ate him to-morrow, and my body is the better 
of it, whatever way it turns out with my sowl. 
But it 's not in the same manner with cursing 
and swearing ; for that brings the sowl into the 
divvle's own hobble, and my own self isn't the 
laste taste the better of it." 

Gerald was not as much amused by this scene 

as, under other circumstances, he might have been. 

He rather engaged himself during its intervals 

with making up his mind to enter the kitchen 

i 5 



178 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

before it should conclude, accost the lecturer, as 
a stranger in need of direction on his way, and, 
under his patronage, escape from the Hogans ; 
for, from some cause distinct from their awe of 
him as a religious instructor, it was evident that 
this individual was an object of interest to the 
landlady and her family. Gerald's lurking dis- 
inclination to run the chance of being asked for 
a name by a person sufficiently respectable to 
take such a freedom, made him still pause, how- 
ever, when an occurrence abroad seemed to sug- 
gest that he need not even so far commit himself. 
Old Denny, anxious, no doubt, to spend no 
more time idly, called upon his son to accom- 
pany him to " the work in the field, 1 ' as he said ; 
and in a few seconds both left the cabin, aban- 
doning the women to the apostle. " Either they 
have no harmful purpose against me," argued 
Gerald, " or they prefer attempting it out of 
doors ; but surely not in a populous village, nor 
even on the road leading out of it, in the broad 
daylight, and where people unconnected with 
their atrocities must meet me almost at every 
step ; so, I will only wait till this strange gentle- 
man also takes his leave, not wishing to have 
him see my person, in my present situation, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 179 

and then I can certainly continue ray unlucky 
journey." 

More edifying discourse ensued between Mrs. 
Hogan and the exemplary man, during which 
she was ail submission to his doctrines, and 
then she put him some questions, as to whe- 
ther the debt of his honour's servant-boy to her, 
would be allowed to Denny at the next payment 
of rent, and previously be stopped out of her 
creditor's salary. 

The index to Mrs. Hogan's character, con- 
tained in this sudden change of topic, marvel- 
lously pleased Gerald ; but he was more inte- 
rested by the evidence it supplied that the gen- 
tleman was no itinerant apostle, but a person 
residing close at hand in the neighbourhood, and 
withal possessing some local consideration and 
influence. He was doomed to be more enlight- 
ened on the point. When the visitor had dis- 
posed of Mrs. Bridget Hogan's query, to her 
satisfaction, be it added, he proceeded to say, — 
lt That leads me to ask you, Mrs. Hogan, if 
your silly and obstinate neighbour, Larry 
O'Dea, has come to see you this morning ?" 

While the landlady replied in a low and em- 
barrassed voice; "Yes!" concluded Gerald, 



180 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" the accent should have at once hinted as much 
to me — it is Clangore's very worshipful Mr. 
Bignel. Come ; now, indeed, I am patronized. 
Now, indeed, I march forth, for every reason. 
When this infernal old Rockite woman sees us 
meet as perfect strangers, her suspicions that I 
am his expected visitor will vanish. Then, 
whether or not I deem it necessary to announce 
myself to Bignel, he will at least escort me 
towards Lower-Court, whither I can truly say I 
proceed on business, allowing him to suppose it 
of an humble kind, if he likes. Besides, though 
I do not clearly comprehend what danger he 
stands in from these brigands, it is my duty to 
hint to him that he does stand in some disodour 
with them." 

Before he would enter the kitchen, however, 
Gerald stopped at his door to catch something 
else that fell from Mr. Bignel. 

" Well, Mrs. Hogan, I will leave for leisurely 
perusal these little tracts, out of which I have 
been reading for Dennis, and pray take good 
care of them.' 1 

" Never fear, your honour ; they '11 be as safe 
as if they were in your own desk, at home ; see 
here, Sir ;" Gerald heard her unlock, and lock, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 181 

some drawer near at hand, and gave her full 
credit for her assertion ; for it struck him that 
in that same drawer they were sure to remain 
till called for. 

" And as to O'Dea," continued Mr. Bignel, 
" tell him when you see him, that if he yields 
up the ground quietly, I may forgive him his 
recent outrage on my person ; but if he does 
not, that I shall consider myself bound, for the 
well-being of society, to punish him as far as 
the law permits. 11 

At this moment, Gerald made his appearance, 
holding his purse in his hand, and saying to Mrs. 
Hogan, " Your bill, Ma'am ?" The woman, 
smiling graciously, spoke her bill, "A hog, Sir." 
Gerald stared. Mr. Bignel, who turned back 
on the threshold, told him that she meant an 
English shilling, which then passed for one 
shilling and one penny, Irish. Gerald thanked 
the interpreter, and really delighted his land- 
lady, so far as the incident went, by handing 
her half-a-crown, and declining change. But 
during all this he noticed that her glances flew 
from Bignel to him, and back again, no doubt 
to ascertain if they were acquaintances. 

Mr. Bignel was a middle-aged, corpulent, se- 



182 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

cond-rate-clerical-looking person, and not at all 
like a Scotchman, or, at least, like a good re- 
presentative of one. His hair, instead of being 
red or sandy, was black, as, to an excess, was 
his beard, notwithstanding its close-shaven con- 
dition ; his cheeks, instead of being high-boned, 
were well filled out with firm, though super- 
fluous flesh : and altogether, as has been hinted, 
he might pass for a professional distributor and 
expounder of the pious tracts we have just seen 
him introduce into Mrs. Hogan's family. While 
Gerald settled his breakfast-bill, this gentleman's 
small grey eyes were almost as attentive to him 
as were the landlady's large black ones ; nor did 
Mr. Bignel remove his inquisitive regards, when 
finally Gerald addressed him. 

" Perhaps you will farther aid my local ig- 
norance," alluding to the dilemma about " the 
hog, 1 ' " by putting me into the road to Lower- 
Court, Sir." 

(< Lower-Court !" repeated Mr. Bignel and 
Mrs. Hogan, in a breath, both equally sur- 
prised — " Here, Tom !" continued the former, 
speaking to some one from the door ; a man led 
up a horse, saddled and bridled ; Mr. Bignel 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 183 

took the rein from his hand, and spoke apart 
with him. 

Gerald now fully resolved to make the land- 
steward of his brother's agent aware who he was, 
and for that purpose remained silent until the 
conference between master and man should end, 
when he, too, would speak aside with Mr. 
Bignel. He turned his back, meantime, to the 
door, that he should not seem to listen to the 
confidential discourse outside its threshold. 

While thus disposed, M Lower-Court ?" re- 
peated Mr. Bignel ; Gerald saw that the stew- 
ard was now mounted — " you '11 be one of the 
fancy-painters, from London or Dublin, Sir, 
come down to put the last hand to the vanities 
that have lately been going on there ?" 

" You shall know who and what I am in a 
moment." Gerald stepped out. 

" The road is not to be missed," resumed 
Bignel, spurring his stout horse, " 'tis straight 
forward out of the village ; Good-morning, Sir ;" 
and he trotted off. 

" Stay, Sir ! come back, I say !" cried Gerald. 

" Straight forward, — cannot you hear, friend? 
My duties leave me little time to know much of 
the comers to Lower-Court." 



184- THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Mr. Bignel was soon out of sight. Gerald 
looked round for his man. That person had 
before disappeared. He glanced to the door of 
the cabin. There stood Mrs. Hogan, eyeing 
him shrewdly. 

" Musha, Sir," said she, " what need you 
trouble yourself about finding a road that 's as 
plain afore you as the nose on your face, if it 's 
a truth that it 's to Lower-Court you 're for 
going ?" 

" Have I not said so, woman ?" asked Gerald, 
with sufficient reassumption of his usual man- 
ner to startle Mrs. Hogan. 

" Well, Sir, and you can no more miss your 
way than a bird going home to his nest, 1 ' ob- 
served a slow, dull voice, evidently that of a 
man, from some remote part of the interior of 
the house. 

Gerald, assured that he had not before heard 
this person speak, now just looked past the 
threshold into the kitchen to observe the con- 
cealed inmate. The mysterious third door, in 
the end wall, near the chimney, was open, and 
revealed, beyond it, an old, tall, dingy-faced 
man, sitting on the ground, his legs spread out, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 185 

and employed, with the aid of spectacles, in 
shaping little wooden pegs out of a piece of deal 
board. 

" What the deuce contingent process of 
Rockism can this be ?" thought Gerald. 

" The poor reduced brother o' me, Sir," said 
Mrs. Hogan, answering his look ; " once the 
natest broguemaker on Ireland's ground, and 
the best scholar in our parts, and knowing the 
most about ould things, and ould people ; only, 
for the last years, trade grew bad with him, 
and the little he does at it now, we let him do 
among us ; and when he hasn't the brogues to 
make, he makes pegs for 'em ; the same he 's 
doing the present time, Sir." 

Gerald did not believe a word of this story, 
though he might have done so ; for it was true. 
The hero of it arose, and pushing his spectacles 
up on his forehead, slowly and peaceably ad- 
vanced to him and Mrs. Hogan. Resuming his 
explanation about the road, he pointed it out, 
plainly running over a hill, from which you 
might drop a stone on Lower-Court, the old 
broguemaker said, and the sea " quite con- 
vanient," (a few miles,) at the back of the 
house. 



186 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

M By dad !" struck with a sudden thought, 
" I may as well walk to the top o' the hill by 
the side o' you ; where *s the ould hat ?" 

Gerald, not liking the over-civil proposal, 
demurred ; Mrs. Hogan earnestly pressed him 
to accept it ; and this questionable recommen- 
dation made him still more dislike it. " I shall 
give too much trouble, 1 ' he said — " The old 
rascal will lead me into the toils," he thought. 
" Oh, no trouble in life," the landlady assured 
him, and so did the broguemaker; — "But 
I had rather not," persisted Gerald ; — but 
he need not be so shy; they persisted in their 
turn ; and away went the old man for his 
hat. 

" Ould Dinny was saying, Sir," resumed the 
landlady, in a close tone, fixing her eyes upon 
Gerald's, " that you were taking an account of 
the furniture about the room ; but for what 
would you be doing that ? nobody has a call to 
my furniture ; not Bignel himself." 

" He was only drawing it all out, mother," 
interposed Nance, much to Gerald's relief. 

" Go along, you ^awk ! Didn't you say that 
making the pictur was no such thing?" asked 
Mrs. Bridget Hogan angrily. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 187 

" Yes, my pictur ; but the pots and the 
bellows were better things for a pictur, and so 
the gentleman drew them all out, as I tell you 
now, mother : sure it "'s his trade ; didn't you 
hear what Bignel said ?" — and Nance contrived 
one or two glances at Gerald : one, coquetish, 
to suit the first part of her speech; the other, 
friendly, earnest, and assuring, though Gerald 
could not distinctly read it. 

" Here, now, in the name o' God," said 
the old broguemaker, re-appearing with a 
curious, discoloured piece of felt on his 
head. 

" Harkee, Noll,"" resumed Mrs. Hogan, tak- 
ing him aside. 

" What do you mean ? shall I accept the old 
man's company ? v whispered Gerald to Nance, 
while her mother's back was turned. 

" Better for you, and do it bouldly — but 
don't fear — I '11 come up with ye on the road, may- 
be ; we can spake no more, now : I '11 watch the 
boys I mane — here 's my mother turning round 
— just throw an arum over my neck ;" Ge- 
rald did so, seconding the ruse with a real 
something not bargained for, however it was 



188 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

allowed to pass, although Nance kept strug- 
gling to edify her mother, and crying out — 
" Stop, I bid you ! be asy with your behaviour, 
Sir r 

" Sir, a-vourneen, are you for coming Y* de- 
manded the self-elected guide, and they set 
forward, Gerald expressing his readiness and 
thanks. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 189 



CHAPTER VIII. 

The road over which Gerald was led cer- 
tainly seemed to be the direct one out of the 
village to Lower-Court, that is, so far as a 
man could determine who did not certainly 
know in what direction Lower- Court lay, and 
who depended on his map alone (or rather 
upon his recollection of it, for it was safe in 
his portmanteau) for his presumptions on the 
subject. Gerald drew farther comfort from 
the guileless, almost silly features of his old 
companion, and from his primitive manner and 
conversation. 

Having cleared the last cabin of the village, 
they found their up-hill way running between 
uncultivated, swelling grounds, studded with 
patches of furze and with large stones; no 
fence of any kind prescribed its limits at either 
hand ; and yet it grew narrower at every step ; 



190 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

and from the ruts and water-channels in its 
course, the mire and the loose pieces of rock, 
to say nothing of its abruptness, proved diffi- 
cult for the pedestrians. The broguemaker 
had likened it to a bird's flight home, for 
straightness ; — this was partly metaphorical, 
however. At about half-way to the line of 
the bleak eminence over which it passed, the 
road suddenly wheeled to the left, and, like a 
tired horse, continued to ascend obliquely. 
And now, looking back, Gerald found himself 
shut out from all view of the village beneath — 
indeed of every human habitation, barrenness 
and solitude alone surrounding him. 

All along, the old man, unaltered in his 
quiet dull manner, displayed the antiquarian 
lore for which, according to his sister, Mrs. 
Bridget Hogan, he was so celebrated. He 
harangued, eloquently, upon " the ould his- 
tory of Ireland's land," and scarce a little 
knoll appeared in sight, but he had some mar- 
vellous legend for it. Gerald's doubts were 
wholly giving way, notwithstanding even Nance's 
hints at parting ; there could not possibly be 
any harm, he was sure, in such a silly old 
fellow. They made another slight turn in 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 191 

the road, and the ruins of a square building 
appeared, nearly upon the edge of the hill, 
about a mile from the place where they pro- 
posed to cross it. As usual, the chronicler 
produced a cock-and-bull story. 

*' Oh, ye-a, Sir, and do you see it?" in 
reply to a remark from Gerald upon the ob- 
ject, which, indeed, seemed of very ancient 
date — " Oh, Sir, there used to be a bad light 
shining on that castle in former times, and was 
the death of many a one." 

" How r asked Gerald. 

" It used to shine bright, in the night-time, 
Sir; and when the poor sowls in their boats or 
ships saw it, they sunk to the bottom o' the 
say ; but it was put out, at last." 

" And who put it out ?" 

" It was put out, clane, by one that could 
put it out — Saint Patrick, Sir: just one o' the 
little things he done while he was doing greater 
things, in them times, to keep his hand in ; 
cursing the snakes and the toads, that they 
have in England, yes, Sir, and a power of other 
pisonous cratures. People came to him, Sir, 
and he making his way near this place, and 
they tould him of the bad light. ' Show it to 



192 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

us,' says Saint Patrick ; * maybe it won't kill 
me, boys :' " here the broguemaker assumed an 
authoritative tone, and spiritlessly flourished 
his stick, to give Gerald some idea of how the 
saint spoke the last words — " and then, Sir — 
but what the divvle !" again interrupting his 
tale, and again changing his tone, and his 
manner and simple features, too, into a fierce- 
ness that did not please his hearer — " what 
brings this idle hussey from the work o 1 the 
house, to be crossing our road, this way ?" 

Looking in the direction to which his guide's 
eyes turned, Gerald saw Nance Hogan bound- 
ing up a little ascent that, at one side, edged 
their path, laughing, and holding out something 
in her hand. 

" Did you forget any thing at the house, 
Sir ?" asked the broguemaker. 

" No, uncle, no 1 ' — answered Nance, who 
caught the question, though now she stood 
some distance before them on the road — " No 
— but the half-crown the gintleman gave us ;- — 
see ; my mother laid it down on the dresser, 
and went out a bit, and I took it up to look at 
it, and I'm sure it's not good coin."" 

" Show it here," said her uncle. 



THE ANGLO IRISH. 193 

Gerald stepped before him, secured it, peered 
at it, and taking Nance's hint, said he was very 
sorry indeed, but he was ready to replace it 
with good money ; nay, to give a crown back in- 
stead, — if he got some value ; and he now " threw 
an arm round her neck,*' without any invitation. 
She secured the crown, but resisted his salute 
violently, and whispering, "Don't, yet,"— pressed 
his arm, and cried aloud — "if that's what you 
want, you must have a run for it ;" — and then 
got free, and galloped down the way she had 
come, with the reckless speed of a young deer. 

Gerald, sure that he understood her, followed 
at his best. Nance's uncle shouted shrilly after 
them ; and Gerald, glancing back, at last saw 
the plausible old traitor flourishing his stick in 
real character. 

" Run, run I 11 cried Nance ; and run Gerald 
did — " but don't close on me," she continued ; 
"I see you can, if you like, though I didn't 
think you could — musha ! where were you born, 
at all ? — ay — and so does he see the same thing — 
pull up, then, in time ; — no — not that either- 
pretend to fall — that'll put him out, cute as 
he is." 

Gerald, worshipping woman's wit in his heart, 

VOL. III. K 



194 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

stumbled and fell flat, accordingly, at which, 
laughing loudly, as if in triumph, Nance in- 
creased her speed. Her pursuer, allowing him- 
self to scramble, as naturally as possible, for a 
few more seconds, regained his feet, and conti- 
nued the chase. They made way through a 
lonesome, pathless, little valley, one of several 
between the road from which they had started, 
and the spacious hollow in which the village 
stood. The broguemaker's shouts grew fainter 
on Gerald's ear ; and, at a quick turn amongst 
the fairy knolls around, he a second time looked 
back, and saw nothing of the hypocritical anti- 
quary. Nance, without a glance behind, also 
seemed aware that they were now out of view, 
for she suddenly stopped, sitting upon a large 
flat stone, and allowed Gerald to come up. 

" You know what I 'm about, Sir," she said, 
panting for breath — " so, no use of words ; 
there, straight afore you," pointing to a gap in 
the fence, some forty yards onward, u is the 
right road to Lower-Court, and the only one 
they are not watching, this moment, in hopes of 
meeting you — so, stir yourself. 1 ' 

" Why should they watch me ? They take 
me for another person, of course f 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 195 

" Yes, and there 's no time to show them the 
differ ; and if they and you meet aforehand — 
Oh, run, Sir, run .' my own father and brother 
went out, a while ago, to wait for you !" here 
the girl grew agitated. 

" I will follow your advice, and I am your 
debtor beyond expression : these few gold 
pieces cannot convey my gratitude; but if you 
call at Lower-Court, to-morrow — " 

" Put up the gould, Sir ; I did not sarve you 
for that." 

" Well, then ;" Gerald showed preparations 
for snatching the prize of the late race. 

" No, no !" resumed Nance ; " you 're out; I 
mane, that if I take the gould, my mother will 
find it after me, and want to know all about 
it, and that wouldn't answer — behave, Sir — 
divvle's in you, be asy — by this, and that, Sir, 
I '11 say something to vex you, if — " 

" If what now ?" 

" If you don't stop my mouth," laughed 
Nance, while recent tears stood on her lids : — 
" But give over now, in arnest, like a good 
boy ; there 's not a minute to lose ; we don't 
know what ould Noll Thong is doing, while^ 
you're just making a fool o' me here — Stop, I 
K 2 



196 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

bid you ! bad manners to you, for one strange 
gorcoon, how did you come to larn yourself 
such tricks in Dublin, at-all-at-all ? — Mind me, 
I tell you ; I won't have the gould ; maybe your- 
self can make use of it ; but I '11 stale up to the 
Coort to-morrow, as you say, and when you '11 
have an hour to spare from your work within 
doors, let you stale out the back-way, till I see 
that you 're safe and sound, for — " 

" Nance," interrupted Gerald, rising, while 
the girl stared at the sudden self-assertion of 
her companion — " I can come to meet you by 
no back-ways at Lower-Court, and your great 
kindnesses and services to me demand that I 
should tell I am Lady Augusta's brother." 

Nance, in her turn, slowly stood up, her 
eyes fixed on her new acquaintance, her colour 
gone, and her gaze almost one of terror. " I 
ax pardon, Sir, my Lord/' she began, dropping 
a quick curtsey at almost every word ; but her 
voice failed, perhaps under softer feelings ; 
tears flowed, and she put her hands to her 
face. 

" My good, kind girl — " 

" Whisht !" — she interrupted, letting her 
hands fall to her sides ; " there 's some whistling 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 197 

going on where I thought nobody was to make 
it. Run for the road, my Lord ! — ould Noll is 
outwitting me, and I desarve it ! — Oh, don't 
give 'em another moment ! To be BignePs 
crony, would turn out bad enough in their 
hands ; but if they larn your right name, on 
this woful day, and they bent on making it end 
in such a night— oh, my Lord, a-vourneen, run 
for the road !" 

" Farewell, then !" he flung the purse at her 
feet — " you can hide it from your mother, and 
don't forget to call at Lower-Court:" — he was 
half-way to the gap in the road-fence. 

" And don't you forget, Sir, my Lord, to 
keep your name from them, if the ould divvle, 
my uncle, and the rale divvle, his step-father, 
sends them in your road !" admonished Nance, 
keeping close enough to make her whispers tell 
on Gerald's ear : — " and when you're through 
the gap, stop your foot, and show neither haste 
nor hurry — and if you see any body coming 
again you, be whistling a bit, or, maybe, hum- 
ming the turn of a song ; and spake them 
fair and bould, and have a joke for them — and 
now the blessing o' God be in your path, Sir, 
my Lord !" 



108 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Gerald stood on the road to Lower-Court. 
He looked up and down, and did not see a 
human figure. He listened for a repetition of 
the whistling, but heard none. Tired and agi- 
tated, he then sat on the rugged fence to re- 
cover breath and presence of mind, and arrange 
a mode of action for future contingencies. 
Nance's string of instructions, drawn, as they 
were, from a knowledge of her own tribe, seem- 
ed well worth following up, if, indeed, her pre- 
sent pupil had a talent for the lecture. With 
heart and soul, Gerald loathed, however, the 
part she wished him to play ; the implied equi- 
vocation as to his name, and the buffoonery, the 
singing and the whistling, in the service of an 
Irish banditti — " Accursed be the moment," he 
began to think aloud, when three men appeared 
on the line of the road, where, like the former 
one, it crossed the summit of a hill; and, smother- 
ing his feelings, he tried, after all, to do Nance's 
tutelage some justice. 

The strangers were about a quarter of a 
mile distant. Gerald advanced to them at an 
even, careless pace, and certainly '* humming 
the turn of a song."" Upon a nearer approach, 
he soon concluded that he had nothing to fear 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 199 

from them. Of the three peasants, one was 
supported at either side by his companions, 
and came limping along. Indeed, one of his 
feet scarce touched the ground, and his head was 
sunk on his breast, while almost at every pace 
of his supporters he groaned deeply, and they 
replied by sympathizing lamentations. 

" What's the matter, lads?" asked Gerald, 
now within speaking distance, his late fears al- 
most forgotten in the sufferings of the poor 
peasant. 

'* Oh, the quarry, your honour !" replied one 
— " we were all working in it, there below, at the 
other side of the hill — and the divvle's own biff 
stone fell on poor Tim's leg, and it's smashed 
into smithereens, so it is ! M 

" And why do you move him in such a 
state? 1 ' continued Gerald: "for mercy's sake, 
let him lie here, at the road-side, and run, both 
of you, for the nearest surgeon ; I will take 
care of him till you come back." 

With earnest thanks and blessings for his 
honour's kindness, and a ready admission that, 
of all things in the world, letting him lie quiet 
would be the best for the present, they accord- 
ingly stretched their companion upon a patch 



200 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

of grass near the fence. The man, still groan- 
ing deeply, turned his face to the ground, with- 
out moving the limb they pointed out as frac- 
tured, and round which was needlessly wrapped 
one of their celebrated frieze great-coats. Then 
they stopped to debate, an instant, if it would 
not be well for one to go back, " the Lower- 
Coort road," and another forward to the village, 
in order to call on two surgical practitioners at 
the same time. 

" Or, stop, 11 said the first spokesman, " here "s 
two sogers marching in from country- quarters 

to town, and since they '11 pass the village, 

maybe they 'd do our message there ; and you 
and I, Shawn, can run back to Mr. Kelp, that 
lives nigh hand to the Coort." 

Gerald saw, indeed, two soldiers, carrying 
their muskets at rest on their arms, half-way 
down the abrupt road by which the peasants 
had approached him. They came on slowly, 
walking as if jaded with a long march. The 
last speaker arose from the side of his groaning 
friend, and holding his hat in his hand, went to 
meet them, proclaiming the misfortune and im- 
ploring their aid, in a loud wailing voice. His 
unhurt companion stood looking down on the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 201 

sufferer, as if in silent grief. Gerald knelt on 
one knee, advising the principal of the scene to 
turn up his face, that he might breathe more 
freely. The soldiers, vouchsafing short and yet 
not unfeeling answers, cautiously followed the 
person who had harangued them, apparently 
anxious or curious to view the prostrate man. 

"Yes, gintleman, dears," pursued the zealous 
caterer for help, " all we '11 ax ye, is just to bid 
Mistress Bridget Hogan send out Peter Doyle, 
the bone-setter, while we run for Mr. Kelp ; 
and this good gintleman, that 's a rale stranger 
to us, as I tould ye afore, when ye thought I 
was joking ye, or worse, maybe — but a gintle- 
man, I '11 go bail, every inch of him — he'll stay 
with poor Tim ; isn't that it, gossip ?" address- 
ing his silent companion, who answered in Irish, 
just glancing up for an instant at the soldier 
next to him — " yes, indeed, they '11 do it ; God 
reward 'em for so great a charity," continued 
the less taciturn peasant ; " they will, indeed, 
Shaun ; and — see this, now ! — just to lighten 
'em for the road, we'll take care o' these guns 
for the cratures!" 

Simultaneously with his signal word, the 
fellow, breaking out into the wildest fierceness 
K 5 



202 THE ANGLO IRISH. 

of action, tone, and look, sprang upon the soldier 
at his side, and wrenched the musket out of 
the man's hand ; the silent mourner closed, at 
the same instant, with the poor fellow's com- 
rade, and was equally successful ; and the by- 
play of the scene consisted in Gerald's charge 
jumping up on two unhurt, muscular legs, and 
with a yell, responsive to the " see this" of his 
gossip, fastening his gigantic hands in Gerald's 
collar, and, in a trice, reversing their relative 
positions. 

While the disarmed and captured parties ex- 
pected nothing but threats of instant death, gig- 
gling laughter alone reached their ears, shortly 
followed by a speech, addressed to the soldiers. 

" Don't be afraid, now ; it's only these purty 
things we want from ye \ barring, we'll be axing 
ye for the little black pockets ye wear outside 
of your jackets, on your back parts, there," — 
they pointed the muskets, and the soldiers 
speedily delivered up their cartridge-boxes. 
" And now, luck and leisure in your road to 
the village, an' don't forget Peery Doyle, the 
bone-setter, an' we '11 thank you— only, the 
sooner ye 're off, the more we '11 be obliged to 
ye." The soldiers began to walk down the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 203 

remainder of the hilly road — " And, d' ye hear, 
honest boys ! — there 's no use in your having 
the trouble of looking to see what weVe going 
to do with ourselves; ould Nick sometimes 
pulls a trigger of a sudden, and we couldn't 
help it, you know, if your jackets went back 
to the army tailor with a hole or two in 'em : 
so, just keep never minding till ye come to 
the next turn; an' ye may use the shanks as 
fast as ye like, just for love." — The soldiers 
quickened their pace — " Stop, Shaun ! don't 
hurt the cratures — faith, boys, for the matter 
o 1 that, ye may run — asy, Shaun, I bid you !" 
The men rushed down the road, and at the 
turn spoken of, were soon out of sight. 

" And now for Bignel's crony," resumed 
the director of the Rockite party ; " let him up, 
Tim ; 'tisn't here we're to talk to him." 

" You mistake me for some one I know 
nothing of," remonstrated Gerald, as soon as 
his captor relaxed the iron grasp at his collar, 
and removed a knee from his person. 

" A-then, do we ? maybe you were not 
bound, a little while agone, for BignePs white 
house, on Curra-hill, where the nice dinner 
will be waiting for you ?" 



204 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" I am not even acquainted with the man 
you speak of;" Gerald now stood up, well 
guarded. 

" Well, but maybe you seen him, once on 
a time." 

" I would not even be known to him," 
answered Gerald, skilfully evading the last 
point. 

" Why so, gossip ?" 

" Because, since I came to this country, 
every thing I have heard of him makes me 
dislike his character." 

" Why, what did he do ?" 

" In the first place, he destroyed the poor 
Farrels" — they glanced at each other — u and I 
am personally known to Michael Fareel ; and if 
you let me see him, he will assure you I can 
have nothing to do with Bignel." 

" And if we happen to meet poor Mickle, 
after parting from you, who will we say was 
axing about him ?" 

" He does not know my name, although, 
as I say, he knows my person well, and there- 
fore it would be useless to mention it to him." 

"But you may tell it to us. 1 ' 

" Excuse me." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 205 

" You 'd better, if you 're not a friend of 
BignelsV 

" Did you never hear that people travelling, 
for instance, on mercantile business, are some- 
times under an obligation to their employers 
not to tell their names ?" 

" None o' your palaver : tell the name that 's 
on you, at once, or we'll say it's all lies you've 
tould us, since you began to use your tongue ; 
tell it, or come to them that will soon take you, 
face to face, afore Bignel, along with us to help 
'em, and then, maybe, the truth would pop out, 
at last." 

Gerald, comforted by this implied removal of 
personal danger, and by the certainty that if al- 
lowed such a test as the man promised, he might 
ultimately escape all perils, replied : "I can 
only assure you, upon my hopes of life and of sal- 
vation, that already I have uttered nothing but 
the truth ; my name, however, I am not at li- 
berty to disclose." 

" Come off, then !" cried the fellow angrily ; 
" you are the man we were sent to watch, 
though you thought to snake round by Lower- 
Coort to your crony, and now think to bam- 
bouzle them that 's listening to your stories ; 



206 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

what else hinders you from answering our ho- 
nest question ? what else brings you amongst us ? 
Seldom 's the time that one like you comes this 
road for any thing but harum. Hurry, boys, 
down to The Dry Lodging." 

To their right, far under them, was a valley 
similar to that through which Gerald had pur- 
sued Nance, but more extensive, and more wind- 
ing. Down into this they hurried their prisoner, 
bounding over rock, and tuft, and bush, with 
an agility and a headlong speed which he could 
not rival ; in fact, during this race he fell, in 
reality, and his captors, muttering curses in 
Irish, were compelled now to support him along 
— now to regulate their progress by his. Oc- 
casionally they addressed him in ironical boast 
of their double success over him and the sol- 
diers, giving him to understand, that the en- 
counter with the muskets was quite a providen- 
tial " God-send," while they were engaged, at 
Noll Thong's hint, in the more important duty 
of crossing his road, from the other, by a short 
cut. Traversing the bottom of the valley, the 
party often wound to the right and to the left, 
sometimes coming on cultivated patches of 
ground. Then the soil began to grow marshy 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 207 

and black; and at last they entered an ex- 
tensive turf-bog, which, however, was still 
quite enclosed by successions of knolls and emi- 
nences, barren and rock-strewn. The bog 
had been worked, as was evident from oblong 
piles of black turf, called clamps, which appear- 
ed at different parts of it, as well as from its di- 
visions into pools of water, intersected by cause- 
ways of the soft soil, communicating with each 
other. Upon one of these causeways, attached 
to the more solid land, Gerald was ushered by 
his conductors. Here they were obliged to 
help him on more assiduously than before ; for 
while the trained " bog-trotters" bounded, like 
deer, out of every slough and hole, Gerald trip- 
ped or stuck fast. Not long pursuing a straight 
course, they turned upon many other tracks 
through the bleak waste, passing different huge 
piles of the fuel that had been wrought out of 
it, and at every step approaching, though cir- 
cuitously, to its centre. 

" Do you hope to find your Dry Lodging here- 
abouts ?" asked Gerald, when at last they paus- 
ed, and seemed to listen. 

" Never fear, my boy, v he was answered ; 
" there it is, in the inside o 1 that divvle's own 



208 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

big clamp, that looks to be as substantial as the 
rest, only it isn't — " the man pointed to one a 
short distance off, upon the track-way they were 
now pursuing — " whisht !" he resumed, as a loud 
burst of laughter issued from the singular den — 
" I wonder what 's the fun among the boys, to 
make them screech so hearty ? Stale asy, and 
we '11 ketch 'em at it, whatever it is ;" and set- 
ting the example, the speaker trod lightly for- 
ward. 

At the remote corner of the clamp, after 
turning which was the entrance into its interior, 
the party again paused, and Gerald now became 
the most interested of the listeners ; for, quickly 
succeeding to another gleeish laugh, he heard 
the following words, uttered in a voice that 
there was no mistaking : — 

« Very indubitably, yes, gentlemen-Rocks ; 
and furthermore, allow the most shadowy in- 
dication of a hint, to the effect, that by permit- 
ting my well-esteemed roadster to perish in 
yonder Stygian pool of bog-water, your conduct 
may be designated as embarrassingly unhand- 
some." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 209 



CHAPTER IX. 

Another loud laugh followed the words 
which Gerald overheard. It was evident that 
Flood was a source of great amusement to the 
Rockite party. " I am safe, 1 ' thought Gerald ; 
" it is not in human nature to harm him, or any 
friend of his ; but, first, let me take a precaution. 1 " 
He tore a leaf out of a small memorandutn-book, 
and requested permission of his guard to write 
a line upon it to the gentleman inside, who was 
a friend of his. The man suspiciously asked 
what was the use of writing, when he could 
walk in and see his friend at once ? He said 
that the gentleman might receive a shock at his 
sudden appearance in such a situation, for they 
were very great friends indeed. This expla- 
nation, assisted by a sovereign, (and here Gerald 
wondered that he had been permitted to keep his 
purse,) was allowed to pass ; so he penciled in 
French the following words : — " Call me by any 



210 THE ANGLO-IR SH. 

name but my own when we meet. Yours, — an 
old class-mate. 1 ' 

One of his captors went in with this commu- 
nication ; and as soon as Gerald heard Flood's 
absurd ejaculations of surprise, he signified his 
readiness to enter the hollow turf-clamp. 
At sight of his friend he could scarce refrain 
from laughter. The exquisite sat on the floor 
of the den, his hands clasped round one of his 
raised knees. It would seem, that when taken 
by the rovers, he had been dressed in civil at- 
tire, without any indication of military character 
about him. An almost white and beautifully 
cut surtout was buttoned to his chin, but ap- 
peared splashed and stained with bog-water and 
bog-mire, as if its wearer had often tripped and 
fallen during the progress to his present retreat ; 
one of his feet was bootless, some particular 
spot of the yielding causeway having doubtless 
played bootjack to him ; and his usually rosy 
cheeks were pale. The listless self-command 
of his features remained, however, with little 
change from its every-day character. " Friend 
of my bosom, 11 he said, rising as Gerald entered, 
" let me, even in reverse of fortune, in captivity, 



THE ANGLO-IHISII. 211 

and amid turf, embrace you. This will be per- 
mitted, warriors of the bogs," he continued, 
bowing around to a formidable circle of pea- 
sants, mostly armed, who answered with re- 
newed laughter; " this will be permitted to the 
David and Jonathan of your modern days, 
meeting, as we do, in unfelicitous though ho- 
nourable company.'" 

" How in the world, Sir Tristram, have you 
got here ?" demanded Gerald. 

" You may suppose me, most worthy, is- 
suing, well mounted " 

" Call each other by your right names," in- 
terrupted a voice, which Gerald recognized as 
that of Dinny Hogan. 

" Even as you wish it, be it, my general, 
for such I conclude you are, sitting here, in 
head-quarters, awaiting the execution of your 
various commands, issued to your gallant force ; 
and how trustily observed, the friend of my 
youth and his poor admirer will lastingly 
witness. Wherefore," again addressing Gerald, 
" good Daniel Mahaffy, suppose me, in answer 
to your question, issuing, I say, well mounted, 
from the town of -, and innocently bent 



212 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

upon paying a visit to certain fair features, 
somewhere in this neighbourhood, shining and 
blooming " 

'* Ay, but where, in the neighbourhood ?" 
again interrupted Hogan, — " you won't answer 
that, though we often axed it afore." 

" Willingly should I, Excellentissimo, did 
chivalry or manhood even remotely permit ; 
but who amongst your gallant band would 
counsel me to do so ? Who amongst them would 
do so himself, in my situation ? Who is here 
so recreant as to proclaim to the world his 
triumph over coy beauty ? To point out to 
squint-eyed Suspicion the generous nymph he 
may have slightly caused to smile upon him : in 
other words, rather more generally used, day 
after day, who is here so vile as to kiss and 
tell? I pause for a reply." 

" N9 one, by the powers o' man," roared a 
score of laughing voices. " Go on, my boy," 
continued a young fellow, the most delighted 
and edified of his party ; " give the general, as 
you call him, more of it." 

" No one, I am ready to uphold to the 
world, no one !" resumed Flood : " and how, 
then, can I be fairly or amiably admonished 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 213 

to do that which would shame the most beardless 
lip, or the most reverend hairs it is my happiness 
to harangue ? Nay, Excellentissimo, here, on 
ray couch of turf, let me lie, a sod of turf be my 
only food, a bowl of turf-water my only drink, 
the bottom of a pool of the same liquid my 
early grave ; — let me, I say, eat of turf, drink of 
turf, live on turf, sleep on turf, and of turf let 
me expire ; but hope not, aged chieftain of turf- 
bogs, that your poor prisoner, Valentine Blen- 
nerhasset by name " 

" Bother, my chap, 1 ' still interrupted Dinny, 
4C that 's no more your name than the name you 
gave your comarade is his right one, or than 
the raumawsh you 're spaking is the truth. 
And, boys, it 's trying to make fools of us he is ; 
don't ye hear hiin about the turf?" 

" Well, and let him try it, and what harum ?" 
said the lad who had before spoken. 

" Yes, when he's the biggest fool among us, 1 ' 
observed a second. 

" And we having more o' the laugh than him, 
barring he can do it with the back of his face," 
assented another. 

" And the crature is right about his sweet- 
heart, whoever she is," resumed Flood's warm- 



214 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

est advocate ; " and no more to Bignal than I 
am, after all." 

" That 's plain to be seen," agreed Dinny ; 
" for never such an amadawn came from Big- 
nal's country.'" 

" But the other, that's hand and palm with 
him," remarked a second elder. 

" Not the man we want, either ; just afore 
the boys came in with him, Nance was here 
and tould me as much ; Bignel and he stood 
face to face, at my thrashold, and didn't know 
one another.'' 

" Admirable Nance, 1 ' thought Gerald. 

'* Then, what are we to do with them ?" 

" It 's hard to tell," answered Dinny ; " the 
both has more knowledge of us, boys, by this 
time o' day, than we'd like they'd go away with, 
to give to the neighbours." 

" And one of 'em more knowledge of you and 
me, aforehand, father ; and more knowledge of 
where we're to be found, when convanient, since 
to-day morning, than he ought to be let to go 
away with," said Dinny's son. 

" We will pledge our words of honour, as 
gentlemen, to conceal every thing we know of 
you, or have known of you," said Gerald. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 215 

" Bind ourselves, by regular treaty, to such 
a course, very certainly," agreed Flood. 

" As gintlemen ! — how do we know what you 
are at all ?" pursued young Hogan ; " and you 

most of all didn't you once try to take me 

up, only my father made you run for it ?" 

Gerald eagerly explained how mistaken was the 
speaker in his notion of the rencounter alluded 
to. " We will go in your company, to one of 
your priests, and give an oath of secrecy," he 
continued. 

" The priest !" cried Dinny, with a sneering 
laugh — " which o' them ? Is it Father Dick, 
that found himself lying in the glin o' Boyle, 
the other night, with more holes than breath in 
his body, just for meddling too much with what 
no ways concerned him ? Musha, my boy, the 
priests and some o' their neighbours aren't as 
good friends as you think." 

" Nien," said the second grave counsellor, 
" that cock won't fight." 

" So, as I said afore, it's hard to tell what to 
do with 'em, bould boys. One thing is sartain, 
howsomever ; — they can't go their road to-day, 
for fear they 'd happen to spile the night's fun, 
unknownst to themselves." 



216 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Yes; bring the sogers on us, or give the 
wink to Bignal," added young Hogan. 

" Are our fair pledges nought, brave captors ?" 
asked Flood. 

" We don't believe a word out o' your fool 
of a mouth ; — shet it," replied Gerald's youth- 
ful enemy. 

" Out-spoken gallant," resumed Flood, " you 
are not, permit me to suggest, the most reason- 
able or civil of your tribe ; no other tongue here 
goes the unseemly and somewhat hazardous 
length of inducing the shade of a doubt upon 
the honour of your captives." 

M What do you mean by hazardous ?" de- 
manded young Hogan fiercely. 

"Whisht, Tom, good boy," interrupted Flood's 
former admirer, " and let us spake more in rai- 
son. Serjeant Dinney, there 's no denying that 
the gintlemen must stay with us the night ; 
what 's to happen after, will all be according as 
the future may turn out to be. And there 's 
some sense in that, I 'm thinking," added the 
young councillor, vain of his wisdom. 

" There is," said Dinny's elder friend. 

" And no one has a right to say as much on 
that head as Captain Mickle," continued the 



the anglo.irish. 217 

lad : the majority loudly assented ; — " and so, 
we must only wait for him, on this business, 
as well as on the rale business o' the night." 

Again there was a cheer of acquiescence, 
which revived Gerald's fallen hopes, and he 
hastened to say — " We are satisfied with that 
arrangement, and thank you for it : for I have 
no fear of meeting the person you allude to ; 
he and I are not bad friends. 1 ' 

" What fool's words are you spaking, at 
all ?" demanded Denny. 

" I mean plainly to say, that Michael Far- 
rel and I are known to each other;" many 
of the listeners started, and all looked as- 
tonished. 

1,4 And where did ye meet first, might a 
body be axing you ?" catechised Denny, with 
his sneer. 

" You need not ask," retorted Gerald, more 
boldly than prudently as he came to the cor- 
rect conclusion that the old Rockite must be 
perfectly aware of who it was that befriended 
Farrel when he fell from the coach, inasmuch 
as he had seen Gerald mount to the seat beside 
the ex-coachee, and no doubt had afterwards 
learned from the sufferer's own lips, the ser- 

VOL. III. L 



218 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

vice which Gerald now for the first time hoped 
might be remembered in season ; — " You need 
not ask, Mr. Dennis Hogan — " again the 
party looked surprised — " for, if I do not 
greatly err, I saw you run into the cabin to 
Michael Farrel, upon the day he broke his 
thigh, and I my arm, just as I entered my 
post-chaise to ride to Dublin." 

Denny coolly said — " You might happen to 
make a mistake ;" but the rest of the Rockites 
clamorously proclaimed their knowledge of a 
strange gentleman's kindness, upon the occa- 
sion spoken of, to their former captain — Mich- 
ael and his wife had spread the story far and 
wide— and they were sure, so they were, that 
Gerald must be the good Samaritan : the men 
who had captured him on the mountain-road, 
testified his recent avowal, to them, of an ac- 
quaintanceship with Farrel; and finally, after 
being desired to describe his friend's appear- 
ance, and after submitting a satisfactory por- 
trait, shouts of good- will arose from all, and 
many crowded round him, to assure Gerald 
and his * crony' of protection, until the arrival 
of their chief leader. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 219 

" Again we embrace," said Flood, theatri- 
cally folding his arms round Gerald — " again 
I hold you to my heart, — now, as well in gra- 
titude as in love, adventurous and life-preserving 
Mahaffy." 

" But it's a shame for Mickle to keep us 
waiting to know his pleasure," observed the 
elderly peasant before spoken of, after the new 
laugh which Flood sought to produce had 
somewhat subsided. 

" Maybe he thinks we are to take him at 
his word, and won't come at all," said Denny. 

" And it seems we can't have the pleasure 
of bringing Bignel's gossip to the dour, as we 
thought we could ; here 's two o' the roads 
he'll travel missed already," resumed his col- 
league. 

" Let the Boys run out again," advised 
old Hogan : " but stop — the man we want is 
coming, at last, I'm thinking — see there." 

" Yes, the patroul from the low road," cried 
several. 

** But how careful they are of him," remark- 
ed one ; " giving him a jaunt here on their 
showlders." 

l 2 



220 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Maybe he wouldn't walk for them," said 
Denny. 

" And how he kicks and tears with his legs, 
ay, and hits them with his stick," observed 
Gerald's young advocate : " musha, I wonder 
how they let him do that."" 

" Flood !" whispered Gerald, " lo, who comes 
to share our captivity ?" 

" Ha ! No, — it were redundantly too excel- 
lent ; call the apparition some evil, boggy, amus- 
ing thing, in his shape," answered Flood. 

M Musha, what an ould man he is, after all," 
continued the last Rockite speaker. 

The entrance to the turf-clamp faced a 
causeway through the bogs at right angles with 
that by which Gerald had gained it ; and along 
this track, and now near enough to be identified, 
certainly came Mr. Gunning, his hat and wig- 
gone, and borne, as the spectators have noticed, 
on the shoulders of two athletic fellows, who, 
with all the strength of their clasping arms, 
could scarce keep his foundered legs secure, 
while they were therefore compelled to excuse 
as they might the occasional visitation of his 
stick on their sides and thighs. He seemed 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 221 

half frantic with rage and impatience, and kept 
crying out, as he neared the retreat, " Rascals ! 
what 's all this ? what confounded place ? let 
me down, I say ! My leg, you reprobate ! I 
mean you that hold my left leg ! you crush 
it, you cruel villain ! Take that, and be d — d ! 
What am I to do here ? Who are those scoun- 
drels, yonder ? who or what are you all, — curse 
and confound you, one and all, together !" 

" Here he's for ye," said one of his porters, 
as both trundled down Mr. Gunning under 
the roof of the den ; " and our notion is, that 
it's the ould divvle we 're after carrying on our 
showlders, not to talk of an ould Scotchman." 
Gerald and Flood had stepped aside to indulge 
the laughter that rang through the turf-cavern. 

" Scotchman ! do you take me for a Scotch- 
man ?" asked Gunning, still furiously, as he 
sat squatting on the soft ground. 

" Yes ; and you 're name is Macintash ?" 
said Dennis Hogan. 

" Macin-devil!" screamed Gunning: " Macin 
— be d — d to you !" he continued, beating the 
turf puddle beside him with his stick. " It's 
a confounded lie, whoever you are that says 



222 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

it ! — I 'm an Englishman, and no Scotchman ! 
I hate a Scotchman, if that's any use to me, — 
and now what have you got to say ?" 

" As sure as you have mistaken my friend 
and myself," began Gerald, advancing with 
Flood 

'* What, the deuce !" interrupted Gunning, 
staring at them : " Aha ! I see it now, as plain 
as my stick. 'Tis all your work, you brace of 
puppies ! To give me a taste of Irish welcom- 
ing to the bog-holes, as it were ! but if I 
don't remember your jest, — stop though ; you 
couldn't come here to the world's-end, merely 
for that — and then, why or how have you come 
here ?*» 

" My dear Sir," resumed Gerald, making 
a secret sign, " give us time to speak, before 
you say any more ; — I was about to state," he 
continued, turning to the man, " that as sure 
as you have mistaken my friend and myself, 
you have also mistaken this gentleman.''' 

" Yes, I promise them ; they '11 soon find 
they've caught a Tartar," interrupted Gun- 
ning. 

" For," Gerald went on, " he is well known 
to both of us — although — " again glancing ex- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 223 

pressively at Gunning — " he may wish, as we 
atjirst wished, to conceal his name." 

" I don't wish any such thing ; not a bit ; 
why should I ? J 'm not ashamed or afraid of 
my name — 'tis Gunning — Miles Gunning — and 
my brother is Mr. Gunning, of Belleview, not 
many miles from this cursed place." 

" A man we like in our hearts," said one of 
the Rockites, which assertion was confirmed by 
an encomiastic uproar. 

f Do you ? I suppose he must be much 
obliged to you, — though I 'm not." 

"He's a good man to his tenants, though 
not bred or born in the country," added one 
of the eulogists. 

M Thank you much for your information,' 1 
resumed Gunning; " though here I am, his 
brother, also coming to live amongst you, I 
fear, and dragged off my horse, and forced to 
this infernal nook, on my road to dine with 
another of your neighbours, Mr. Knightly." 

f* Mr. Knightly ?" was repeated by all the 
hearers ; " three screaches for Mr. Knightly ! 
and let no friend of his fear hurt or harum from 
us," pursued an earnest voice. 

" Hurt or harm ?" retorted Gunning : *' why, 



224 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

what else can you do to me ? Confound your 
assurance. Where 's my horse ? where 's my 
hat ? where 's my wig ? And how am I to 
get across yonder labyrinth of black water and 
quagmire ?" 

'* Supposing we were to make all that as 
convanient as we could, after what has hap- 
pened," began a spokesman — ■ — 

" Yes, after what has happened, indeed," 
said Gunning. 

" Would your honour swear down on the 
book, aforehand, not to tell of us ?" 

" My honour will swear down on the book no 
such thing." 

" Maning to say, Sir, that if we let you off 
this moment, you '11 complain of us to the neigh- 
bours the next ?" 

" Yes ; meaning exactly that. 11 

" Then we believe your honour can't ate 
your dinner with Mr. Knightly, this blessed 
day." 

This threat, proposing a very climax to his 
hardships, made Gunning more violent and 
vituperative than he was before, — the men pas- 
sively enduring his abuse, partly out of love 
to his brother and to Mr. Knightly, partly 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 225 

because the frenzy, as well as the appearance 
of the old gentleman, amused them. Seeing 
them laugh aside, he lost all patience, and 
once or twice strove to start up. 

Gerald addressed him, in the hope of prevail- 
ing on Mr. Gunning to submit quietly to his 
situation, by giving him to understand its exact 
nature. He stated that Flood and he had 
been kidnapped, just as he had been ; he made 
him conceive how it had happened, and that 
they were all in the hands of a formidable 
Rockite band — (here Mr. Gunning cried, 
" They be d d !"" and looked round fierce- 
ly at them ;) — he hinted the kind of outrage 
which they were preparing to commit; and 
lastly, Gerald sought to calm and comfort his 
old friend, by assuring him of the protection 
of Michael Farrel, and implored him to col- 
lect his thoughts, in order to give him, Gerald, 
effectual support in endeavouring to persuade 
Michael and his men, upon the arrival, in the 
dreary haunt, of that important personage, 
from going to Bignal's house upon any hostile 
intent. 

But Mr. Gunning was little soothed after all 
Gerald could do. He said, " Pish !" and 
l 5 



226 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" stuff!" at each word that did not provoke 
him into violent invective, and at last began 
to complain of his leg, rubbing it tenderly, 
and calling down vengeance on the head of 
the malignant savage who had treated it so 
roughly. And this brought Captain Flood 
once more upon the stage, in a prominent and 
novel situation. 

" Arra, let the poor boy alone, with your 
cursing and swearing, you ould sinner," said 
young Hogan, observing upon Gunning's abuse 
of his comrade—" how could he know that you 
were such a bocca ?*" 

" Hold your tongue, you monkey, 11 snarled 
Gunning. 

" Hold you, your tongue, you father o' 
monkeys,' 1 retorted the young savage. 

U Inevitably, friend, 11 said Flood, turning to 
the rude youth, " I am rather bound to repeat, 
that you may be said to be the least polished 
of your brave people. 11 

" A crooked straw for what you say." 

" And moreover, allow yourself to compre- 
hend, that here I may not stand to hear you 
contribute to your former want of courtesy to- 
* Contemptuously used for lame person. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 227 

wards my poor self, by aggrieving the gray 
hairs of " 

" Why, he has no hairs at all," broke in the 
lad, laughing ironically, as he pointed to Mr. 
Gunning's close-shaven head. The old gentle- 
man missed a blow at the speaker, while Cap- 
tain Flood continued. 

" In that respect, athletic stripling, Art has 
incontrovertibly left him as deficient upon the 
exterior of the cranium, as Nature hath left you 
in the interior of the same : still may my words 
bear utterance, according to metaphorical usage, 
and therefore I go the length of asseverating, 
(again putting aside your indelicacies towards 
Valentine Blennerhasset, who addresses you, 
including, I would fain admonish you to re- 
member, a salute from your stalwart hand, upon 
his induction to this soddy tent ;) that I rather 
conceive myself urged to object to your strong 
language, directed towards a captive, whose 
hairs would be gray, or grayish, if they were per- 
mitted to shoot forth ; and whose body is infirm, 
and unprepared to recompense your misconduct. ^ 
" Aha, Murtuck, take that, and divvle 
mend you !" cried many of the hearers, who, 
amid loud laughing, evidently felt gratified at 



228 THE ANGLO IRISH. 

the vaguely-conceived rebuke experienced by 
young Hogan. 

" And how will you help yourself from stand- 
ing there to listen to any thing I have a mind 
to say ? v> asked the admonished party. 

" Even thus :" Flood stepped into the middle 
of the turf-floor, as gallantly as he could, con- 
sidering the halting-pace induced by his having 
one foot booted, and the other bare — "before 
this brave band, I wish to be understood as now 
arraigning you of the deficiences in good con- 
duct, already enumerated; before them, whose 
honour, I dare venture to believe, is as certain 
as their bravery, I incline to denounce you as an 
individual deserving of gentle personal chastise- 
ment therefor — I also solicit permission to be- 
come the instrument of awarding to you your 
deserts ; and finally, on this good quarrel, and 
always with allowance from the tribunal now 
besought to judge between us, I defy you to 
single combat, and heaven defend the right." 

The cheer that followed this speech, barely 
understood in its tendency, was uproarious : 
" All fair, all fair !" they cried, and a group 
of seconds soon stood at Flood's side. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 229 

" You mane, by your raumaush, to ax me 
to fight you ?" demanded young Hogan. 

" Thou hast said it very positively," replied 
Flood. 

" Come, this is good, after all," said Gunning, 
settling himself as comfortably as it was pos- 
sible on his primitive seat. 

" Are you mad ?" asked Gerald, catching 
Flood's arm. 

" With a method, perhaps," answered his 
friend. 

" To be sure he is, and nothing else," re- 
sumed the challenged: "look at him, — does he 
want me to break him across, at the first snap ? 
And, do ye think I 'd shame my father's son, 
by pulling the sting out of such a wasp as 
that ?" The gigantic youth pointed at Flood's 
refined waist. 

" Words may be called idle, robust foeman," 
observed Flood; " in stature and weight, I ad- 
mit your preponderance, though flatterers have 
designated me a goodish enough 'un ; also, 
about the region above the hips, my span is 
less than yours ; though here, art may mislead 
vour primitive judgment ; and though the pec- 



230 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

toral muscles, the deltoids, nay, even the os- 
teology of the shoulders — * 

"Don't be bothering with your gibberish," 
interrupted the sullen youth ; " but if you will 
try it with me " 

" He will, — to be sure he will !" exclaimed 
several, clapping Flood on the back : " and 
fair play he must have, by the powers !" 

" How, then ?" continued young Hogan. 

" Choose your mode," answered the chal- 
lenger. 

M You 're for the fists, I suppose, after your 
English fashion ?" 

" If so it please you, fair foe ; or more 
in accommodation to your brave Milesian 
practices, let it be a trial at wrestling, or a 
play at quarter staff, by you denominated shil- 
lelagh." 

" Let it be one after the other," shouted 
Flood's most zealous seconder, the same lad who 
had before pleaded Gerald's cause: " since 
Captain Mickle keeps us waiting for him, it will 
be good sport to fill up the time, boys ; — so, the 
fists, first; the wrastling second; and the sticks 
at last." 

Again there was loud assent, which young 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 231 

Hogan scowlingly said, " With all my heart," 
and instantly pulled off his coat. 

Flood did not so soon prepare himself for 
battle ; his first care being directed to arrange- 
ments for a ring, and enumerations of the rules 
of fair play. In these matters he found a 
zealous ally in Mr. Gunning, who, half-sup- 
ported, half-hobbling to a corner, gave out 
his commands with a loud, sharp voice. The 
Rockites, gleeishly enjoying the scene, readily 
carried into effect the instructions of both ; and 
Gerald derived some comfort from observing 
that, however his old friend might deport him- 
self, fair play and fair feeling were certainly 
to be expected. Even old Denny, smiling in 
real good-humour, seemed disposed to let his 
son take his own fortune, and more than once 
applauded Flood's spirit, calling him " The 
divvle's own quare gorcoon." 

With the,exception of two seconders, — Gerald 
one, — at each side, the peasants stood three deep 
round the turfy apartment, and thus a ring was 
formed. Young Hogan stepped out, and called 
to his opponent to come on. Flood implored 
him to have patience, while he got through the 
needful preliminaries. Sitting down, he first 



232 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

craved the aid of his seconders to pull off his 
single boot, in order to allow him to stand even- 
ly on his ground. This proved a difficult task, 
as, from its having been saturated with bog- 
water, the delicate article clung to his foot ; 
and the spectators much enjoyed the operation, 
eked out as it was by the intentional hard tugs 
of the peasant, which occasionally dragged 
Flood from his place. At length the challenger 
was free to stand up; and then his final prepa- 
rations for battle ensured an increase to the mirth 
of the spectators ; for when he had doffed his 
white surtout, green body-coat, and vest, 

" Why, it 's a woman is in it !" cried his 
antagonist, starting back, as if in terror, and 
pointing to the stays which were buckled tightly 
round the dandy's waist. 

" You considerably err, primitive being," said 
Flood, calmly and skilfully proceeding to divest 
himself of his elegant incumbrance, " as, I take 
your patron saint to witness, shall ultimately ap- 
pear to your dissatisfaction. ,, He flung the stays 
to his peasant friend, who held then up between 
finger and thumb ; and then Flood, whispering 
Gerald, " Now, Tom Crib, be honoured in your 
favourite pupil," spiritedly threw himself into 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

excellent attitude, and saying aloud — " For 
old Ireland's chivalry, whose son, after all, I 
am !" awaited his foe. 

Hearty shouts answered him. It was evident 
to Gerald that, notwithstanding his great stature 
and strength, the challenged party must fight 
under disadvantages, of some of which he was 
conscious — namely, a bad cause, and the un- 
favourable wishes of his friends. But what he 
had most to fear he could not perhaps suffici- 
ently estimate, — Flood's coolness, " science," 
and confidence. The battle began. He made 
a furious onset, aiming blows, the least con- 
siderable one of which must have decided the 
contest, had it told. But his antagonist par- 
ried them, with a skill that is only to be ac- 
quired; nimbly jumped round him, or retreat- 
ed ; until, at the entrance to the ring, he found 
opportunity to inflict a hit under the ear, which 
brought down Hogan, as if he had been shot. 
Those who were not silenced by absolute sur- 
prise, cheered loudly ; and Gunning, all his 
sufferings forgotten, became vociferous with de- 
light. 

" He '11 never come to time !" cried the old 
gentleman, as umpire, looking at his watch. 



284 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Hogan that instant sprang from his second's 
knee, not quite recovered, and still more blind- 
ed by rage, and jumped upon his challenger. 
He received between the eyes a second warn- 
ing to be more cool, and a second time, after 
staggering, fell. The third round was a scram- 
ble on his part, by which he succeeded in 
throwing Flood ; but not before that gallant 
person's knuckles had made free with every 
feature of his face. The young tiger would 
have leaped on his prostrate foe, but that he 
was prevented. Flood, now determined to keep 
him off, fought the next round admirably, and 
with another hit under the ear, and a ' left- 
hander' in the throat, as he went down, so far 
won the battle. Hogan did not answer the 
call to time. 

Amid roars of applause, Flood's hand was 
shaken by almost every Rockite around him ; 
and many offered ' his share' of the illicit 
whisky which others poured down young 
Hogan's throat, or applied to his bruised and 
bleeding face. 

" Let me at him again!" cried the hideous- 
looking fellow, scrambling up. His friends in- 
formed him that he was beaten, so far, accord- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 235 

ing to all the rules of fair play. He would 
not hear of it. They insisted : "Well; I'll 
wrastle him, then,"' he added. 

u My brave old class-mate," said Gerald, 
" well have you reminded me of your boyish 
victory over the hot-headed Milesian, at West- 
minster ; yet I dread this second trial.*" 

" Worthy fellow,'' 1 answered Flood, delibe- 
rately tearing off the skirts of his Bond-street 
coat, in order to furnish himself with a wrest- 
ling jacket, "if this juvenile giant will but 
engage me at what they call " the Fingallian,'' 
or " collar and elbow — 11 (remark my know- 
ledge of their technicals, acquired in early 
youth, and, it is probable, in later life, 
amongst them) — then shall I but slightly 
value his utmost ; but if he rather choose their 
" long-arm-wrestling, 11 I incline to agree that 
you may account your poor well-wisher a bro- 
ken-necked, or broken-backed man. Prudence, 
and a good cause, however, aided by your 
pious aspirations, befriend me." 

" Here I am, 1 ' bellowed his antagonist. 

" Collar-and-elbow ? w asked Flood. 

" Arra, bother, here it es ! — " and, rushing 
forward, he seized his hated foe round the 



236 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

small of the back, with both arms, clasping 
his hands firmly together, and stooping a little 
from his hips. Flood secured, in return, as 
good a gripe as was left open to him ; but his 
anticipations of this mode of wrestling proved 
correct ; he had now to contend with mere 
animal strength ; skill or activity little availed 
him ; and Hogan, after a few tugs, threw him 
a heavy fall, to which Gunning's groans, more 
than his champion's, responded. 

Gerald flew to take him up, much alarmed. 
The gallant though absurd fellow was not, 
however, materially hurt, and soon recovered 
his breath and spirits. His other seconder 
beckoned him aside, while Gerald strove to 
persuade him from farther struggle against 
the colossal muscles he had to encounter. 
" Thanks, amazingly instructive friend, and I 
will remember," said Flood, speaking to the 
peasant, as he soon joined Gerald ; and again 
to the tug he would go. 

Now he secured a better hold than at first, 
and for a longer time baffled his opponent's 
furious attempts to throw him. Hogan lifted 
him from the ground, and dashed him down- 
ward ; he alighted firmly on his outspread feet : 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 237 

and suddenly, while the revengeful lad forced 
him back, Flood dropped on one knee, and 
aiding the sleight with his hands, allowed the 
young brigand to propel himself, head-foremost, 
over his shoulder. 

" Was that it, esteemed tutor ?" he in- 
quired of his rude seconder. 

" Nothing else it was — hoo !" and the man, 
jumping high, slapped him on the back. 

But at the third and fourth struggle Flood 
was thrown ; and a fifth fall might have prov- 
ed very dangerous, if his trusty squire had 
not skilfully broken it. When Flood gained 
breath, he addressed his audience. 

" In this passage of wrestling, I may be 
allowed, without faint-hearted ness, to indicate 
my admitted inferiority. Victory to the de- 
scendant of your ancient giant and captain, 
Fin-mac-cool. And so stand we equal, battle 
for battle, if, indeed, success in the horse-like 
quality of tugging and of throwing man, be 
esteemed as glorious as triumph in the noble 
encounter of the pugilistic ring. A third 
species of engagement must, nevertheless, pro- 
claim the real victor. Give unto us the shille-r 
laghs." 



238 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Smiling perfect confidence, young Hogan 
grasped his primitive weapon. 

" He looks success,*" remarked Flood to Ge- 
rald, " but he may not be so near to it. Their 
shillelagh play is, incontrovertibly, admirable; 
yet have I practised it ; and my rather studious 
attention to the broadsword fence, under emi- 
nent tutors of Albion, of Germany, and of the 
Gaul, may moreover slightly stand my friend 
upon the present occasion. 1 ' 

Again the speaker made correct calculations. 
Though Hogan came on, shouting and dancing, 
and whirling his cudgel round his head, at the 
rate of a hundred flourishes to a minute, he could 
not make a blow tell inside his antagonist's scien- 
tific guard. Meantime, Flood hit him smartly, 
now upon his knuckles, now upon his up-raised, 
capering knees, or shins, and at length, while 
hard-pressed, was compelled to knock the mad 
fellow down. Silence prevailed amongst the 
Rockites, which Gerald at first feared might 
bode danger, but which was really suspended 
breath, caused by their utter astonishment and 
admiration. Up jumped Hogan, after a few se- 
conds, and frowning deathfully, flung by his short 
cudgel, and snatched from a by-stander a club 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 239 

of great length and weight. " Asy, gorcoon !" 
said his father. 

"He'll kill you, now, if he can! 1 ' — cried 
Flood's constant seconder, as the young ruffian 
attacked him. 

" And I hinder him, as I may, without aim- 
ing at life V questioned the brave dandy, as he 
with difficulty parried many a deperate blow. 

M To be sure ! — what else ?" — answered se- 
veral : " he desarves it." 

" Then must I very positively disable his 
weapon-arm ;" and scarce had Flood spoken the 
words, when young Hogan dropped his formida- 
ble club, and let fall to his side the member that 
had just flourished it so vigorously. The arm 
was broken. 



240 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER X. 

" Brave Rockites !" resumed Flood, now- 
appealing earnestly and naturally to the by- 
standers, whose seriousness, at the serious ter- 
mination of their amusement, probably urged 
him to forget his habitual eccentricity — " brave 
Rockites, I request you to take notice that this 
I have been compelled to do in self-defence, my 
antagonist having attacked me at odds not first 
agreed on ; and pray observe also, that the 
arm I have hurt, inflicted upon me, at my first 
introduction among you, the only degrading 
blow which, as a gentleman, and a man, I have 
ever received." 

The band remained silent. At last ; " What 
does yourself say, Dinny ?" asked Flood's 
staunch friend, while the father sat by his son, 
at one side. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 241 

" Why, I believe the gorcoon must go home 
to his mother to be nursed, for another start, 
and that's all," replied Denny. 

" This purse will pay his surgeon,'' resumed 
Flood, presenting it to his seconder. 

" It's heavy, 'faith," observed this person, as 
he handed it to the old man. 

" Thankee, your honour," said the father, 
coolly enough ; but as he put it up, the Rock- 
ites muttered their satisfaction. 

" The rascal should not have had a farthing 
from me," remarked Gunning to his champion. 

" Whisht, ould man, or maybe we M forget 
whose brother you are," counselled Denny. 

" Forget, and be d !" Mr. Gunning began 

to retort, when he was interrupted by the re- 
entrance into the den of men who had long 
before gone out to watch, a second time, on the 
neighbouring roads, for Mr. Bignel's expected 
new tenant. Every face grew still more serious, 
nay, stern, at their sudden appearance, and they 
were assailed with questions from every tongue. 
The tidings they had to communicate produced 
general disappointment. 

" Their gossip,' 1 as they called the doomed 
man for whom they had been on the look-out, 

VOL. in. M 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

had not yet come in their way ; and, moreover, 
must not be expected to-night, for intelligence 
to that effect had reached Bignel, as " a friend 
in the house," assured them. 

Gerald rejoiced in his heart at this providen- 
tial disappointment, and hoped that no outrage 
of any kind could that night be committed. 
But the sanguine brigands otherwise deter- 
mined. 

From their growling deliberations he inferred 
that, having assembled in great force, and bent 
their minds on an exploit, they were unwilling 
to disband and go home, without executing ven- 
geance upon at least the principal object of their 
hatred. 

This point decided, important questions next 
arose concerning " Captain Mickle." No one 
could account for him ; it seemed to all that, as 
Denny had at first said, he left them to pursue 
their own measures ; and again it was resolved 
to act without him ; old Hogan, as his Serjeant, 
succeeding to a temporary command over his 
comrades. 

The heavy and sunless winter's day was 
now failing ; the expanse of bog without grew 
blacker. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 248 

" Well, boys; an' we'll just have time, afore 
we go, for a mouthful, and a taste of the pot- 
teen ; but it must be a taste in rason ; remem- 
ber that, and no grumbling. And the gintle- 
men, too, that we're hindering from their good 
dinner, sure they must be hungry," said Denny. 

" What hogs 1 food have ye ?" asked Gun- 
ning. 

" Only just the praties, Sir, and the pot- 
teen." 

" Agh !" shrugging his shoulders, " the pra- 
ties ; raw, I suppose f* 

" Yes, your honour ; but we '11 soon roast 
'em. 1 ' 

" Roast 'em ? here, amid such a combustible 
pile ? Do you want to roast us along with 'em? 1 ' 

" If the place takes fire, sure there 's plenty 
o' water to go into from it," answered Denny. 

" Thank you," said Gunning. 

During this dialogue, several of the peasants 
rooted holes in the damp turfen floor, filled them 
with potatoes and straw alternately, heaped dry 
sods of the convenient fuel over all, struck lights 
with their pistols, and dinner was soon cooked. 
Themingledinterest and contempt, natural yearn- 
ing, (for he was very hungry,) and recollective 
M 2 



244 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

abhorrence with which Mr. Gunning eyed these 
proceedings, was amusing to Flood and Gerald. 
He would turn with a shrug, to gaze out at 
the inhospitable waste of bog, but as often glance 
back at the roasting process. The primitive 
meal was ready, and the Rockites, kneeling or 
stooping round the different fires, began, in 
great glee, to snatch up the hot potatoes, and, 
delving off the blackened peels with their skilful 
thumb-nails, to eat them ravenously, blowing 
upon them, all the while, and passing them 
from hand to hand, to avoid being burnt. Now 
and then, according to the permission of their 
new chief, they moistened their throats with a 
sip from a cow's horn ; and delighted with their 
dinner they seemed to be. Gerald now detect- 
ed his old friend eagerly watching their motions, 
and more than once heard from him that pecu- 
liar sucking in of the breath, between the part- 
ed teeth, which may philosophically be termed 
a symptom of strong animal desire, though a 
plain-spoken person would say that Mr. Gun- 
ning's teeth watered. At last, losing patience, 

" You break faith with us, old chap, 1 ' he 
said, addressing Denny ; and when his hint pro- 
cured him a little pile of roasted potatoes, near 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 245 

to his hand, and a spare cow's horn, half-filled, 
Mr. Gunning used his thumb-nails and his jaws 
to as good a purpose as any one around him ; 
and when pretty well helped, recommended his 
young friends to follow his example; adding, 
that he never before knew what it was to get 
a good potatoe ; that he saw London was 
not the place to get them ; and as to the 
bog-whisky, he assured Gerald that it was at 
least better stuff than Mr. Gore's Madeira 
puddle. 

" And what 's to be done with me, now ?" 
he inquired, as the men stood up from their 
meal, once more assuming serious faces. 

" Why, Sir, you must be sent off to your 
friend, Mr. Knightly," said Denny. 

" Sent off? how am I to go?" 

" In your kish, and hay about you,"" an- 
swered Gerald's humoursome advocate, using a 
kind of rustic, slang phrase, generally applied 
in a figurative sense, though now in a real 
one. 

" In my what ?" snarled Mr. Gunning. 

" There it is," said Denny, pointing to an 
oblong wicker-basket, about five feet in length, 
shallow, and open at top, with which two men 



246 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

entered, bearing it, like a barrow, upon poles 
which had just been thrust through it from 
end to end. In Ireland, such articles are made 
to fit into the peculiar * cars 1 of the country, 
for the purpose of ensuring a compact load of 
any loose material ; turf, stones, or coals. 

Though Mr. Gunning was pleased in his 
heart at the prospect of speedy escape, he 
strongly objected to travel by this mode of 
conveyance. His weight might burst the 
wicker bottom, or the poles might break, 
and then he must surely tumble into the bog, 
and perish, the night grew so dark. Denny 
and others ensured him against any such perils. 
Then came the more important question — 
" How do I know that I shall be carried to 
Mr. Knightly's ?" 

" Oh, honour bright," answered all : " a friend 
of Mr. Knightly, and a brother of Mr. Gun- 
ning of Belleview, need fear no deceit at their 
hands." 

"Well; I'll believe all that when I see it. 
And what becomes of my young friends ?" 

" They'll just stay here, with a friend or 
two of our own, till we come back, 1 ' answered 
old Dennis ; " and then, by the time, towards 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 247 

morning, when your honour will be left at Mr. 
Knightly 's gate— " 

" Towards morning ! — why, confound you, if 
I leave this infernal hole now, what should 
keep me on the road till near morning ? 'Tis 
but a few miles to Mr. Knightly's ; and if those 
savages only take me on at the rate of a sedan- 
trot, I can be there in an hour." 

" But your honour 'ill consave that we don't 
want you to tell on us, as you promised, till 
our night's work is done ; nor the other gentle- 
men either, though they don't threaten us as 
you do ; so, they '11 stop here, as I said afore, 
while we're on the fut ; (there's no use in 
letting 'em come with us, to be looking at us, 
you see, Sir;) — and you'll be axed to stop, in 
some convenient place to Mr. Knightly 's, if you 
plase ; and as soon as you can do no harum by 
informing again us—" 

With increased anger Mr. Gunning inter- 
rupted the speaker, protesting against being 
removed, on such an understanding. He 
would prefer staying with his friends. Denny 
replied that so he should, if it were as safe to 
carry him through the bog at a later hour of 
the night, of which the noon promised to be so 



248 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

"pitch-dark;" still he objected; but, at Den- 
ny's command, his appointed porters lifted him 
into the kish by main force, tied a handker- 
chief on his bald head, and, amid his abuse 
and maledictions, trotted off with Mr. Gunning 
along the narrow causeway that ran from the 
entrance. 

" And so we 're quit of the wickedest ould 
man that ever I seen with my two born eyes," 
observed Dennis; "it's a marcy he didn't 
bring down the roof on our heads. Come, 
boys, get ready." 

Gerald thought this the time to exhort the 
Rockites against the atrocities they were about 
to commit, and accordingly he addressed them 
earnestly. Flood seconded him in the most 
serious speech he had that evening delivered. 
The men, pausing in their preparations of 
blackening their faces, and kicking off their 
brogues, looked angry and threatening. While 
the gentlemen continued, Denny sternly inter- 
rupted them. 

" You 're spaking of what doesn't concarn 
you, and what you know nothing about ; and 
we never let strange people meddle or make 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 249 

with us ; no, nor our neighbours either ; re- 
member the story about Father Dick. And 
so, hould your tongues, gorcoons ; it 's the 
best of your play, maybe, if ye don't want 
to make us forget the smooth promises ye 
had ready awhile agone, and call to mind, 
instid of 'em, that ye are strangers, in earnest, 
without a friend to give ye a good word, 
like the gintleman that 's just gone, in the 
country wide. Come here, Sham us ; come 
here, Paudge," he continued ; two Rockites 
advanced, well armed ; " Stand here by their 
sides, and let us find 'em here, alive or dead, 
when we see ye again. Start off, bould boys ! 
The foremost o' ye carry red sods, that 
the rest may know their way along the 
tracks, and not go astray after the willy-the- 
wisps, that's beginning to dance about in the 
bog." 

Promptly obeying his commands, the men 
bounded out, barefooted, many holding sods of 
lighted turf in their hands. 

" Make off you" resumed old Dennis, ad- 
dressing his son, in the open air, " as fast as 
you can, to the mother and Nance." 
m 5 



250 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

"No; I'll stay here," answered the lad, 
scowling at Flood. 

" The divvle a stay, then, 1 ' said his father, 
shoving him far from the entrance to the re- 
treat — " no matter how the gintlemen 'ill happen 
to be settled with hereafter, you sha'n't bring 
me into trouble by hurting 'em behind my back. 
Go home, I bid you !" 

" Men," turning to the guards ; " don't let 
the born fool inside the place :" and the old 
brigand briskly followed his party. 

" Well, I know who Bignel 'ill have to 
thank, if ye are faint-hearted enough to let him 
off' to-night," muttered the ill-blooded youth, 
once more scowling at Flood ; and then he dis- 
appeared. 

" Not your own self, at any rate, my boy," 
cried one of the two men left with our friends, 
speaking after him — " for your hand was never 
the one to cry stop, when once it had a finger on 
the trigger ; — see," peering out into the increas- 
ing darkness, — "Salvation to my soul, Shamus ! 
but the young rap is staling after the boys, 
since he won't be let in here — but he can do 
no more than look on ; they won't give him back 
his pistol." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 251 

" So," said Flood to Gerald, as both retired 
and sat down in the remote end of their turfy 
prison ; " I may have remotely done this oft- 
named Bignel some good, without intending it." 

"But yourself none, I fear, Flood. 11 

" Explain slightly, good Blount." 

" We remain in the power of your enemy^ 
father, upon his return ; and I did not relish 
the old ruffian's last words, in allusion to that 
return, addressed either to our guards, or to his 
hopeful son." 

" Nor I, very positively. 1 ' 

" These men have been told to produce us 
here, alive or dead" continued Gerald. 

" Such were the orders, worthy fellow : nay, 
the allusion, touching the hereafter, vouchsafed 
to his son, appeared to me more disagreeable. 1 ' 

" It is my opinion, my dear Flood, that the 
old scoundrel only kept in his revenge because 
he saw his party indifferent to the cause for it ; 
and that he hopes to provoke them against us, 
when their passions shall have been roused to tiger- 
cruelty by the scene they have gone to enact." 

" And indubitably with that sage opinion I 
rather incline to agree.' 1 

" Self-preservation, then, as well as the claims 



252 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

upon us to try and prevent this outrage, by 
alarming the neighbourhood, suggests — what ?" 

,s Our seizing upon the persons of yonder fel- 
lows, securing them here, and effecting our re- 
treat," answered Flood, coolly, but with a cou- 
rageous sparkle in his eye. 

" Then we must not longer discuss it," re- 
sumed Gerald ; " for, supposing them mastered, 
we can find our way out of the black bog only 
while the lighted turfs borne by their comrades 
remain in view to guide us ; and see, — there 
they go, like wavering stars across the rayless 
gulph." 

" Forbid it, Heaven, that we mistake them 
for the facetious meteors of the bog, spoken 
of by Captain Dennis Hogan, my excellent 
Blount. 1 ' 

" No, they are too red ; see, again — there, 
nearer to us, glides one of the false lights you 
mean, and note how much paler." 

" Good. Let us remember the distinction. 
Now measure those two unsuspecting ones, as 
they look out after their friends from the en- 
trance, and take your choice of them.'" 

" Choose for me. 11 

" You have been an invalid, most eminent; 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 253 

and therefore, only, I claim the biggest crea- 
ture, and him I rather propose not to struggle 
with, but merely fell, by aid of Mr. Thomas 
Cribb's best method. Are you ever tranquilly 
sure * of a floorer ?' " 

" I Ve never struck a blow in my life," said 
Gerald. 

" Enormously strange. The primitive ! But 
spare we comments. Your part, then, must be 
to embrace the lesser identity, rather of a sud- 
den, and him get to the earth, as well and as 
speedily as is within the range of possibility, 
not suffering him to poke his long-barrelled 
piece at your inexpressibly precious head dur- 
ing the effort. This you incontrovertibly can 
perform ; for, lo ! he lacks inches, five or four, 
of your aristocratic height, and withal is elderly, 
thinnish, and hard-worked.'" 

" I shall do my best," promised Gerald. 

" Then are we free as yonder bog-ranging 
phosphoric sprite. Now, mark ; steal up your 
hand to your neck, — innocently, as I do, so, — 
and unloose and cautiously convey to your friend, 
the ample silken kerchief which encircles your 
noble thorax." 

Gerald obeyed those orders. " Good. Out 



254 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

of your poke also draw its proper square of 
silk — warily, still — an inch at a time ; thanks. 
Arise, now, heaving an audible sigh of captivi- 
ty, and walk a few melancholy paces up and 
down, while with corresponding articles of cos- 
tume, undeniably mine own, I contrive gentle 
fetters for yonder Goliah ; honours, to match, 
being already prepared for your prize." 

Gerald arose, following his friend's instruc- 
tions. The men turned at his step and 
his sigh, but immediately resumed their gaze 
after the receding turf-lights, and began to 
whisper earnestly. In a few moments Flood 
joined Gerald, nothing appearing in his hands. 
The friends linked each other, and now paced 
together up and down their singular prison- 
house. " They must face us, before we act,' 1 
said Flood, " in order to enable you to secure 
the long barrel, by hugging it affectionately to 
your breast. Friends,"" he resumed, plaintively 
addressing the guards, and languidly stepping 
towards them, still linking Gerald, " we 
thirst to extremity, and would give gold for 
water." 

" Here 's no water but what 's to be found 
in the bog, and you'll not be thinking it the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 255 

natest," answered the tall peasant ; " but what '11 
ye give for that V extending his cow's horn, 
with his left arm, upon which rested the pistol 
he held in his right hand. 

" This," said Flood, holding out a sovereign ; 
and still the friends advanced ; both men had 
now turned round — " This !" repeated Flood, 
tendering his " floorer" instead, while Gerald 
pounced upon his man. Mr. Thomas Cribb's 
" best method 1 ' partially failed : the huge 
Rockite only staggered like an ox, also bel- 
lowing like one ; and was about to cock his 
pistol, when Flood, jumping in with all his 
strength, at a second attempt struck him down. 
The next instant he wrested the pistol from 
his hand ; the next deliberately knocked him 
on the head with its butt, although the blow 
seemed a calculated one, and intended to stun 
only ; and then, crying out to Gerald, 

" ' Now, gallant Saxon, hold thine own !' " 
" That is, contrive to keep Poucet amazingly 
tight for one moment !" adroitly slipped his cap- 
tive's head into a running noose, formed at the 
end of one silk handkerchief; pinioned his arms 
with two others, attached to it ; tied a fourth 
round the fellow's ankles; jumped up; found Ge- 



256 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

raid tumbling, not quite at advantage, with the 
lesser Rockite, near the entrance ; a second time 
used the butt of the pistol ; then ran to a corner, 
where lay his own stays; assisted by Gerald, 
buckled them round the little old peasant, arms 
and all, — the straps, as may be concluded, 
stretched to their last holes ; tore a slip off his 
white surtout, from the lapel to the skirt ; with 
this fettered the man's legs; thrust his bare feet 
into one of the many pairs of brogues kicked 
off by the main band ; and, a moment after, Ge- 
rald and he were hurrying through the bog, 
armed with the weapons of their late guards. 

" When thelights first changed their straight 
course, it was to the right ; and this, therefore, 
must be our way," said Gerald, turning upon 
another causeway, at right-angles with that 
which had led them so far. 

" Agreed," said Flood, keeping at his side ; 
" and, veritably, yonder they still appear to 
give us assurance. 1 ' 

u At the verge of this dreary waste, I 
should think, if not beyond it, Flood." 

" Very possibly ; — but hold, doughty Blount, 
may they not be called stationary, now ?" 

" I fear so," answered Gerald. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 257 

" I venture to hint that the bellow emitted 
by my great animal may have aroused the 
suspicions of the flying band," resumed Flood, 
" and that they pause to hold counsel on us ?" 

" Supposing your case, what must we do ?" 
asked his fellow adventurer. 

" The gallant thing, yet - -push on, worthiest." 

" Till we come up with them P 11 

" I say not precisely so ; but, surely, till we 
have all possible aid from their breeze-fanned 
sods, to extricate ourselves out of this very 
abominable and perilous maze." 

The friends continued their course, often 
obliged to travel zig-zag, according to the whim 
of the trackways, and scarce able to distinguish 
the narrow and by no means firm slips of soil 
to which they were limited, from the sedges or 
from the water which edged them. Night, the 
real wintry night, had gained it deepest dark- 
ness ; overhead not a star twinkled. No dis- 
tinct forms of elevated land could be traced in 
the distance ; no tree, no house, no cabin ; all 
was vague gloom. The wind now and then 
swept gustily and sullenly over the drear ex- 
panse of bog ; or the black water-fowl, startled 
from their rushy tufts by the quick feet of the 



258 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

fugitives, plunged unseen, though near at hand, 
farther out into the stagnate lake, flapping it 
with their heavy wings, and booming wildly. 

" This is worse than the run from Burgos," 
said Flood. 

" Look at the lights, ahead l" cried Ge- 
rald. 

" A bull, — an exceedingly native bull, ex- 
cellent comrade, 1 ' answered Flood ; " one can- 
not see things out of sight.'" 

" They certainly all disappeared that in- 
stant, Flood — explain why." 

" Gallant fellow, your command rather pre- 
sumes me infallible, which compliment I 
waive ; and yet would attempt to pronounce, 
that the Rockites have extinguished our guid- 
ing-stars, either for the purpose of pursuing 
their expedition along the more solid and more 
inhabited country, which now they gain, with- 
out notice ; or haply, have done so in order to 
form an ambuscade for your admirable self, 
and your humblest — " 

" Stand r interrupted Gerald, as a light 
suddenly appeared about twenty paces before 
them ; and he presented his piece. 

" 'Tis but the fiend," said Flood ; while, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 259 

as both pressed forward, it fell back, and went 
out. 

" Ah ! — I forget — let us hold on," said Ge- 
rald, his voice tremulous. 

"So; a few of our honester sparks, again 
at the proper distance, though not precisely 
in the same direction," said his companion. 
" Come; suffer yourself to turn upon this 
track ; they have surely traversed it before 
us." 

" Let us be cautious of getting too near 
them," advised Gerald, following Flood. 

" They permit our free progress, for now 
they are not stationary, my Blount — so, for- 
ward." 

Some quick walking, or rather repeated 
bounds, brought them to the extremity of the 
trackway they had last chosen ; but that ex- 
tremity was surrounded by water. At the 
same time, the lights, of which Flood had just 
spoken, vanished from their sight. 

" How, my Pythias ? was it but the imp 
again, with many of his fellows ?" 

" Look here !" whispered Gerald : both 
turned; and a single flame advanced down 
the trackway, about a man's height from the 



260 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

ground, and moving up and down, and here 
and there, as a light might do carried by a 
man who should come springing along — " Is 
it illusion or reality ? bewilderment or — death 
for us ?" continued Gerald. 

" The first it may be ; the second it shall 
not be, brave Blount. What ! sink before it ? 
cheer up ! 'tis borne but by one coward foe, 
remember, or by one exceedingly fantastic 
devil, after all.'" 

" You detect my nervousness/ 1 said Gerald ; 
" but will you believe the cause ? These 
strange though usual phenomena, now first 
seen by me ; the sense of bewilderment ; the 
uncertainty of true or false, around us, — this, 
rather than dread of a Rockite bullet, affects 
me. See ! that must indeed be a meteor — 
how it flickers towards us, as if waved to and 
fro by some malicious sprite, dancing with 
delight at our quandary." 

" And now he valtzes back again," said 
Flood, " and now he melts into atrocious 
boggy air." 

" And I can almost fancy his spiteful laugh, 
in that strange sound," resumed Gerald — 
" what is it ?" 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 261 

" It is a laugh, poetically-Germanically- 
sensitive Blount, and no will-o'-the-wisp laugh, 
either, though yet a most distant one — allow 
yourself to listen." 

" I do hear feet hastening this way ; we are 
pursued, Flood."" 

" Veritably, good fellow." 

" What then ?" 

M You can swim, I positively conclude, else 
would you now be traversing the real Stygian 
shades, instead of this Irish imitation of the 
same?" 

" And shall we jump in here ?" 

" Even here ; for odds surely come against 
us." 

" And strike for what point ?" 

*' Yonder, I venture to be very well as- 
sured, is firm land ; see ; that must at least be an 
eminence, blacker than the sky ; and its base, 
sweeping towards us, is the lightish spread of 
something, that, at about sixty yards, edges the 
ebon pool we have to cross. 1 ' 

** Let us try ;" and Gerald, abandoning his 
piece, as many footsteps came closer, set Flood 
a good example. For dear, dear life they 
swam boldly to their point, often entangled 



262 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

amongst rushes and weeds ; it was indeed 
solid land which Flood had descried ; long be- 
fore they reached it, they could wade ; and they 
sprang lightly upon the spare grass, when almost 
the whole of the Rockite party rose from the 
ground, and without much trouble again made 
them prisoners. 

" I tould ye I heard them in the bog, 
where the weakness made me lie down," said 
young Hogan. 

" What's become of our poor gossips, that 
we left to keep you company ? Did ye — kill 
them ?" demanded his father, his last words 
uttered in an ominous tone. 

Gerald and Flood declared the true state of 
the case. 

" Do ye believe 'em, boys ?" continued old 
Hogan. A vengeful mutter answered him. 

" Make the Sassenachs kneel down," said a 
voice. Our friends once more remonstrated, 
eagerly, it may be concluded, proposing, as a 
very simple test of the truth of their state- 
ment, that a man should be dispatched to the 
retreat in the bog. Other voices concurred with 
this alternative. Denny resumed. 

" We can't spare a man the present time ; 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 263 

the four or five that went to hunt the gintle- 
men for us, is loss enough when we can't wait 
any longer till they come back. But maybe 
they 'd go to the Dry Lodging, and bring us the 
news we want. Morebetoken, howsomever, this 
brace o' foolish boys is to be paid for their 
peeping ; let them have a right peep now in 
arnest. Let them see somebody else kneel 
down, Jirst — if it's a thing that they must be 
behoulden to kneel down themselves, I mane. 
So, look after them, bould boys, in the front; 
ye know we let them stay behind, once afore. 
And now, up the hill, like hurlers." 



264 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER XI. 

Pursuant to old Dennis's order, Gerald and 
Flood were placed in the midst of those of the 
band who formed the advance, and all quickly 
moved up the eminence. Upon its brow a 
man appeared, starting out of a copse, like a 
guilty spectre. 

" Is all quiet below ?" inquired Dennis. 

'! As quiet as an empty church of a Sunday ; 
I was in the yard, a minute agone," answered 
the sentinel. 

" But he 's not gone to bed ?" 

" No, but going to sing his bed-psalms. 1 ' 

" So much the better for him and us ; — stale 
down, boys. 1 ' 

Opposite the hill upon which this dialogue took 
place was another, partially and newly planted, 
so far as the profoundly dark night allowed 
Gerald to judge, and near to its base twinkled 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 265 

lights, as if from the windows of a house. The 
hollow between both eminences seemed tra- 
versed by a road. As the Rockites descended 
to this hollow, they trod over fields in a good 
state of cultivation, and Gerald heard one of 
them whisper, " How well poor Mickle's ould 
farum comes on with him." They arrived at 
a dry wall which fenced one side of the road 
previously guessed at by Gerald, and here all at 
first crouched down, and then, one by one, crept 
stealthily over, and again bent low when they 
stood upon the road, causing the prisoners to 
follow all their movements. Gerald now more 
certainly knew that they were before a house. 
The candle-light vividly streamed through the 
shutters of its windows, and its humble front, 
one story high, became, from its white or 
lightish colour, a decided object in the gloom. 
It was not very distant from the road, in the 
opposite wall of which appeared a small, barred 
gate, that led up to it. 

" How mighty convanient it is, boys, that 
he 's in the Farrels"' ould house, to-night, warm- 
ing it for the new tenant," whispered Denny. 

" But no one is in the last empty house he 
made, to-night — in mine," said the elderly man, 

VOL. III. N 



266 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

of whom mention has already been made during 
the scene in the Rockites' head-quarters, as 
the grave cabinet-minister of Dennis Hogan. 

u That's Martin spaking," said a weak female 
voice from the opposite side of the road. The 
man, crying " Jude !" under his breath, started 
across; the foremost of his comrades, taking 
our friends with them, followed. Close by Mr. 
Bignel's gate lay a woman, wretchedly habited, 
holding an infant to her bosom. Two other 
children, more grown, slept in her cloak, at her 
feet. She showed signs of feebleness and 
agitation. 

w Jude, machree," resumed her husband, 
kneeling by her side, " what are you and the 
childer doing here ? and how did you come 
here ? I left ye far away yesterday." 

" Yes, Martin," she answered; *' but the way 
you left us in, was worse to bear than a long 
road ; without house or home, bit or sup ; and 
when you turned your back on us, and the 
weenocks began to cry for what I couldn't 
give 'em, I said to myself, sure Bignel is a 
Christhen, any how ; and if Martin's wife and 
childer axes help at his dour, he'll remember 
who put 'em in the way to ax it : and so, Mar- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 267 

tin, with the babby in my arums, and little Jude 
and little Johnny by the hand, I walked the 
weary miles now between us and our own place, 
and that's the reason you find me here, to- 
night." 

'' Is it all the reason ? is it the reason I find 
you outside of his gate, instead of under his 
roof ? You hadn't the strenth to go up to the 
house ? eh, Jude ?" 

" I hardly had the strenth, Martin, but I 
did go up." 

"Well?" 

" And I knocked at the front-dour, but no 
one came, only a winda was lifted up, over 
my head, and shet down agin ; then I turned 
round to the back-dour ; and that was opened 
only to be slapt in my face : and they spoke of 
loosing the dog in the yard ; and then I grew 
afeard for the childer; and I thought to walk 
far away from the house ; but the load on my 
heart, and the weakness o' my feet, to say no- 
thing of the crature in my arums, made me 
drop here, where you see us afore you." 

" Better and better. And how is the babby ?" 
stretching his arms for it. 

" The hunger and the could troubled it, 
N 2 



268 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

a-cushla, till awhile agone, but now it 's asleep, 
like the others." 

" Why it 's dead !" cried her husband, look- 
ing close into the face of the little corse. 

The mother's scream was drowned in the 
horrible shout with which the Rockites, now 
headed by Martin, instead of Dennis, rushed 
to attack Bignel's house. Their cry interrupt- 
ed another sound which issued from Bignel's 
parlour ; it was the swell of a hymn, sung by 
several voices. The furious barking of the 
unchained mastiff in the yard answered their 
threatening challenge, however ; but as Gerald 
and Flood were hustled by their guards into 
a small square enclosure before the hall-door, 
two shots killed the courageous animal on the 
spot, and, with the expressed purpose of giving 
Mr. Bignel a foretaste of his own fate, the 
bleeding carcass was instantly thrust between 
iron-bars, lately put up before his parlour win- 
dows^ — the shutters having first been burst in 
with the butts of muskets and fowling-pieces, — 
and flung upon the floor of the apartment. 

The lights had been extinguished all through 
the house. Without a moment's pause, the en- 
raged and revengeful band ran in separate 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 260 

groups, the prisoners' guard only excepted, to 
try for ingress at the front and at the back 
doors, and at the lower windows. None of the 
latter were found undefended, however, by iron- 
bars, which resisted their efforts ; and the former 
proved well-bolted, and locked. Meantime, 
Mr. Bignel and his garrison fired steadily from 
windows in the second story, themselves re- 
maining unseen, and were answered by volleys, 
which shattered the glass, and tore the slates 
off the slanting roof; while successive shouts, 
threats, and curses, accompanied the explosions, 
the crash, and the clatter. 

How the defenders fared, Gerald could not 
surmise; but he observed, with mixed wonder 
and pleasure, that none of their shots took 
effect upon the assaulters ; because, however 
the affair might end, he reflected that any 
personal injury sustained by the frantic pea- 
sants would greatly add to their thirst of 
blood. And doubtless his sympathy for Mr. 
Bignel had much to do with his present feel- 
ings and calculations ; but concern for himself 
and for his brave companion chiefly called them 
up. Nor was he made less selfish on this point, 
when Dennis Hogan, coming from the rear to the 



270 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

front of the house, to head a renewed attempt 
on the hall-door, said to the guards, while his 
features, tone, and manner at last reassumed the 
savage energy they had shown upon two former 
rencounters with Gerald, 

" Take the best care of the gintlemen." 

Three of the strongest of his party now hurl- 
ed huge stones, which they could barely lift 
and propel, against the hall-door, and crashes 
and increased cheers soon told that poor Big- 
nel's dangerous moment was near. Yelling 
like demons, the Rockites jumped into the 
house ; a few shots followed under its roof ; 
then Gerald saw the victors busily placing can- 
dles in every window ; and, amid the light thus 
thrown upon the enclosure in front, Bignel was 
dragged out. 

His head was bare ; his coat off, — perhaps 
he had thrown it by to leave himself more free 
for defence, — but he now made no struggle 
against his ferocious enemies ; his head hung on 
his breast, his eyes were cast down, and the hue 
of anticipated death swarthed his features. In- 
deed he seemed stupified, and insensible to the 
fate that awaited him. 

" Kneel down, Bignel !" cried Martin, dash- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 2?1 

ing him on the ground ; the victim fell pros- 
trate : " Stop a hand, boys !" continued the 
maddened husband and father, and he ran to- 
wards the road. Gerald repressed, at this re- 
spite, the acting of a determination formed in 
Bignel's favour. 

" It 's a shame for a pious body, like you, to lie 
flat there," said Dennis — " stay on your knees, 
as you Ye bid ;" and he seized Bignel's arm and 
placed him in a kneeling posture. The silence 
and repose that, for a moment, had previously 
ensued, most probably prepared the land-steward 
for becoming conscious of Hogan's sudden words 
and action, and now, wavering from side to 
side, as he knelt, he stared around him. 

" Yes ! It was I that stirred you," resum- 
ed Dennis, bending close to Bignel's face; 
" and don't you remember me, gossip ? I am 
the ould fellow that 's forced to take to labour- 
ing-work, and to selling sour beer and whisky, 
in a house, in the village below, that I have at 
a double rack-rent from one you know, because 
the same body took my dacent farum from me, 
to let it out at another rack-rent." 

" And must I give up the ground you let 
to me for two years, afore good witnesses/ 1 



272 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

asked Larry O'Dea; " or send the childer to 
your school, Misther Bignel ?" 

" Will your honour take the security I 
offered for the last gale, and let the cattle out 
o' the pound, to-morrow morning? 1 ' inquired 
another. 

" I 'd trouble you, Sir, if you plaise, for a 
good word in the next letter you write to Lord 
Ciangore, over to England, instead of penning 
us all down to be raps and rogues/ 1 said a 
fourth. 

" Bignel,' 1 demanded the youth, who had 
befriended Gerald and Flood in the bog, his 
good-humour now gone, his brow deadly, and 
his tones deep, — " was it by the psalm-singing, 
and the Bible-reading, and nothing else, you 
coaxed my mother to quit her fatherless childer, 
and her ould home, and her ould prayers, to 
go among the swaddlers,* and be a sarvant in 
your house ?" 

" Bignel ! how cum that ?" screamed Mar- 
tin, reappearing with the dead infant in his 
hands, and flinging it on the ground before the 

* Methodists, or other sects. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 273 

kneeling man : " Draw out afore him, boys, and 
give me the first offer !" 

" With a hearty good-will, 1 '' said old Hogan ; 
" and to bring to his mind as good a rason as 
any, let him remember the Farrels." 

" The Farrels !" shouted all, as they took 
their ground. Gerald was again about to in- 
terfere, but a second interruption checked him. 
The galloping of a horse was heard near at 
hand on the road, and then through the gate 
that led up to the house, and, mixed with the 
sound, a woman's voice repeated — " The Far- 
rels ! Never mind the Farrels ! ye have no 
right to spill blood in their name ! Hould your 
hand, Dinny Hogan, if it isn't too late to bid 
you ! — hould your hand, and listen to me !" 
The speaker, Moya Farrel, here came upon 
the scene, jumped from her horse, and ran be- 
tween Bignel and his executioners. The land- 
steward swooned. 

" No," she continued ; " if poor Mickle and 
I can't forget what he did to us, we forgive it ; 
and, I say again, that 's why ye have no right to 
harm a hair of his head on our account. And, 
morebetoken, Mickle has sent me here, to tell 
N 5 



274 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

ye so, and to bid you, on every other account, 
not to touch Bignel ! And well ye know ye are 
book-sworn to do his bidding." 

" Where is Mickle himself?" asked Dennis. 

" Coming after me," replied Moya ; " and 
you have a rason of your own, Dinny Hogan, 
to be wondering at that I Good care you took 
to keep him from hindering this work, ever 
since he left me, last night ! But he got away 
from your boys, just in the nick o' time, Dinny, 
to stop your hand from it, and from more than 
it, maybe — Ah !* as, looking around, she espied 
Gerald, — " but there he is, too, safe and sound 
yet r 

" He ?" repeated Dennis ; " and do you know 
who the doul the Sassenach is ?" 

" I do, — and you know a little of him, as well 
as me, Dinny, though not as I do ; you know 
him for the good-hearted gentleman that saved 
your captain's life on the strange road, and 
his wife's and their poor childer's life — ay, and 
that helped him, by good advice, and kind 
words, to play the part he'll surely play to- 
night, in spite o 1 you. Oh, boys, boys ! can ye 
raise a finger again the man that was Mickle 's 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 275 

only friend, when he wanted one ? ay, or again 
the man afore you, for his sake ?" 

" How, for his sake ?" questioned Dennis ; 
" what do you mane at»all, Moya? What's the 
more you know of this strange gorcoon ?" 

" What I won't tell you, yet, Dinny Hogan. 
— Never fear, your darling honour !" she con- 
tinued, addressing Gerald. " Though I found 
the letter, that learned me who you are, just a 
while agone, no one but Mickle, and better 
friends, heard it from me — and Mickle — " 

" Boys !" interrupted Martin, " our own trou- 
bles, put on us by Bignel, gives us fair lave and 
licence to settle with him." 

" They do," assented Denny ; " and, more- 
betoken, Mickle isn't here, after all, to give us 
his commands his own self." 

"But he's coming after me, I tell you!" 
cried Moya Farrel. 

" We don't know that, Moya; and whe- 
ther or no, boys, just let us finish our good 
night's work ; and sure, if he 's angry at it, he 
can never say — " 

" Dinny Hogan !" in her turn interrupted 
Moya, " you want to do, before he comes, 



276 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

what you dare not do to his face, and for that 
rason you pretend not to believe me when I say 
he is on the road — but he is ! The lameness 
wouldn't let him mount a horse ; and besides, he 
was beholden to turn off o' the road, a start, 
to spake with friends that 11 give him better 
advice than you would, on the whole of the 
business, and consarning all you have now in 
your power. And have a care of Mickle, Dinny ! 
well he knows, from me, the honest way the 
stranger was sent on his road to Lower-Court, 
out of your house, this morning !" 

" Arra, boys, this is all the divvle's nonsense ; 
take her away !" said Denny. 

" They won't !" — she cried, falling on the 
yet insensible Bignel — " they won't, unless they 
drag the arms from my body !" she clasped the 
victim close : " they won't, unless they 'd earn a 
curse for themselves and all belonging to them !" 
Two men tried to bear her aside : " Hell-hounds, 
do, and rue it ! — ye don't know whose eyes are 
looking at ye, this night. — Stop — listen ! isn't 
that the noise 0"* the car that brings him to ye, 
as fast as a whip can speed the horse ?" 

" No such thing, boys, 1 ' resumed Denny ; 
" it's just making fools of us, she is ;— so, by 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 277 

your lave, Mova" — by main force, he nearly 
unclasped her arms from Bignel ; but the un- 
happy man, at last restored to consciousness, 
now clung as closely to her, and the struggle 
grew desperate : " Come, there 's no use, either 
in this, or in your big words, about this body 
and that body, and the other great buggaboo 
you want to frighten us with, that no one but 
yourself knows any thing about — lave off, I 
tell you !" 

Denny's last tug was nearly successful ; and 
now, indeed, Gerald felt himself called on to try 
another chance. Suddenly breaking from his 
guards, — " Hold, for me !" he said, " and you 
shall have Moya Fan-el's secret — I am the 
Honourable Gerald Blount." 

" Now, boys ! — " cried Moya. 

And if you are, by the G !" exclaimed 

Denny, who perhaps had before surmised the 
fact, " so much the better ! it's the very lesson 
we ought to larn you, for your brother's sake ! 
Step aside,— first — and see how we like the good 
steward he sends over to us." 

" Spare the man's life, and, in Lord Clan- 
gore's name, I promise you that he shall be 
removed from amongst you ! w 



278 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Divvle a spare !" cried Martin, and Denny 
and many others repeated the words, and warn- 
ed the new mediator to retire. 

" Spare him .' and I give the same pledge, 
that the injuries he has done you shall be 
retrieved ; that in future — " 

"Whisht! listen again!" — broke in Moya, 
and now the rapid motion of wheels sounded 
distinctly below the house. She ran to the 
limit of the enclosure, and assisted her husband 
to dismount from a car, on which he reclined, 
driven by another man. 

" Fall back, Rocks, all of ye," was Michael 
Farrel's command, authoritatively delivered, as 
he limped forward, supporting himself on a 
stick ; and the party at once obeyed him. 
" Kneel up, Bignel," he resumed, " and take 
this hand to help you. Such as you treat us 
badly enough, but this is not the way to make 
ourselves be better treated. And, after all, ye 
are not as much to blame as them that lets ye 
do it." 

Here, to Gerald's great surprise, and some- 
what to his consternation, his old acquaintance 
frowned threateningly at him. 

" I'm thinking, boys," he continued, "con- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 279 

sidering the comfort Bignel took from me and 
Moya, our downfal and sufferings, by his 
means, are greater than any of yours ; but, if I 
forgive him, every man here ought — and will, — 
except one — Dinny Hogan : and, look — I'm 
standing before my father's dour, that 's now a 
strange dour to me, and he and ye know why — 
and yet, on this very spot, I take his hand 
again, and I say — may God forgive you, Big- 
nel, for Mickle Farrel does ! Come, boys ; I 
must have more than one or two clerks to that 
prayer." 

In excitement, men pass rapidly from one ex- 
treme to another ; and the magnanimity shown 
by Michael, produced, indeed, an emulative 
" Amen P 

" Stand by me, then, Bignel — hould my arm ; 
for, to make all sure, III stand by you, in the 
house, till daylight. Now, where 's Dinny 
Hogan ?" 

After looking round them, the men answered 
that he had gone away. 

" So he ought. And let the rest o" 1 ye follow 
his example, barring the boys I'll call to my 
side for another business." 

He mentioned the names of four of the party, 



280 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

who, while their fellows dispersed, walked to 
him. 

" Mr. Bignel, you'll lend us your handsome, 
smooth-going, jaunting-car? — I knew you would. 
Jim, go for it." 

One of the four went into the back-yard. 

" I want it for these strange gentlemen, that 
must move a start farther to-night, to be made 
more secure than they could be made in your 
house, until the morning; for, though we're 
done with you, Bignel, we 're not done with 
them — I mane, if it 's the rale truth, that one o' 
them is the man that the letter Moya found 
would lead us to think he is :" and once more 
Michael Farrel glanced angrily at Gerald. 

" For the love o 1 God, Mickle " began 

Moya, in great wonder and alarm. 

" Hould you your tongue, Moya — you're a 
simple, foolish crature, and a body would be just 
as great a fool to tell you every thing aforehand 
— but, whisper a bit, now that my mind is made 
up." 

Leaving Bignel for a moment, he drew his 
wife aside, and, after exchanging a few words 
with her, she became, to Gerald's increased sur- 
prise, silent, grave, and reserved. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 281 

" Though I give up our boys, Mr. Bignel," 
he resumed, regaining the land-steward's side, 
" and won't let them have to do with my grand 
prisoners, maybe there's other friends, better 
able to keep the poor country quiet, that, with 
my help — " 

" Your prisoners, fellow !" cried Gerald, 
catching Flood's arm, who now stood near him, 
all his former notions of Farrel's duplicity con- 
firmed. 

" You'll see, Sir," answered Michael — 
" cock your pistols, and keep close to them," — 
addressing his three remaining brigands — " and 
here comes the jaunting-car : and now, gintle- 
men, listen. I'm sending ye, as I said, to a 
place where we can find ye safe in the morning ; 
but we don't want ye to know the road to the 
spot, just because ye might be talking of it 
hereafter. For this rason, ye must sit in the 
car, without being able to look about you ; and 
because, over again, the handkerchiefs mustn't 
slip off o' your eyes, by any manes, your arums 
will be tied behind your backs, if ye don't say, 
upon your honours, that ye won't touch 'em ; 
howsomever, if ye do bind yourselves down in 
that manner, ye will be treated like gintlemen, 



282 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

and let to travel with your arums as free as God 
gave 'em to you." 

To these proposals, in general, our friends 
violently objected. When, Michael, however, 
grew stern, and insisted on no time being lost, 
and when their new guards advanced, as if to 
force them into the genteel Irish vehicle, and 
threatened to blindfold them, and more than 
that, whether they would or not, Gerald and 
Flood, accepting the only advantageous alterna- 
tive held out, gave their solemn words of honour 
upon the understanding required ; allowed thick 
handkerchiefs to be tied over their eyes ; and 
were then assisted into the jaunting-car, and, 
after Michael seemed to have held some private 
communication with his men, driven off, they 
knew not whither. 

" Fellow-playmate in this tragic farce, are 
you indeed yet with me ?" asked Flood, after 
a few minutes had elapsed in silence. 
" Yes ; that at least, Flood." 
" And ultimately very desponding ?" 
" I certainly fear much, for we are in the 
power of a hypocritical scoundrel." 

" Well ; to time and fortune I surrender 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 283 

up myself. Meanwhile, let us permit our- 
selves to beguile our minds of vain regrets 
and cloudy anticipations, by adverting to a 
few topics upon which, since we met this ad- 
venturous day, I have been prone to discourse ; 
although this may be said to be the first favour- 
able moment for my purpose. Poor Gore's 
exit from the world of Ireland has been vastly 
sudden and afflicting." 

" It has, indeed." 

" Close, very close, profound Blount. Yet 
must I come rather abruptly upon you by 
saying, that a certain letter, received this 
morning, renders unnecessary all farther mys- 
terious language between you and your worthi- 
est friend. Maria writes that you suspect our 
little fact." 

" And I now suspect where you were 
riding to, when the Rockites encountered you, 
to-day. To your wife, who is with the 
Knightlies." 

" Undeniably true. But on this tender to- 
pic I yearn to add a sentence or two. In 
solemn earnest, I am what is called anxious 
to let you know why I did not admit my 



284 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

sentiments towards my present lady, to her 
excellent father — much less my amazingly hasty 
wedding." 

" Thank you. 1 listen with interest." 

" Then call to mind, sagacious Blount, 
certain hints I vouchsafed to yourself when 
you poetically would assert a tenderness which 
you never felt for the very brilliant being in 
question." 

" I do. Well r 

" In beseeching you to stand guarded 
against her eloquent parent, I gave an advice 
that experience had suggested for my own 
adoption. For, good Blount, (though these 
matters would come better from another mouth,) 
I must inform you, that your poor friend had 
previously been taught a lesson considerably 
more important than that inculcated by the 
voyage to India of your three hundred and 
fifty ; and well he comprehended, that if the 
unhappy Mr. Gore became aware of — as you 
would term it — the state of his heart, the ex- 
celling Maria could scarce be his, without 
enormous acquirements of knowledge in the 
same way. Wherefore, his necessitous mys- 
tery, shared, I rather should add, by the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 285 

peerless creature herself, whose most honouring 
confidence in me, whose excelling sound sense, 
and whose unavoidable coolness to her family, 
in return for their cruelties, permitted the 
amiable artifice. The words with which I 
conclude I am especially anxious to recommend 
to your consideration. Neither of us were, 
however, fully informed of the actual extent 
and nature of Mr. Gore's embarassments ; if 
we had been, allow me to venture to say, that 
neither could have taken any step farthermore 
to disturb him ; nay, that worldly prudence 
must then have yielded to mere human suscep- 
tibilities, by the agency of which Maria's ill- 
starred father might, at even extraordinary risk, 
have been preserved to us, and to his admiring 
Dublin. As it is, credit me, your old class-mate 
shall remember whose son he has so recently, and 
so much even to his own wonderment, become." 

" Thanks for all this, Flood," said Gerald, 
and he groped out his hand, and shook it. 
" And now you, of course, expect that I shall 
relapse into my old habit of asking you plain 
questions, on my own account, connected with 
the last interview between Mrs. Flood — " 

" Mrs. Flood ! Enormous."" 



286 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" And myself." 

" Yes ; droopingly I have anticipated new 
infliction from you : proceed, nevertheless." 

" But a few weeks ago, — and how much has 
happened in that short time ! how long it seems 
to me ! — you assured me, in Pere la Chaise, that 
you did not know who our mysterious lady 
was." 

" And exceedingly correct you may still 
esteem my statement to have been.' 1 

" You farther gave me to understand that 
she had aroused a certain interest in your heart." 

" My sole, gentle disingenuousness, error-for- 
giving Blount ; put forward, in order to mystify 
even your astute brain upon the real state of the 
important portion of my viscera which you have 
mentioned." 

" But what was the necessity of inconvenienc- 
ing yourself as you did — " 

" I faintly remember the annihilating effort — 
spare me." 

" By hunting the lady through the laby- 
rinths ?" 

" You shall comprehend. The very amazing 
similitude existing between her and the still 
more shining beauty of my worship, which 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 287 

then almost perplexed me, as much as it has 
since rendered you amusing, — that alone com- 
pelled the unusual endeavours made to converse 
very closely with her." 

" Well ; how soon after did you ascertain who 
she was ?" 

" The same evening, positively ; having first 
ascertained that her excelling likeness — " 

" I deny that assertion, Flood ; and in its first 
shape, just uttered by you, I deny it." 

" Temerity, ancient friend, so to do; and 
future performance of battle between us, can 
alone arrange the point. Now, however, to pro- 
ceed in replies to your ruthless questions. Very 
briefly — after leaving your side upon that me- 
morable day, I learned that Maria Gore's self 
was in Paris.'" 

" Ay, indeed !f 

" Indeed — and, furthermore, slightly to add 
to your interest — in Paris as the visiting friend 
and guest of her copy, who— mark me — had just 
arrived from the south of the sunny country, with 
— mark me, I say! — an invalid brother — her — the 
third time, I cry, mark me ! — her elder brother !" 

" Here he comes again," said Gerald ; " Mr. 
Knightly's eldest son." 



288 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Indubitably I break faith with some of the 
very most divine of their sex, and yet, under all 
your present circumstances, much-injured, and 
much-suffering fellow, here, on our way to some 
noisome den, instead of progressing to the fairy 
abode in which the smiling and playful rulers of 
your destiny await, I little doubt, only your 
appearance to unweave all the gossamer webs 
it has been their pleasure and pride to wrap 
around your gigantic intellect, — thus circum- 
stanced, let me repeat, your eldest admirer has 
not the heart to avoid continuing the subject ; 
especially, guileless Blount, when your situation 
is to be consoled, by my treason against beauty, 
in hearkening to what will make you unmea- 
suredly felicitous, and of which, I fear, it has 
been cruelty to leave you so long ignorant." 

M Augusta's old cant," said Gerald ; " now for 
the mighty tidings, however. " 

" They come. The invalid brother, whom 
your radiant vision had been nursing, was — " 

" Mr. Knightly's eldest son?" interrupted 
Gerald, now using the hitherto disagreeable 
words with a new interest — " and, let me see ; — 
her elder brother — then she is, after all, — she is 
one of them ?" 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 289 

" The second, in years, of her fair sisters, as- 
suredly — Rhoda Knightly ; her superior of some 
few months, you, yesterday, (as I can learn,) 
bowed to, very awkwardly." 

M Rhoda Knightly !" repeated Gerald, his 
mind now dazzled before the graceful beauty of 
Pere la Chais6, now astride on a donkey, up the 
hilly, Devonshire road, in her company. 

" Pass we a moment to her brother. This 
youth's father, as well as his sister, accompanied 
him, a few weeks before, to the sweet South, 
whither he had been removed from London, his 
life despaired of." 

" Well ? I 'm sorry for all their sufferings on 
the occasion — but what 's this to me ?" 

M And this youth and his father, learning 
from me, that you were in Paris, wrote you a 
joint letter, which, as now appears, you never 
received.' 1 

" And which, if I had received it, must have 
shown me cause, according to you, and your 
new married lady, and Augusta, and Miss Flint, 
and Mr. Gore, why I ought to be very anxious 
to embrace the writers ?" 

" True, to a proverb : permit yourself still 
to listen. And the first signature to that letter 

VOL. III. o 



290 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

was ' Ambrose Knightly ;' but, although Mr. 
Knightly's eldest son has been named in bap- 
tism after his worthy father, such was not the 
second signature." 

" Oh, yes, I remember ; while Miss Flint 
was abusing me the other day in Dublin about 
him, she mentioned that some rich relation had 
left him a great property, provided he would 
change his name ; but the matter made no im- 
pression on me, inasmuch as it was nothing to 
me ; and again, I ask, what can it be to me 
now ?" 

" And that letter proposed to you mutual 
forgiveness of the past, and expressed a kind 
hope for future amiabilities on both sides." 

" Of what past ?" 

" And hoping that you had received it in 
Paris, though the run home, immediately fol- 
lowing, did not permit you to answer it, the 
writers of that letter called upon you lately in 
Dublin, to comfort you after your shipwreck ; 
they having learned that enormous misfortune 
and adventure from Rhoda Knightly, your pre- 
server on the beach, although your sister Au- 
gusta was not immediately warned to the same 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 291 

effect, lest the tidings might prove perilous to 
her, but merely led to believe that you had 
voluntarily appeared near to Lower-Court, as 
if in a spirit of stealth or espionage; and 
hence her letter to command you back, contain- 
ing her advice of the progress to Dublin of the 
two persons, whose appearance, she well knew, 
would heap immeasurable joy upon your head." 

" Well ; I suppose I must let you go on with 
this in your own way, Flood. Before we break 
through the grand enigma, however, — which 
ought to be written about, and called — ' Mr. 
Knightly and his Eldest Son, a Mystery,' — an- 
swer me, if you can, a few less important ques- 
tions. From your wife's admissions, in Dublin, 
I know that, although Miss Rhoda encountered 
me on the beach, she did not absolutely dictate 
my destinies in the Rockite hovel.' 1 

" Then has my fallible, though superlative, 
partner, happened to misinform you." 

" No ; Rhoda did not write me the precious 
note.'" 

" Nevertheless did she prompt it, word for 
word, to her stalwart waiting-woman, her own 
pupil in penmanship ; because, in the true de- 



292 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

licacy of matchless woman, the lady would not 
address, with her own hand, a man who had 
never been presented to her." 

" Go on. Since I was so near, upon that even- 
ing, both to Lower-Court, and to her father's 
house, why did she not cause me to be conveyed 
under the roof of either, instead of into a place 
where my life was in many ways endangered ?" 

" Had you gone to Lower-Court, excellent 
fellow, then must your sensitive sister have in- 
deed learned your dilemma, and suffered accord- 
ingly. Unto Mr. Knightly's you must have 
gone, but that here, female dignity and nicety 
again interfered ; your protectress was, upon that 
night, almost alone, and quite unmatronized, 
and uncountenanced, in her father's house. Her 
mother, and her very abundant phalanx of gal- 
lant brothers, and of beauteous sisters, adolescent 
and infantine, had gone to meet her father, her 
elder brother, and herself, at Cork, after their 
debarkation in their native and verdant country, 
and the whole amazingly fine family sojourned 
a day in that famous city, she proceeding, singly, 
homeward, on necessary business. Not many 
hours after her arrival on her paternal ground, 
the waves washed you to her feet ; and however 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 293 

humanely she felt towards your sad condition, 
and however she could contrive to soothe it, 
Miss Rhoda Knightly declined the honour of 
receiving you in her unmatronized mansion, — 
haply her innocent calculations of how the mea- 
sure might rate, even in your punctilious estima- 
tion, slightly influenced her conduct ; wherefore, 
wave-worn man, the Rockite hovel was your 
fate ; though here, as the note informed you, it 
seems not intended you should have remained 
longer than three o'clock the ensuing day, at 
which hour her father, her brother, and so forth, 
were surely expected home, and a visit by one 
or more of the family to your uncomfortable 
couch, doomed on the part of your guardian 
angel ; and home to the very minute they did 
come ; and then, hearing of your fugacious 
escape to the metropolis, thither were you pur- 
sued by Mr. Knightly and his eldest son." 

" And my refusal to see this famous pair, 
sent them back again, very indignant, of course,' 1 
said Gerald. 

" More in sorrow than in anger, veritably ; 
inasmuch as your so doing, under circumstances 
believed to be known to you, must have lessened 
you in their estimation." 
o 3 



294 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" This grows exceedingly provoking, Flood." 

" However, since the evening at Mr. Gore's, 
when, by your answer to a question of your 
sister's town-prime-minister, proposed through 
me, you admitted the important fact of not 
having got the letter, every body is only mon- 
strously amused at your expense, and working 
all human means to get you down to Lower- 
Court, where the scales are to fall from your 
eyes, under circumstances of very romantic and 
well-studied effect." 

" But you have engaged to anticipate all that 
folly, like a good-natured and sensible person 
as you are ; and, therefore, for mercy's sake, 
make me half delirious with happiness, and with 
love for the Knightlies, at once, Flood." 

" Still gradually, not at once ; ever I object 
to vehemence, and prepare against it. Return 
we to the invalid elder brother of your Rhoda, 
at the moment of her arrival with him and her 
in France. 

" His life, as I have mentioned, I rather 
think, was then despaired of. Previously, in 
London, and before his friends reached him 
from Ireland, skilful leeches had utterly pro- 
nounced him a man whose hours were number- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 295 

ed ; yea, on the very spot upon which occurred 
the little affair that injured him so ominously ; 
— for, good Blount — and once more I ejaculate 
— mark ! — he had been very well hit, and exceed- 
ingly badly wounded, in that species of mortal 
combat, called a duel." 

" Flood !" cried Gerald, starting, " what can 
you mean ?" 

" Nay, credible reports of his death followed 
his poor antagonist to France, whither, faith- 
fully accompanied by his humblest though oldest 
admirer — " 

" Oh, gracious God, Flood ! gracious God !" 
— again Gerald groped out his companion's 
hands, and clasped and wrung them. 

" My dear fellow,' 1 answered Flood, to this 
appeal, " 'tis, thank Heaven, true — the only 
cloud that could darken your life is removed — 
the second signature to the letter was Robert 
Knightly Stanhope." 

" Oh, thank Heaven, indeed ! oh, indeed, in- 
deed, thank Heaven !" — and now, pressing his 
hands over his blindfolded eyes, Gerald wept 
with joy. 

His feelings were disagreeably checked by 
the stopping of the car at this moment, and by 



296 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

an abrupt announcement from one of the armed 
men, who had kept trotting at its side, that 
" Their honours were come to their journey's 
end." Gerald brought to mind they had re- 
cently entered through a gate. 

" And ye '11 just plase to step down at once, 
gintlemen — and you, Sir," to Gerald — " is it for- 
getting honour bright you are, with your hands 
on the handkerchief ?" 

Gerald assured him he was mistaken. 

" Then, here, Sir, — where 's your arum ?" 

" Stop a bit, Jer," said another voice ; " let 
us ax the governor if all's ready, first — see, he 
beckons us from the dour." 

" The governor ?" repeated Flood to Gerald ; 
" very positively, the amusing Rockites are send- 
ing us to jail ; I Ve heard of such tricks^ of 
theirs." 

" 'Tis but one of their conventional words," 
said Gerald. 

" Yes, every thing nate," resumed Jer, after 
his comrade had returned to the car, and whis- 
pered with him ; " Come, genteels ; and much 
good may your new lodging do ye." 

They were assisted down from the car, and led a 
few steps, along hard, sandy ground. Then they 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 297 

became conscious of entering a low doorway; 
and, two persons holding a hand of each, they 
pursued their course through narrow, winding 
passages, flagged under foot, and growing damp- 
er at every step. They passed through another 
door, which was closed and locked after them ; a 
rugged voice said, " Uncover your eyes, gintle- 
men ;" they did so, and found themselves in a 
low, square vault, from the arch of which over- 
head hung dripping petrifactions, but which 
was cheered, however, by a blazing wood-fire. 
The person who had spoken held Gerald's hand. 
He was an old man, respectably dressed, wear- 
ing powder, but the expression of his face 
seemed austere. 

" In receiving you into this establishment, 
your lives are not immediately hazarded," he 
resumed ; " for which rason, there," pointing to 
rude chairs before the fire, " you have the 
means of putting on dry things instead of your 
dripping clothes ; you must hurry, howsomever, 
for in ten minutes I '11 come back to lade you to 
my superiors, with the handkerchiefs on your 
eyes, once again," and he unlocked the rough 
door, went out, and relocked it upon the out- 
side. 



298 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Glancing in extreme surprise, and some ap- 
prehension upon each other, our friends advanced 
to the chairs, glad, at all events, of an opportu- 
nity to replace, comfortably, their wet, soiled, 
torn, and — so far as Flood's brogues went — 
stolen apparel. Every article of dress necessary 
for comfort appeared at their hands, including 
boots and shoes of various sizes, as if it had 
been sought to make sure of fitting them. 
Gerald's wonder increased, when he found one 
of the whole suits to consist of the principal 
contents of the portmanteau he had that morn- 
ing deposited at Moya Farrel's ; the other was 
quite new. 

They zealously engaged in their toilet, and 
had become respectable-looking men, when their 
old — or rather new — warder, re-entered, and 
immediately proposed to bind handkerchiefs 
again over their eyes. To object, would have 
been useless ; and once more, effectually blind- 
folded, they were led out of the vault, along 
another stone-passage, up a flight of stone-steps, 
again over a stone-floor, which echoed to their 
tread, giving an idea of a spacious apartment 
surrounding them ; then up a second flight of 
steps, which were of wood, and, from their not 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 299 

creaking or yielding, perhaps of old oak ; and 
a second time their conductors paused, upon a 
landing-place. 

" You are standing at the dour, gintlemen," 
resumed the old man, as he knocked, " and so, 
we '11 be ready to restore you to your eye-sight, 
for good t* as he spoke, he unknotted Gerald's 
handkerchief, and held it ready to be pulled off. 
Flood felt a second person attending to him, in 
a similar way. 

" Advance, prisoners," said a voice inside, 
evidently a woman's, while earnest whispers also 
sounded from the apartment ; the old man tit- 
tered as he whisked away Gerald's bandage ; a 
female titter responded to his from the stairs 
behind our friends ; the door was pushed open, 
and they entered a spacious and splendidly 
furnished drawing-room, lighted to an excess 
that dazzled them, in the middle of which, 
seated in an arm-chair, raised on a little plat- 
form, and assuming (for a moment) a very 
queen-like air, appeared Lady Augusta Blount, 
supported upon the right hand by her rural- 
prime-minister, Miss Rhoda Knightly, and 
upon her left, by — as Flood has drawn the dis- 
tinction — her civic-prime-minister, late Miss 



300 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Maria Gore ; both ladies standing ; both dressed 
alike ; both in the same studied, though graceful 
positions ; both showing the same expression of 
countenance ; and, in fact, both evidently doing 
their best to look very like each other : — and 
very like they certainly were ; but, spite of all 
their efforts, showing differences of feature, now 
that they stood together, which, at a second 
glance, left no doubt on Gerald's mind. For a 
moment only, as has been said, Lady Augusta 
played her regal state. The next, descending 
from her throne, and while Captain Flood 
more nearly approached his masquerading bride, 
she hastened to give Gerald a sister's salute, and 
bid him welcome to Lower-Court. Then fol- 
lowed his presentation to Miss Rhoda Knightly ; 
and the bow of the gentleman, and the obeisance 
of the lady, would — their characters, their breed- 
ing, and their relative situations considered — 
have supplied to Leslie a subject for the ex- 
ercise of that pencil which excels all others in 
the delineation of the elegant-ludicrous. 

" And has it not been well done ?" laughed 
Lady Augusta — " cleverly, charmingly got up, 
from beginning to end ? — Oh, you can't think 
how we have plotted and contrived, ever since 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 301 

poor Farrel, assuring us of your freedom from 
personal danger" — (a presumption and a hope, 
by the way, of Michael, rather than a certainty,) 
" came here to inform us of your presence 
amongst the Rockites in the neighbourhood, 
and then went off, a plotter, too, to send you 
to us. And how did he play his part ? — 
And old Shortall, the butler? — very well? 
that 's delightful ! And you never once sus- 
pected ? But indeed we all pitied your trials in 
the subterranean parts of the house — the old 
vaults are so damp — indeed, we did — though, for 
the sake of a good effect, we were compelled to re- 
press our amiable feelings. And, Captain Flood, 
a word with you ; you must not assume your 
horrid privileges too soon by scolding your lady 
and your wife, for seeming to forget for a mo- 
ment some recent afflictions — poor, dear Maria ! 
it was our persuasions, and pleadings, that forced 
her into it, much against her will— dear, dear 
girl ! M Lady Augusta took Mrs. Flood's hand. 

A knocking sounded at the hall-door. Rhoda 
Knightly and Lady Augusta both glanced at 
Gerald, one growing red, the other pale. He 
understood them. Some one entered below. 
His sister arose, offered her arm, led him down 

VOL. III. p 



302 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

to the door of a parlour — he entered the room 
alone, and embraced, " Mr. Knightly's eldest 
son." 

" But I regret," said Captain Knightly Stan- 
hope, after some conversation delightful to both, 
" that my father, who follows me home, is 
doomed to cloud our second meeting, and, in- 
deed, this house, with sorrowful tidings." 

" This house ?" repeated Gerald : " oh, pray, 
pray, anticipate your father ?" 

" Lord Clangore's agent called upon us, just 
as we prepared to obey Lady Augusta's sum- 
mons," evaded Stanhope, "with the letter which 
contains the sad intelligence — he had been from 
home, and it awaited him on his table since 
morning." 

" But its contents ? " 

" Here comes my father to hand you the 
letter." 

After another peal at the hall-door, Gerald 
saw enter the parlour his stage-coach companion 
of the previous night. 

"I perceive that Robert has broken the news to 
you, — my Lord Clangore," said Mr. Knightly, 
when they had bowed to each other : " Yes, a 
second relapse has proved fatal ; — and Rhoda's 
London correspondent supplied her with more 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 303 

authentic bulletins, Robert, than the report of 
the physicians. 1 ' 

Here we for the present rest ; ending, without 
absolutely concluding. That Gerald, in about 
a year afterwards, married a mere Irishwoman, 
and since then continues to live in Ireland, as a 
mere Irishman, is not sought to be disguised. 
That a great change previously took place in 
his opinions ; that, following Mr. Knightly's re- 
commendation, he bundled up a good many of 
his Anglo-Irish theories, and, to use that gen- 
tleman's words, already reported, " flung them 
overboard,' 1 is also avowed. But how he came 
to permit such a change in his early and deeply 
rooted prejudices; by what experience, by what 
observation, incidents, new acquaintanceships, 
discourses, and adventures, proposes a continued 
subject so various, interesting, and withal impor- 
tant, that, should his reading friends vouchsafe 
their consent, it shall be embodied in some fu- 
ture volumes. 

END OF THE THIRD VOLUME. 
