PART I. 



I. 

The cornets sounded a final flourish as 
the Prince of the Captivity dismounted 
from his white mule, his train shouted as 
if they were once more a people, and 
had it not been for the contemptuous 
leer which played upon the countenances 
of the Moslemin bystanders, it might 

VOL. I. B 



2 THE WONDROUS TALE 

have been taken for a day of triumph 
rather than of tribute. 

" The glory has not departed !" ex- 
claimed the venerable Bostenay, as he 
entered the hall of his mansion. " It is 
not as the visit of Sheba unto Solomon ; 
nevertheless the glory has not yet de- 
parted. You have done well, faithful 
Caleb." The old man's courage waxed 
more vigorous as each step within his 
own walls the more assured him against 
the recent causes of his fear — the audible 
curses and the threatened missiles of the 
unbelieving mob. 

" It shall be a day of rejoicing and 
thanksgiving !" continued the Prince ; 
" and look, my faithful Caleb, that the 
trumpeters be well served. That last 
flourish was bravely done. It was not as 
the blast before Jericho; nevertheless it 



OF ALROY. 8 

told that the Lord of Hosts was for us. 
How the accursed Ishmaelites started ! 
Did you mark, Caleb, that tall Turk in 
green upon my left ? By the sceptre of 
Jacob he turned pale ! Oh ! it shall be a 
day of rejoicing and thanksgiving ! And 
spare not the wine, nor the flesh-pots for 
the people. Look you to this, my child, 
for the people shouted bravely, and with 
a stout voice. It was not as the great 
shout in the camp when the ark returned, 
but nevertheless, it was boldly done, and 
showed that the glory had not yet de- 
parted. So spare not the wine, my son, 
and drink to the desolation of Ishmael in 
the juic which he dare not quaff." 

" It has indeed been a great day for 
Israel !" exclaimed Caleb, echoing his 
masters exultation. 

" Had the procession been forbidden/' 

B 2 



4 THE WONDROUS TALE 

continued Bostenay, " had it been re- 
served for me of all the princes to have 
dragged the accursed tribute upon foot, 
without trumpets and without guards, 
by this sceptre, my good Caleb, I really 
think, that sluggishly as this old blood 

now runs, I would but it is needless 

now to talk — the God of our Fathers 
hath been our refuge." 

" Verily, my lord, we were as David 
in the wilderness of Ziph ; but now we 
are as the Lord's anointed in the strong- 
hold of Engedi ! ,J 

" The glory truly has not yet utterly 
departed," resumed the Prince in a more 
subdued tone ; " yet if — I tell you w T hat, 
Caleb — praise the Lord that you are 
young." 

" My Prince too may yet live to see 
the good day." 



OF ALROY. 



" Nay, my child, you misinterpret me. 
Your Prince has lived to see the evil day. 
'fwas not of the coming that I thought 
when I bid you praise the Lord because 
you were young — the more my sin. I 
was thinking, Caleb, that if your hairs 
were as mine, if you could call back like 
me the days that are gone by— the days 
when it needed no bribe to prove we 
were princes — the glorious days when we 
led captivity captive— I was thinking, I 
say, my son, what a gainful heritage it is 
to be born after the joys that have passed 
away." 

" My father lived at Babylon," said 
Caleb. 

"Oh! name it not ! — name it not!" ex- 
claimed the old chieftain. " Dark was 
the day that we lost that second Sion ! 
We were then also slaves to the Egyp- 



6 THE WONDROUS TALE 

tian ; but verily we ruled over the realm 
of Pharaoh. Why Caleb, Caleb, you 
who know all— the days of toil — the nights 
restless as a love-sick boy's, which it has 
cost your Prince to gain permission to 
grace our tribute day with the paltry 
presence of half a dozen guards — you who 
know all my difficulties, who have wit- 
nessed all my mortification, what would 
you say to the purse of dirhems, sur- 
rounded by seven thousand scimetars ?" 
" Seven thousand scimetars !" 
" Not one less ; my father flourished 
one." 

" It was indeed a great day for Israel !" 

" Nay, that is nothing. When old 

Alroy was prince— old David Alroy — for 

thirty years, good Caleb — thirty long 

years we paid no tribute to the Caliph." 

" No tribute ! no tribute for thirty 



OF ALROY. 7 

years ! What marvel then, my Prince, 
that the Philistines have of late exacted 
interest ?" 

" Nay, that is nothing," continued old 
Bostenay, unmindful of his servant's 
ejaculations. " When Moctador was Ca- 
liph, he sent to the same Prince David, 
to know why the dirhems were not 
brought up, and David immediately 
called to horse, and attended by all the 
chief people rode to the palace, and told 
the Caliph that tribute was an acknow- 
ledgment made from the weak to the 
strong to insure protection and support, 
and inasmuch as he and his people had 
garrisoned the city for ten years against 
the Seljuks, he held the Caliph in arrear." 

" We shall yet see an ass mount a lad- 
der," 1 exclaimed Caleb with uplifted eyes 
of wonder. 



8 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" It is true though," continued the 
Prince ; " often have I heard my father 
tell the tale. He was then a child, and 
his mother held him up to see the pro- 
cession return, and all the people shouted, 
" The sceptre has not gone out of Jacob !" 

c ' It was indeed a great day for Israel." 

" Nay, that is nothing. I could tell you 
such things ! But we prattle ; our busi- 
ness is not yet done. You to the people ; 
the widow and the orphan are waiting. 
Give freely, good Caleb, give freely ; the 
spoils of the Canaanite are no longer ours ; 
nevertheless the Lord is still our God, and 
after all, even this is a great day for 
Israel. And, Caleb, Caleb, bid my ne- 
phew, David Alroy, know that I would 
speak with him." 

" I will do all promptly, good master ! 
We wondered that our honoured lord, 



OF ALROY. Q 

your nephew, went not up with the dona- 
tion this day." 

" Who bid you wonder ? Begone, sir! 
How long- are you to idle here? --Away !" 

" They wonder he went not up with the 
tribute to-day. Ay ! surely— a common 
talk. This boy will be our ruin : a pru- 
dent hand to wield our shattered sceptre. 
I have observed him from his infancy ; 
he should have lived in Babylon. The 
old Alroy blood flows in his veins, a 
stiff-necked race. When I was a youth 
his grandsire was my friend ; I had some 
fancies then myself. Dreams, dreams ! 
we have fallen on evil days, and yet we 
prosper I have lived long enough to 
feel a rich caravan, laden with the shawls 
of India, and the stuffs of Samarcand, if 
not exactly like dancing before the ark, 
is still a goodly sight. And our hard- 

B 5 



10 THE WONDROUS TALE 

hearted rulers, with all their pride, can 
they subsist without us ? Still we wax 
rich. I have lived to see the haughty 
Caliph sink into a slave viler far than 
Israel. And the victorious and volup- 
tuous Seljuks, even now they tremble at 
the dim mention of the distant name of 
Arslan. Yet I, Bostenay, and the frail 
remnant of our scattered tribes, still we 
exist, and still, thanks to our God, we 
prosper. But the age of power has past ; 
it is by prudence now that we must 
flourish. The gibe and jest, the curse, 
perchance the blow, Israel now must 
bear, and with a calm, or even smiling 
visage. What then ? For every gibe 
and jest, for every curse, I'll have a dir- 
hem ; and for every blow — let him look 
to it who is my creditor, or wills to 
be so. But see, he comes, my nephew ! 



OF ALROY. 11 

His grandsire was my friend. Methinks 
I look upon him now; the same Alroy 
that was the partner of my boyish hours. 
And yet that fragile form, and girlish 
face but ill consort with the dark passions, 
and the dangerous fancies, I fear lie hid- 
den in that tender breast. Well, sir ?" 

66 You want me, uncle ?" 

" What then ? Uncles often want what 
nephews seldom offer." 

" I at least can refuse nothing ; for I 
have nought to give." 

" You have a jewel which I greatly 
covet." 

" A jewel ! See my chaplet ! You 
gave it me, my uncle ; it is yours." 

" I thank you. Many a blazing ruby, 
many a soft and shadowy pearl, and 
many an emerald glowing like a star in 
the far desart, I behold, my child. They 



12 THE WONDROUS TALE 

are choice stones, and yet I miss a jewel 
far more precious, which, when I gave 
you this rich chaplet, David, I deemed 
you did possess." 

" How do you call it, sir ?" 

" Obedience." 

"Tis a word of doubtful import, sir; 
for to obey, when duty is disgrace, is not 
a virtue." 

" I see you read my thought. In] a 
word, I sent for you to know, wherefore 
you joined me not to-day in offering 
our—" 

" Tribute." 

V Be it so: tribute. Why were you 
absent ?" 

" Because it was a tribute : I pay 
none." 

" But that the dreary course of seventy 
winters has not erased the memory of my 



OF ALROY. 13 

boyish follies, David, I should esteem you 
mad. Think you, because I am old, I 
am enamoured of disgrace, and love a 
house of bondage. If life were a mere 
question between freedom and slavery, 
glory and dishonor, all could decide. 
Trust me, there needs but little spirit to 
be a moody patriot in a sullen home, and 
vent your heroic spleen upon your fellow- 
sufferers, whose sufferings you cannot 
remedy. But of such stuff your race 
were ever made. Such deliverers ever 
abounded in the house of Alroy. And 
what has been the result ? 1 found you, 
and your sister, orphan infants, your 
sceptre broken, and your tribes dispersed. 
The tribute, which now at least we pay 
like princes, was then exacted with the 
scourge, and offered in chains. I col- 
lected our scattered people, I re-esta- 



14 THE WONDROUS TALE 

blished our ancient throne, and this day, 
which you look upon as a day of hu- 
miliation, and of mourning, is rightly 
considered by all a day of triumph, and 
of feasting; for has it not proved, in the 
very teeth of the Ishmaelites, that the 
sceptre has not yet departed from Ja- 
cob r 

" I pray you, uncle, speak not of these 
things. I would not willingly forget you 
are my kinsman, and a kind one. Let 
there not be strife between us. What 
my feelings are is nothing. They are my 
own : I cannot change them. And for 
my ancestors, if they pondered much, 
and achieved little, why then 'twould 
seem our pedigree is pure, and I am their 
true son. At least one was a hero." 

" Ah ! the great Alroy ; you may well 
be proud of such an ancestor. ,, 



OF ALROY. 15 

" I am ashamed, uncle, — ashamed, 
ashamed." 

" His sceptre still exists. At least, I 
have not betrayed him. And this brings 
me to the real purport of our interview. 
That sceptre I would return." 

" To whom ?" 

" To its right owner, to yourself." 

" Oh ! no, no, no — I pray you, pray 
you, uncle, I pray you not. I do en- 
treat you, Sir, upon my knees, forget I 
have a right as utterly as I myself dis- 
claim it. That sceptre — you have wielded 
it wisely and well ; I do beseech you 
keep it. Indeed, good uncle, I have no 
sort of talent for all the busy duties of 
this post." 

" You sigh for glory, yet you fly from 
toil." 

" Toil without glory is a menials lot." 



16 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" You are a boy ; you may yet live to 
learn that the sweetest lot of life consists 
in tranquil duties and well-earned re- 
pose." 

" If my lot be repose, I'll find it in a 
lair." 

" Ah ! David, David, there is a wild- 
ness in your temper, boy, that makes me 
often tremble. You are already too 
much alone, child. And for this, as well 
as weightier reasons, I am desirous that 
you should at length assume the office 
you inherit. What my poor experience 
can afford to aid you, as your counsellor, 
I shall ever proffer; and for the rest, 
our God will not desert you, an orphan 
child, and born of royal blood." 

" Pr'ythee, no more, kind uncle. I 
have but little heart to mount a throne, 
which only ranks me as the first of 
slaves." 



OF ALROY. 17 

" Pooh, pooh, you are young. Live 
we like slaves ? Is this hall a servile 
chamber ? These costly carpets, and 
these rich divans, in what proud harem 
shall we find their match ? I feel not 
like a slave. My coffers are full of dir- 
hems. Is that slavish ? The wealthiest 
company of the caravan is ever Boste- 
nay's. Is that to be a slave ? Walk the 
bazaar of Bagdad, and you will find my 
name more potent than the Caliph's. Is 
that a badge of slavery ?" 

" Uncle, you toil for others." 

" So do we all, so does the bee, yet he 
is free and happy." 

" At least he has a sting." 

" Which he can use but once ; and 
when he stings " 

" He dies, and like a hero. Such a 
death is sweeter than his honey." 



18 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" Well, well, you are young, you are 
young. I once, too, had fancies. Dreams 
all, dreams all. I willingly would see 
you happy, child. Come, let that face 
brighten ; after all, to-day is a great day. 
If you had seen what I have seen, David, 
you too would feel grateful. Come, let us 
feast, let us feast. The Ishmaelite, the ac- 
cursed child of Hagar, he does confess 
to-day you are a prince : this day also 
you complete your eighteenth year. The 
custom of our people now requires you 
should assume the attributes of manhood. 
To-day, then, your reign commences ; 
and at our festival I will present the 
elders to their prince. For a while fare- 
well, my child. Array that face in 
smiles. I shall most anxiously await 
your presence." 

" Farewell, Sir." 



OF ALROY. 19 

He turned his head and watched his 
uncle as he departed ; the bitter expres- 
sion of his countenance gradually melted 
away as Bostenay disappeared ; dejection 
succeeded to sarcasm ; he sighed, he threw 
himself upon a couch, and buried his 
face in his hands. 

Suddenly he arose, and paced the 
chamber with an irregular and moody 
step. He stopped, he leant against a 
column. He spoke in a tremulous and 
smothered voice. 

" Oh ! my heart is full of care, and my 
soul is dark with sorrow ! What am I ? 
What is all this ? A cloud hangs heavy 
o'er my life. God of my fathers ! let it 
burst. 

" I know not what I feel — yet what I 
feel is madness. Thus to be, is not to 
live, if life be what I sometimes dream, 



20 THE WONDROUS TALE 

and dare to think it might be. To 
breathe, to feed, to sleep, to wake and 
breathe again — again to feel existence 
without hope ; if this be life, why then 
these brooding thoughts that whisper 
death were better ? 

" Away ! away ! The demon tempts 
me. But to what, to what ? What name- 
less deed shall desecrate this hand ? No, 
no, it must not be : the royal blood of 
twice two thousand years it must not 
die — die like a dream. Oh! my heart is 
full of care, and my soul is dark with 
sorrow ! 

" Hark ! the trumpets that sound our 
dishonor. Oh ! but that they sounded 
to battle ! Lord of Hosts ! Let me con- 
quer or die ! Let me conquer like David, 
or die, Lord, like Saul. 

if Ah ! were I in the woods once more, 



OF ALROY. 21 

a melancholy child ! Each flower, that 
raised its haughty head, should be the 
turbaned enemy, and I would wave some 
sword of straw, and find revenge in 
every blow, that quelled their painted 
pride. 

" Tis over now ; that sweet, sweet 
prime, when fancy solaced solitude. Yet 
I am still alone. But how alone ? The 
madness of the past and the despair of 
the future — are not these the choice com- 
panions of my pleasant life ? 

" I once remember, when a child, I 
cried to be a man — and now, methinks, 
I'll sit me down and cry to be a child. 
Ah ! tears of bliss, though shed in sad- 
ness, unutterable joys ! No more the 
sunshine of the breast succeeds those 
freshening showers of grief; light season 
of my boyish spring, when Care was but 



22 THE WONDROUS TALE 

a mimic game, and Woe a wild delu- 
sion ! 

6 ' Behold this chaplet rich and rare ; 
its stones might deck a soldan's brow ! 
Could 1 but weep, for each bright tear I'd 
give a flaming gem ; could I but weep 
for each soft sob, Fd yield a lustrous 
pearl. Alas ! the age of tears is o'er, and 
yet — my heart is full of care, and my soul 
is dark with sorrow. 

" Why do I live ? Ah ! could the 
thought that lurks within my secret 
heart but answer — not the trumpet's blast 
when echoing on the noisy hills, could 
speak as loud or clear. The votary of a 
false idea, I linger in this shadowy life, 
and feed on silent images which no eye but 
mine can gaze on, until, at length, they 
are invested with all the terrible circum- 
stance of life, and breathe, and act, and 



OF ALROY. 23 

form a stirring- world of fate and beauty, 
time, and death, and glory. And then 
from out this dazzling wilderness of deeds 
I wander forth and wake, and find myself 
in this dull house of bondage, even as I 
do now. Horrible ! horrible ! 

" God of my fathers ! — for indeed I 
dare not style thee God of their wretched 
sons — yet by the memory of Sinai let 
me tell thee that some of the antique 
blood yet beats within these pulses, and 
there yet is one who fain would com- 
mune with thee face to face — commune 
and conquer. 

" And if the promise unto which we 
cling be not a cheat, why let him come, 
come, and come quickly, for thy servant 
Israel, Lord, is now a slave so infamous, 
so woe-begone, and so contemned, that 
even when our fathers hung their harps 



24 THE WONDROUS TALE 

by the sad waters of the Babylonian 
stream, why, it were Paradise again to 
what we suffer. 

" Alas ! they do not suffer ; they en- 
dure and do not feel. Or by this time 
our shadowy cherubim would guard again 
the ark. It is the will that is the father 
to the deed, and he who broods over some 
long idea, however wild, will find his 
dream was but the prophecy of coming 
fate. 

" And even now a vivid flash darts 
through the darkness of my mind — me- 
thinks, methinks— Ah ! worst of woes to 
dream of glory in despair. No, no, I 
live and die a most ignoble thing ; beauty 
and love, and fame and mighty deeds, 
the smile of women and the gaze of men, 
and the ennobling consciousness of worth, 
and all the fiery course of the creative 



OF ALROY. 25 

passions — these are not for me — and I, 
Alroy, the long posterity of sacred kings, 
and with a soul that pants for empire, I 
stand here extending my vain arm for 
my lost sceptre, a most dishonoured slave ! 
And do I still exist ? Exist ! ay, merrily. 
Hark ! Festivity holds her fair revel in 
these light-hearted walls. We are gay 
to-day ; and yet ere yon proud Sun, 
whose mighty course was stayed before 
our swords that now he even does not 
deign to shine upon : ere yon proud Sun 
shall, like a hero from a glorious field, 
enter the bright pavilion of his rest ; there 
shall a deed be done. 

ic My fathers, my heroic fathers, if this 
feeble arm cannot redeem thy heritage, 
if the foul boar must still wallow in thy 
sweet vineyard, Israel, at least I'll not 
disgrace ye. No ! let me perish. The 

VOL. I. C 



gQ THE WONDROUS TALE 

house of David is no more : no more our 
sacred seed shall lurk and linger, like a 
blighted thing, in this degenerate earth. 
If we cannot flourish, why then well 

die !" 

" Oh ! say not so, my brother !" 
A voice broke on the air, so soft, so 
sweet, so wildly musical — it sounded like 
a holy bell upon a summer day, a holy 
bell that calls to prayer, and stills each 
fierce emotion. 

And softly kneeling at his side behold 
a female form ! Her face is hid, her lips 
are pressed against the hand she gently 
steals. And now she raises up her head, 
and waits with tender patience for a 
glance from one who seldom smiles. 
M Oh ! say not so, my brother !" 
He turns, he gazes on a face beauteous 
as a starry night, — a starry night in those 



OF ALROY. 27 

far climes where not a cloud is marked in 
heaven, when all below on earth 's so 
sweet, and all above in air so still, that 
every passion melts away, and life seems 
but a fragrant dream. 

I too have wandered in those lands, 
and roamed mid Jordan's vocal bowers. 
Ah ! could the nightingale that sang to 
Syria's rose now sing to me, I'd give the 
fame of coming years to listen to that 
lay! 

He turns, he gazes, and he bends ; his 
heart is full, his voice is low. 

" Ah, Miriam: thou queller of dark 
spirits ! is it thou ? Why art thou 
here ?" 

u Why am I here ? Are you not here ? 
and need I urge a stronger plea ? Oh ! 
brother dear, I pray you come, and min- 
gle in our festival ! Our walls are hung 

c 2 



28 THE WONDROUS TALE 

with flowers you love ; 2 I culled them by 
the fountain's side ; the holy lamps are 
trimmed and set, and you must raise their 
earliest flame. Without the gate, my 
maidens wait, to offer you a robe of state. 
Then, brother dear, I pray you come and 
mingle in our festival." 

" Why should we feast ?" 

" Ah ! is it not in thy dear name these 
lamps are lit, these garlands hung ? To- 
day to us a prince is given, to-day — " 

" A prince without a kingdom." 

" But not without that which makes 
kingdoms precious, and which full many 
a royal heart has sighed for — willing sub- 
jects, David." 

" Slaves, Miriam, fellow-slaves." 

" What we are, my brother, our God 
has willed ; and let us bow and tremble." 

" I will not bow, I cannot tremble." 



OF ALROY. 29 

" Hush, David, hush ! It was this 
haughty spirit that called the vengeance 
of the Lord upon us." 

* It was this haughty spirit that con- 
quered Canaan/' 

"Oh ! my brother, my dear, dear bro- 
ther ! they told me the dark spirit had 
fallen on thee, and I came, and hoped thy 
Miriam might have charmed it. What 
we have been, Alroy, is a bright dream ; 
and what we may be, at least as bright a 
hope ; and for what we are, thou art my 
brother. In thy love I find present feli- 
city, and value more thy chance embraces 
and thy scanty smiles, than all the va- 
nished splendour of our race, our gorgeous 
gardens, and our glittering halls." 

M Who waits without there ?" 

<< Caleb." 

" Caleb ?" 

" My Lord." 



30 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" Go tell my uncle, I presently will 
join the banquet. Leave me a moment, 
clearest. I'll soon be with thee. Nay, 
dry those tears, my life, or let me stop 
them with a soft kiss." 

" Oh, Alroy, they are not tears of sor- 
row !" 

" God be with, thee, angel ; fare thee 
well, though but for a moment. Thou 
art the charm and consolation of my 
life. Farewell, farewell. 

" I do observe the influence of women 
very potent over me. 'Tis not of such 
stuff that they make heroes. I know not 
love, save that pure affection that does 
subsist between me and this girl : an or- 
phan and my sister. We are so alike, 
that when, last Passover, in mimickry, 
she twined my turban round her graceful 
head, our uncle called her David. 

" The daughters of my tribe, they 






OF ALROY. 31 

please me not, though they are passing 
fair. Were our sons as brave as they are 
beautiful, we still might dance on Sion. 
Yet have I often thought, that could I 
pillow this moody brow upon some snowy 
bosom that were my own, and dwell in 
the wilderness, far from the sight and ken 
of man, and all the care and toil and 
wretchedness, that groan and sweat and 
sigh about me, I might haply lose this 
deep sensation of o'erwhelming woe, that 
broods upon my being. No matter : Life 
is but a dream, and mine must be a dull 
one/' 



II. 



Without the gates of Hamadan, a very 
short distance from the citv, was an en- 



32 THE WONDROUS TALE 

closed piece of elevated ground, in the 
centre of which rose an ancient sepulchre, 
the traditionary tomb of Esther and Mor- 
decai. 3 This solemn and solitary spot was 
an accustomed haunt of Alroy, and thi- 
ther escaping from the banquet, about an 
hour before sunset, he this day repaired. 

As he unlocked the massy gate of the 
burial-place, he heard behind him the 
trampling of a horse ; and before he had 
again secured the entrance, some one 
shouted to him. 

He looked up, and recognized the 
youthful and voluptuous Alschiroch, the 
governor of the city, and brother of the 
Sultan of the Seljuks. He was attended 
only by a single running footman, an 
Arab, a detested favourite, and notorious 
minister of his pleasures. 

"Dog!" exclaimed the irritated Al- 



OF ALROY. 33 

schiroch, " art thou deaf, or obstinate ? or 
both ? Are we to call twice to our slaves ? 
Unlock that gate!" 

u Wherefore ?" inquired Alroy. 

" Wherefore! By the holy prophet, 
he bandies questions with us. Unlock 
that gate, or thy head shall answer for it !" 

" Who art thou," inquired Alroy, 
" whose voice is so loud ? Art thou some 
holiday Turk, who hath transgressed the 
orders of thy prophet and drunken aught 
but water ? Go to, or I will summon thee 
before thy Cadi ;" and so saying, he 
turned towards the tomb. 

" By the eyes of my mother, the dog 
jeers us. But that we are already late, 
and this horse is like an untamed tiger, 
I would impale him on the spot. Speak 
to the dog, Mustapha ! manage him ! " 

" Worthy Hebrew/' said the silky 

c 5 



34f THE WONDROUS TALE 

Mustapha, advancing, " apparently you 
are not aware that this is our Lord Al- 
schiroch. His Highness would fain walk 
his horse through the burial-ground of 
thy excellent people, as he is obliged to 
repair, on urgent matters, to a holy San- 
ton, who sojourns on the other side of the 
hill, and time presses." 

" If this be our Lord Alschiroch, thou 
doubtless art his faithful slave, Mustapha." 

" I am, indeed, his poor slave. What 
then, young master ?" 

" Deem thyself lucky that the gate is 
closed. It was but yesterday thou didst 
insult the sister of a servant of my house. 
I would not willingly sully my hands 
with such miserable blood as thine — but 
away, wretch, away ! " 

" Holy Prophet ! who is this dog ?" ex- 
claimed the astonished governor. 

" Tis the young Alroy," whispered 



OF ALROY 35 

Mustapha, who had not at first recognized 
him, " he they call their prince : a most 
headstrong youth. My Lord, we had 
better proceed." 

" The young Alroy ! I mark him. 
They must have a prince too ! The young 
Alroy ! Well, let us away, — and, dog !" 
shouted Alschiroch, rising in his stirrups 
and shaking his hand with a threatening 
air, " dog ! remember thy tribute !" 

Alroy rushed to the gate, but the massy 
lock was slow to open ; and ere he could 
succeed, the fiery steed had borne Alschi- 
roch beyond pursuit. 

An expression of baffled rage remained 
for a moment on his countenance ; for a 
moment he remained with his eager eye 
fixed on the route of his vanished enemy, 
and then he walked slowly towards the 
tomb ; but his excited temper was now 



36 THE WONDROUS TALE 

little in unison with the still reverie in 
which he had repaired to the sepulchre 
to indulge. He was restless and dis- 
quieted, and at length he wandered into 
the woods, which rose on the summit of 
the burial-place. 

He found himself at length upon a 
brow, crested with young pine-trees, in 
the midst of which rose a mighty cedar. 
He threw himself underneath its thick 
and shadowy branches, and looked upon 
a valley small and green ; in the midst of 
which was a marble fountain, the richly 
carved cupola, 4 supported by twisted co- 
lumns, and banded by a broad inscription 
in Hebrew characters. The bases of the 
white pillars were covered with wild 
flowers, or hidden by beds of variegated 
gourds. The transparent sunset flung 
over the whole scene a soft, but brilliant 
light. 



OF ALROY. 37 

The tranquil hour, the beauteous scene, 
the sweetness and the stillness blending 
their odour and serenity, the gentle 
breeze that softly rose, and summoned 
forth the languid birds, to cool their 
plumage in the twilight air, and waive 

their radiant wings in skies as bright 

Ah ! what stern spirit will not yield to 
the soft genius of subduing Eve ! 

And Alroy gazed upon the beauteous 
loneliness of earth, and a tear stole down 
his haughty cheek. 

" Tis singular ! but when I am thus 
alone at this still hour, I ever fancy I 
gaze upon the Land of Promise. And 
often in my dreams, some sunny spot, the 
bright memorial of a roving hour, will 
rise upon my sight, and when I wake, I 
feel as if I had been in Canaan. Why 
am I not ? The caravan that bears my 
uncle's goods across the desart would bear 



38 THE WONDROUS TALE 

me too. But I rest here, my miserable 
life running to seed in the dull misery of 
this wretched city, and do nothing. 
Why ! the old captivity was empire to 
our inglorious bondage. We have no 
Esther now to share their thrones, no po- 
litic Mordecai, no purple-vested Daniel. 
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem ! I do believe 
one sight of thee would nerve me to the 
sticking point. And yet to gaze upon 
thy fallen state — my uncle tells me that 
of the Temple not a stone remains. Tis 
horrible. Is there no hope ?" 

" The bricks are fallen, but we 
will rebtiild with marble ; the sy- 
camores are cut down, but we will 
replace them with cedars" 
" The chorus of our maidens, as they 
pay their evening visit to the fountain's 
side. 5 The burthen is prophetic. 

" Hark again ! How beautifully, upon 



OF ALROY. 39 

the soft and flowing air, their sweet and 
mingled voices blend and float I" 

" Yet again I will build thee, 
and thou shalt be built, O Virgin 
of Israel ! Yet again shalt thou 
deck thyself with thy tabrets, and 
go forth in the dance of those that 
make merry. Yet again shalt 
thou plant vineyards on the moun- 
tains of Satnaria." 
" See ! their white forms break through 
the sparkling foliage of the sunny shrubs 
as they descend, with measured step, that 
mild acclivity. A fair society in bright 
procession : each one clothed in solemn 
drapery, veiling her shadowy face with 
modest hand, and bearing on her grace- 
ful head a graceful vase. Their leader is 
my sister. 

" And now they reach the fountain 



40 THE WONDROUS. TALE 

side, and dip their vases in the water, 
pure and beauteous as themselves. Some 
repose beneath the marble pillars ; some, 
seated 'mid the flowers, gather sweets, 
and twine them into garlands ; and that 
wild girl, now that the order *s broke, 
touches with light fingers her moist vase, 
and showers startling drops of glittering 
light on her serener sisters. Hark! again 
they sing." 

" O vine of Sibmah ! upon 
thy summer fruits, and upon thy 
vintage, a spoiler hath fallen ! 

A scream, a shriek, a long wild shriek, 
confusion, flight, despair ! Behold ! from 
out the woods a turbaned man rushes, 
and seizes the leader of the chorus. Her 
companions fly on all sides, Miriam alone 
is left in the arms of Alschiroch. 

The water column wildly rising, from 



OF ALROY. 41 

the breast of summer ocean, in some warm 
tropic clime, when the sudden clouds too 
well discover, the holiday of heaven is 
over, and the shrieking sea-birds tell a 
time of fierce commotion, the column 
rising* from the sea, it was not as wild as 
he — the young Alroy. 

Pallid and mad, he swift upsprang, 
and he tore up a tree by its lusty roots, 
and down the declivity, dashing with 
rapid leaps, panting and wild, he struck 
the ravisher on the temple with the 
mighty pine. Alschiroch fell lifeless on 
the sod, and Miriam fainting into her 
brother's arms. 

And there he stood, fixed and immov- 
able, gazing upon his sister's deathly face, 
and himself exhausted by passion and his 
exploit, supporting her cherished, but 
senseless, body. 



42 THE WONDROUS TALE 

One of the fugitive maidens appeared 
reconnoitering in the distance. When 
she observed her mistress in the arms of 
one of her own people, her courage re- 
vived, and desirous of rallying her scat- 
tered companions, she raised her voice, 
and sang : 

" Haste, daughters of Jerusa- 
lem, O ! haste, for the Lord has 
avenged us, and the spoiler is 
spoiled" 
And soon the verse was responded to 
from various quarters of the woods., and 
soon the virgins re-assembled, singing, 
" We come, O ! daughter of 
Jerusalem, we come; for the Lord 
has avenged us, and the spoiler is 
spoiled" 
They gathered round their mistress, 
and one loosened her veil, and another 



OF ALROY. 43 

brought water from the fountain, and 
sprinkled her reviving countenance. And 
Miriam opened her eyes, and said, " My 
brother !" And he answered, " I am 
here." And she replied, in a low voice, 
" Fly, David, fly, for the man you have 
stricken is a prince among the people." 

" He will be merciful, my sister ; and, 
doubtless, since he first erred, by this 
time he has forgotten my offence." 

" Justice and mercy ; Oh, my brother, 
what can these foul tyrants know of 
either ! Already he has perhaps doomed 
you to some refined and procrastinated 
torture, already — Ah ! what unutterable 
woe is mine — fly, my brother, fly !" 
" Fly, fly, fly /" 

" There is no fear, my Miriam ; would 
all his accursed race could trouble us as 
little as their sometime ruler. See, he 



44 THE WONDROUS TALE 

sleeps soundly. But his carcass shall not 
defile our fresh fountain, and our fragrant 
flowers. Ill stow it in the woods, and 
stroll here at night to listen to the jackals 
at their banquet. " 

" You speak wildly, David. What ! 
No ! It is impossible ! He is not dead ! 
You have not slain him ! He sleeps — 
he is afraid. He mimics death, that we 
may leave his side and he may rise again 
in safety. Girls, look to him. David, you 
do not answer. Brother, dear, dear bro- 
ther : surely he has swooned. I thought 
he had fled. Bear water, maidens, to 
that terrible man. I dare not look upon 
him." 

" Away ! I'll look upon him, and I'll 
triumph. Dead ! Alschiroch dead ! Why ! 
but a moment since, this clotted carcass 
was a Prince, my tyrant. So we can rid 



OF ALROY. 45 

ourselves of them, eh ? If the Prince 
fall, why not the people ? Dead, abso- 
lutely dead, and I his slayer. Hah ! at 
length I am a man. This, this indeed is 
life. Let me live slaying !" 

" Woe ! woe ! our house is fallen ! 
The wiidness of his gestures frightens 
me. David, David, I pray thee cease. 
He hears me not, my voice, perchance, is 
thin. I'm very faint. Maidens, kneel 
to vour Prince, and soothe the madness 
of his passion." 

" Sweet is the voice of a sister 
in the season of sorrow, and wise 
is the counsel of those who love us." 
" Why, this is my Goliath ! a pebble 
or a stick, it is the same. The Lord of 
Hosts is for us. Ri^htlv am I called 
David." 

" Deliver us from our enemies, 



46 THE WONDROUS TALE 

O Lord ! from those who rise up 
against us, and those who lie in 
wait for us" 

" Were but this blow multiplied, were 
but the servants of my uncle's house to 
do the same, why we should see again the 
days of Elah ! The Philistine, the foul, 
lascivious, damnable, Philistine ; and he 
must touch my sister. Oh that all his 
tribe were here, all, all ! I'd tie such 
firebrands to their foxes tails, the blaze 
should light to freedom !" 

While he spoke, a maiden, who had 
not yet rejoined the company, came run- 
ning towards them very swiftly with an 
agitated countenance. 

" Fly, fly," she exclaimed ; " they 
come, they come/' 

Miriam was reclining in an attendant's 
arms, feeble and faint, but the moment 



OF ALROY. 47 

her quick ear caught these words, she 
sprang* up, and seized her brother's arm. 

"Alroy ! David, David, brother, sweet, 
sweet brother. I beseech thee, listen — I 
am thy sister, thy Miriam, thy fond be- 
loved Miriam; — they come, they come, 
the hard-hearted, wicked men, they come, 
they come, to kill, perhaps to torture 
thee, my tender brother. Eouse thyself, 
David, rouse thyself from this wild, fierce 
dream : save thyself — fly !" 

" Ah ! is it thou, Miriam ? Be easy, 
love, thou seest he sleepeth soundly. I 
will collect my senses. I was dreaming 
of noble purposes and mighty hopes. 
'Tis over now. I am myself again. 
What would'st thou, my sweet treasure ?" 

" They come, the fierce retainers of 
this fallen man : they come to seize thee. 
Fly, David." 



48 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" And leave thee ?" 

" I and my maidens, we have yet time 
to escape by the private way we entered, 
our uncle's garden. When in his house, 
we are for a moment safe — as safe as our 
poor race can ever be. Bostenay is so 
rich, so wise, so prudent, so learned in 
man's ways, and knows so well the cha- 
racter and spirit of these men, all will 
go right : I fear nothing, nothing, nothing. 
But thou, if thou art here, or to be found, 
thy blood alone will satiate them. If 
they be persuaded that thou hast escaped, 
as I yet pray thou mayest, their late 
master here, whom they could scarcely 
love, why give me thy arm an in- 
stant, sweet Beruna, I am rather faint. 
So, that's well. I was saying, if well 
bribed, and they may have all my jewels, 
why, very soon, he will be as little in 



OF ALROY. 49 

their memories, as he is now in life. I 
can scarcely speak — I feel my words 
wander, or seem to wander ; I could 
swoon, but will not — nay ! do not fear, 
my love, I will reach home. These 
maidens are my charge. Tis in these 
crises we should show the worth of 
royal blood. Ill see them safe — or die 
with them." 

" Oh ! my sister, methinks I never 
knew I was a brother until this hour. 
My precious Miriam, what is life ? what 
is revenge, or even fame and freedom, 
without thee ? I '11 stay." 

" Sweet is the voice of a sister 
in the season of sorrow, and wise is 
the counsel of those who love us." 

" Fly, David, fly." 

" Fly ! whither, and how ?" 

VOL. I. D 



50 THE WONDROUS TALE 

The neigh of a horse sounded from the 
thicket. 

" Ah ! they come, they come !" ex- 
claimed the distracted Miriam. 

"All this has come upon us,0 
Lord, yet have we not forgotten 
thee, neither have we dealt falsely 
in thy covenant." 
" Hark ! again it neighs ! It is a 
horse that calleth to its rider. I see it, 
I see it. Courage, Miriam ! it is no 
enemy, but a very present friend in time 
of trouble. It is Alschiroch's courser. 
He passed me on it by the tomb ere sun- 
set. I marked it well — a very princely 
steed." 

" Behold, behold, a ram is 
caught in the thicket by his horns" 
" Our God hath not forgotten us ! 
Quick, maidens, bring forth the goodly 



OF ALROY. 51 

steed. What ! do you tremble ? I'll be 
his groom." 

" Nay ! Miriam, beware, beware. It 
is an untamed beast, wild as the whirl- 
wind. Let me deal with him." 

He ran after her, kissed her as he 
passed, dashed into the thicket, and 
brought forth the horse. 

Short time I ween that stately steed 
had parted from his desart home ; his 
haughty crest, his eye of fire, the glory 
of his snorting nostril, betokened well his 
conscious pride, and pure nobility of race. 
His colour was like the sable night shin- 
ing with a thousand stars, and he pawed 
the ground with his delicate hoof, like an 
eagle flapping its wing. 

Alroy vaulted on his back, and reined 
him with a master's hand. 

" Hah !" he exclaimed, " I feel more 

52 THE WONDROUS TALE 

like a hero than a fugitive. Farewell, 
my sister ; farewell, ye gentle maidens ; 
fare ye well, and cherish my precious 
Miriam. One kiss, sweet sister," and he 
bent down and whispered, " Tell the 
good Bostenay not to spare his gold, love, 
for I have a deep persuasion, that ere a 
year shall roll its heavy course, I shall 
return, and make our masters here pay 
for this hurried ride and bitter parting. 
Now for the desart !" 



OF ALROY. 53 



PART II. 

I. 

Speed, fleetly speed, thou courser bold, 
and track the desart's trackless way. 
Beneath thee is the boundless earth, 
above thee is the boundless heaven, an 
iron soil and brazen sky. Speed, swiftly 
speed, thou courser bold, and track the 
desart's trackless way ! 

Ah ! dost thou deem these salty plains 6 
lead to thy Yemen's happy groves, and 
dost thou scent, on the hot breeze, the 
spicy breath of Araby ? A sweet delu- 
sion, noble steed, for this briny wilder- 






54 THE WONDROUS TALE 

ness leads not to the happy groves of 
Yemen, and the breath thou scentest on 
the coming breeze is not the spicy breath 
of Araby. 

The day has died, the stars have risen, 
with all the splendour of a desart sky, 
and now the Night descending brings, 
solace on her dewy wings, to the fainting 
form and pallid cheek of the youthful 
Hebrew Prince. 

Still the courser onward rushes, still 
his mighty heart supports him. Season 
and space, the glowing soil, the burning 
ray, yield to the tempest of his frame ; 
the thunder of his nerves, and lightning 
of his veins. 

Food or water they have none. No 
genial fount, no grateful tree, rise with 
their pleasant company. Never a beast 
or bird is there, in that hoary desart 



OF ALROY. 55 

bare. Nothing breaks the almighty still- 
ness. Even the jackal's felon cry might 
seem a soothing melody. A grey wild 
rat, with snowy whiskers, out of a 
withered bramble stealing, with a youth- 
ful snake in its ivory teeth, in the moon- 
light grins with glee. This is their sole 
society. 

Morn comes, the fresh and fragrant 
morn, for which even the guilty sigh. 
Morn comes, and all is visible. And 
light falls like a signet on the earth, and 
its face is turned like wax with a seal. 
Before them, and also on their right, was 
the sandy desart ; but in the night they 
had approached much nearer to the 
mountainous chain, which bounded the 
desart on the left, and whither Alroy had 
at first guided the steed. 

The mountains were a chain of the 



56 THE WONDROUS TALE 

mighty Elburz ; and as the sun rose from 
behind a lofty peak, the horse suddenly 
stopped, and neighed, as if asking for 
water. But Alroy, himself exhausted, 
could only soothe him with caresses. 
And the horse, full of courage, under- 
stood his master, and neighed again more 
cheerfully. 

For an hour or two the Prince and his 
faithful companion proceeded slowly, but 
as the day grew on, the heat became so 
oppressive, and the desire to drink so 
overwhelming, that Alroy again urged 
on the steed towards the mountains, 
where he knew that he should find a 
well. The courser dashed willingly for- 
ward, and seemed to share his master's 
desire to quit the arid and exhausting 
wilderness. 

More than once the unhappy fugitive 



OF ALROY. 57 

debated whether he should not allow him- 
self to drop from his seat and die ; no 
torture that awaited him at Hamadan, 
that did not seem preferable to the pro- 
longed and inexpressible anguish that he 
now endured. As he rushed along, lean- 
ing on his bearer's neck, he perceived a 
patch of the desart that seemed of a 
darker colour than the surrounding sand. 
Here, he believed, might perhaps be 
found water. He tried to check the 
steed, but with difficulty he succeeded, and 
with still greater difficulty dismounted. 
He knelt down, and feebly raked up the 
sand with his hands. It was very moist. 
He nearly fainted over his fruitless 
labour. At length, when he had dug 
about a foot deep, there bubbled up some 
water. He dashed in his hand, but it 
was salt as the ocean. When the horse 

D 5 



58 THE WONDROUS TALE 

saw the water his ears rose, but when he 
smelt it, he turned away his head and 
neighed most piteously. 

" Alas, poor beast !" exclaimed Alroy ; 
" I am the occasion of thy suffering, who 
would be a kind master to thee, if the 
world would let me. Oh that we were 
once more by my own fair fountain ! The 
thought is madness. And Miriam too ! 
I fear I am sadly tender-hearted/' He 
leant against his horse's back, with a feel- 
ing of utter exhaustion, and burst into 
hysteric sobs. 

And the steed softly moaned, and 
turned its head, and gently rubbed its 
face against his arm, as if to solace 
him in his suffering. And strange, but 
Alroy was relieved by having given way 
to his emotion, and charmed with the 
fondness of the faithful horse, he leant 



OF ALROY. ,59 

down and took water, and threw it over 
its feet to cool them, and wiped the foam 
from its face, and washed it, and the 
horse again neighed. 

And now Alroy tried to remount, but 
his strength failed him, and the horse im- 
mediately knelt down and received him. 
And the moment that the Prince was in 
his seat, the horse rose, and again pro- 
ceeded at a rapid pace in their old direc- 
tion. Towards sunset they were within 
a few miles of the broken and rocky 
ground into which the mountains de- 
scended ; and afar off Alroy recognized 
the cupola of the long-expected well. 
With reanimated courage and rallied 
energies, he patted his courser's neck, 
and pointed in the direction of the cu- 
pola, and the horse pricked up its ears, 
and increased its pace. 



60 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Just as the Sun set, they reached the 
well. Alroy jumped off the horse, and 
would have led it to the fountain, but the 
animal would not advance. It stood 
dreadfully shivering with a glassy eye, 
and then it bowed its head, and with a 
groan fell down and died. 



II. 



Night brings rest ; night brings solace ; 
rest to the weary ; solace to the sad . 
And to the desperate night brings despair. 

The moon has sunk to early rest ; but 
a thousand stars are in the sky. The 
mighty mountains rise severe in the clear 
and silent air. In the forest all is still. 
The tired wind no longer roams, but has 
lightly dropped on its leafy couch, and 



OF ALROY. 61 

sleeps like man. Silent all but the foun- 
tain's drip. And by the fountain's side 
a youth is lying. 

Suddenly a creature steals through the 
black and broken rocks. Ha, ha ! the 
jackal smells from afar the rich corrup- 
tion of the courser's clay. Suddenly and 
silently it steals, and stops, and smells. 
Brave banquetting I ween to-night for all 
that goodly company. Jackal, and fox, 
and marten cat, haste ye now ere morn- 
ing's break shall call the vulture to his 
feast, and rob ye of your prey. 

The jackal lapped the courser's blood, 
and moaned with exquisite delight. And 
in a moment, a faint bark was heard 
in the distance. And the jackal peeled 
the ftesh from one of the ribs, and again 
burst into a shriek of mournful extasy. 

Hark, their quick tramp ! First six, 



62 THE WONDROUS TALE 

and then three, galloping with ungodly 
glee. And a marten cat came rushing 
down from the woods ; but the jackals, 
fierce in their number, drove her away, 
and there she stood without the circle, 
panting, beautiful, and baffled, with her 
white teeth and glossy skin, and sparkling 
eyes of rabid rage. 7 

Suddenly, as one of the half-gorged 
jackals retired from the main corpse, 
dragging along a stray member by some 
still palpitating nerves, the marten cat 
made a spring at her enemy, carried off 
his prey, and rushed into the woods. 

Her wild scream of triumph woke a 
lion from his lair. His mighty form, 
black as ebony, moved on a distant emi- 
nence, his tail flowed like a serpent. He 
roared, and the jackals trembled, and 
immediately ceased from their banquet, 



OF ALROY. 68 

turning their heads in the direction of 
their sovereign's voice. He advanced ; 
he stalked towards them. They retired ; 
he bent his head, examined the carcass 
with condescending curiosity, and in- 
stantly quitted it with royal disdain. 
The jackals again collected around their 
garbage. The lion advanced to the foun- 
tain to drink. He beheld a man. His 
mane rose, his tail was wildly agitated, he 
bent over the sleeping Prince, he uttered 
an awful roar, which woke Alroy. 



III. 



He awoke ; his gaze met the flaming 
eyes of the enormous beast fixed upon 
him with a blended feeling of desire and 
surprise. He awoke, and from a swoon ; 



64 THE WONDROUS TALE 

but the dreamless trance had refreshed 
the exhausted energies of the desolate 
wanderer ; in an instant he collected his 
senses, remembered all that had past, and 
comprehended his present situation. He 
returned the lion a glance as imperious, 
and fierce, and scrutinizing as his own. 
For a moment their flashing orbs vied in 
regal rivalry ; but at length the spirit of 
the mere animal yielded to the genius of 
the man. The lion cowed, slunk away, 
stalked with haughty timidity through 
the rocks, and then sprang into the 
forest. 



IV. 



Morn breaks; a silver light is shed 
over the blue and starry sky. Pleasant 



OF ALROY. 65 

to feel is the breath of dawn. Night 
brings repose, but day brings joy. 

The carol of a lonely bird singing in 
the wilderness ! A lonely bird that sings 
with glee ! Sunny and sweet, and light 
and clear, its airy notes float through the 
sky, and trill with innocent revelry. 

The lonely youth on the lonely bird 
upgazes from the fountain side. High in 
the air it proudly floats, balancing its 
crimson wings, and its snowy tail, long, 
delicate, and thin, shines like a sparkling 
meteor in the sun. 

The carol of a lonely bird singing in 
the wilderness ! Suddenly it downward 
dashes, and thrice with circling grace 
it flies around the head of the Hebrew 
Prince. Then by his side it gently drops 
a bunch of fresh and fragrant dates. 

'Tis gone, 'tis gone ! that cheerful 



66 THE WONDROUS TALE 

stranger, gone to the palmy land it loves ; 
gone like a bright and pleasant dream. 
A moment since and it was there, glanc- 
ing in the sunny air, and now the sky is 
without a guest. Alas, alas ! no more is 
heard, the carol of that lonely bird sing- 
ing in the wilderness. 



" As thou didst feed Elisha, so also 
hast thou fed me, God of my fathers !" 
And Alroy arose, and he took his tur- 
ban and unfolded it, and knelt and 
prayed. And then he eat of the dates, 
and drank of the fountain, and full of 
confidence in the God of Israel, the de- 
scendant of David pursued his flight. 

He now commenced the ascent of the 



OF ALROY. 67 

mountainous chain, a wearisome and 
painful toil. Two hours past noon he 
reached the summit of the first ridge, and 
looked over a wild and chaotic waste full 
of precipices and ravines, and dark un- 
fathomable gorges. The surrounding hills 
were ploughed in all directions by the 
courses of dried up cataracts, and here and 
there a few savage goats browsed on an 
occasional patch of lean and sour pas- 
ture. This waste extended for many 
miles : the distance formed by a more 
elevated range of mountains, and beyond 
these, high in the blue sky, rose the 
loftiest peaks of Elburz, 8 shining with 
sharp glaciers of eternal snow. 

It was apparent that Alroy was no 
stranger in the scene of his flight. He 
had never hesitated as to his course, and 
now, after having rested for a short time 



68 THE WONDROUS TALE 

on the summit, he descended towards the 
left by a natural but intricate path, until 
his progress was arrested by a black 
ravine. Scarcely half a dozen yards di- 
vided him from the opposite precipice by 
which it was formed, but the gulf be- 
neath — no one could shoot a glance at its 
invisible termination without drawing 
back with a cold shudder. 

The Prince knelt down and examined 
the surrounding ground with great care. 
At length he raised a small square stone 
which covered a metallic plate, and taking 
from his vest a cornelian talisman covered 
with strange characters, 9 he knocked 
thrice upon the plate with the signet. A 
low solemn murmur sounded around. 
Presently the plate flew off, and Alroy 
pulled forth several yards of an iron chain, 
which he threw over to the opposite pre- 



OF ALROY. 69 

cipice. The chain fastened without dif- 
ficulty to the rock, and was evidently 
constrained by some magnetic influence. 
The Prince, seizing the chain with both 
his hands, now swung across the ravine. 
As he landed, the chain parted from the 
rock, swiftly disappeared down the opposite 
aperture, and its covering closed with 
the same low, solemn murmur as before. 



VI. 



Alroy proceeded for about a hundred 
paces through a natural cloister of basalt 
until he arrived at a large uncovered 
court of the same formation, which a 
stranger might easily have been excused 
for believing to have been formed and 
smoothed by art. In its centre bubbled 



70 THE WONDROUS TALE 

up a perpetual spring, icy cold ; the 
stream had worn a channel through the 
pavement, and might be traced for some 
time wandering among the rocks, until it 
at length leaped from a precipice, into a 
gorge below, in a gauzy shower of varie- 
gated spray. Crossing the court, Alroy 
now entered a vast cavern. 

The cavern was nearly circular in 
form, lighted from a large aperture in 
the top. Yet a burning lamp in a dis- 
tant and murky corner indicated that its 
inhabitant did not trust merely to this 
natural source of the great blessing of ex- 
istence. In the centre of the cave was a 
circular and brazen table, sculptured with 
strange characters and mysterious figures : 
near it was a couch on which lie several 
volumes. 10 Suspended from the walls 
were a shield, some bows and arrows, 
and other arms. 



OF ALROY. 71 

As the Prince of the Captivity knelt 
down and kissed the vacant couch, a 
figure advanced from the extremity of 
the cavern into the light. He was a man 
of middle age, considerably above the 
common height, with a remarkably ath- 
letic frame, and a strongly marked, but 
majestic countenance. His black beard 
descended to his waist, over a dark red 
robe, encircled by a black girdle embroi- 
dered with yellow characters, like those 
sculptured on the brazen table. Black 
also was his turban, and black his large 
and luminous eyes. 

The stranger advanced so softly, that 
Alroy did not perceive him, until the 
Prince again rose up. 

" Jabaster !" exclaimed the Prince. 

" Sacred seed of David," answered the 
Cabalist, " thou art expected. I read of 



72 THE WONDROUS TALE 

thee in the stars last night. They spoke 
of trouble." 

" Trouble or triumph, Time must prove 
which it is, great master. At present I 
am a fugitive and exhausted. The blood- 
hounds track me, but methinks I have 
baffled them now. I have slain an Ish- 
maelite." 



OF ALROY. 73 



PART III. 



It was midnight. Alroy slept upon the 
couch : his sleep was troubled. Jabaster 
stood by his side motionless, and gazing 
intently upon his slumbering guest. 

" The only hope of Israel," murmured 
the Cabalist, " my pupil and my prince ! 
I have long perceived in his young mind 
the seed of mighty deeds, and o'er his 
future life have often mused with a pro- 
phetic hope. The blood of David, the 
sacred offspring of a solemn race. There 
is a magic in his flowing veins my science 
cannot reach. 

VOL. I. E 



74 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" When in my youth I raised our 
standard by my native Tigris, and called 
our nation to restore their ark, why we 
were numerous, wealthy, potent ; we 
were a people then, and they flocked to 
it boldly. Did we lack counsel ? did we 
need a leader ? Who can aver Jabasters 
brain or arm was ever wanting ? And 
yet the dream dissolved, the glorious vi- 
sion. Oh ! when I struck down Mar van, 
and the Caliphs camp flung its blazing 
shadow o'er the bloody river — ah ! then 
indeed I lived. Twenty years of vigil 
may gain a pardon that I then forgot we 
lacked the chief ingredient in the spell, — 
the blood that sleeps beside me. 

" I recall the glorious rapture of that 
sacred strife amid the rocks of Caucasus. 
A fugitive, a proscribed and outlawed 
wretch, whose life is common sport, and 



OF ALROY. J5 

whom the vilest hind may slay without 
a bidding. I who would have been 
Messiah ! 

" Burn thy books Jabaster ; break thy 
brazen tables; forget thy lofty science, 
Cabalist, and read the stars no longer. n 
But last night I stood upon the gulf 
which girds my dwelling : in one hand, 
I held my sacred talisman, that bears the 
name ineffable ; in the other, the mystic 
record of our holy race. I remembered 
that I had evoked spirits, that I had 
communed with the great departed, and 
that the glowing heavens were to me a 
natural language. I recalled, as conso- 
lation to my gloomy soul, that never had 
my science e'er been exercised but for a 
sacred or a noble purpose. And I re- 
membered Israel, my brave, my chosen, 
and my antique race, — slaves, wretched 

e 2 



76 THE WONDROUS TALE 

slaves. I was strongly tempted to fling 
me down this perilous abyss, and end 
my learning and my life together. 

" But as I gazed upon the star of 
David, a sudden halo rose around its rays, 
and ever and anon a meteor shot from out 
the silver veil. I read that there was 
trouble in the holy seed ; and now comes 
this boy, who has done a deed which — " 

" The ark, the ark ! I gaze upon the 
ark !" 

" The slumberer speaks ; the words of 
sleep are sacred." 

" Salvation only from the house of 
David." 

" A mighty truth ; my life too well 
has proved it. 

" He is more calm. It is the holy 
hour. I'll steal into the court, and gaze 
upon the star that sways the fortunes of 
his royal house." 



OF ALROY. 77 



II 



The moon-beam fell upon the foun- 
tain ; the pavement of the court was a 
flood of light ; the rocks rose dark around. 
Jabaster seated by the spring, and hold- 
ing his talisman in his left hand, shaded 
his sight with the other, as he gazed upon 
the luminous heavens. 

A shriek, his name was called. Alroy, 
wild and panting, rushed into the court, 
with extended arms. The Cabalist started 
up, seized him, and held him in his care- 
ful grasp, foaming and in convulsions. 

u Jabaster, Jabaster !" 

" I am here, my child." 

" The Lord hath spoken." 

" The Lord is our refuge. Calm thy- 
self, son of David, and tell me all." 



78 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" I have been sleeping*, master ; is it 
not so ?" 

" Even so, my child. Exhausted by 
his flight and the iexciting narrative of 
his exploit, my Prince laid down upon 
the couch and slumbered ; but I fear 
that slumber was not repose." 

" Repose and I have nought in com- 
mon now. Farewell for ever to that 
fatal word. I am the Lord's anointed." 

" Drink of the fountain, David : it will 
restore thee." 

" Restore the covenant, restore the ark, 
restore the holy city." 

" The Spirit of the Lord hath fallen 
upon him. Son of David, I adjure thee 
tell me all that hath past. I am a Le- 
vite ; in my hand I hold the name inef- 
fable." 

" Take thy trumpet, then, summon 



OF ALROY. 79 

the people, bid them swiftly raise again 
our temple. ' The bricks have fallen, 
but we will rebuild with marble/ Didst 
hear that chorus, sir J" 

" Unto thy chosen ear alone it sound- 
ed." 

" Nay, nay, it was not here. And yet, 
Miriam, Miriam, my sister, my sweet 
sister, how thou wouldst weep, to know 
that which has happened, tears, tears of 
joy, girl ! Where am I ? This is not our 
fountain. Yet thou didst say, ' The foun- 
tain.' Think me not wild. I know thee, 
I know all. Thou art Jabaster; I am 
Alroy. But thou didst say, ' The foun- 
tain/ and it distracted me, and called 

back my memory to 

" God of Israel, lo, I kneel before thee ! 
Here, in the solitude of wildest nature, 
my only witness here this holy man, I 



80 THE WONDROUS TALE 

kneel and vow. Lord ! I will do thy bid- 
ding*. I am young, I am very young", O 
God, and weak ; but thou, Lord, art all- 
powerful. What God is like to thee ! 
Doubt not my courage, Lord, and fill me 
with thy spirit ; but remember, remem- 
ber her, O Lord, remember Miriam. It 
is the only worldly thought I have, and 
it is pure/* 

" Still of his sister — calm thyself, my 
son/* 

" Holy master, thou dost remember 
when I was thy pupil in this cavern. 
Thou hast not forgotten those days of 
tranquil study, those sweet, long 4 , wan- 
dering nights of sacred science ! I was 
dutiful, and hung upon each accent of 
thy lore with the devotion that must 
spring from love/* 

" I cannot weep, Alroy ; but were it 




OF ALROY. SI 

in my power, I would yield a tear of 
homageo the memory of those days." 

" How calmly have we sat on some 
high brow, and gazed upon the stars !" 

" Tis very true, sweet child." 

" And if thou e'er didst chide me, 
'twas half in jest, and only for my si- 
lence." 

" What would he now infer ? No mat- 
ter, he grows calmer. How solemn is his 
visage in the moonlight ! And yet not 
Solomon, upon his youthful throne, could 
look more beautiful." 

" I never told thee an untruth, Ja- 
baster." 

"My life upon thy faith." 

" Fear not the pledge, and so believe 
me — on the mountain brow, watching 
the starry heavens with thyself, 1 was not 
calmer than I feel, sir, now." 

e 5 



82 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" I do believe thee." 

" Then, Jabaster, believe as fully I am 
the Lord's anointed." 

"Tell me all, my child." 

" Know, then, that sleeping on the 
couch within, my sleep was troubled. 
Many dreams I had, indefinite and 
broken. I recall none of their images, 
except I feel a dim sensation 'twas my 
lot to live in brighter days than now rise 
on our race. Suddenly I stood upon a 
mountain tall and grey, and gazed upon 
the stars. And as I gazed, a trumpet 
sounded. Its note thrilled through my 
soul. Never have I heard a sound so 
awful. The thunder, when it broke over 
the cavern here, and shivered the peak, 
whose ruins lie around us, was but a fee- 
ble worldly sound to this almighty music. 
My cheek grew pale, I panted even for 






OF ALROY. 83 

breath. A flaming light spread over the 
sky, the stars melted away, and I beheld, 
advancing 1 from the bursting radiancy, 
the foremost body of a mighty host. 

" Oh ! not when Saul led forth our 
fighting men against the Philistine, not 
when Joab numbered the warriors of my 
great ancestor, did human vision gaze 
upon a scene of so much martial splen- 
dour. Chariots and cavalry, and glitter- 
ing trains of plumed warriors too robust 
to need a courser's solace ; streams of 
shining spears, and banners like a sunset ; 
reverend priests swinging their perfumed 
censers, and prophets hymning with their 
golden harps a most triumphant future. 

" ' J°y> j°y/ ^ey say, ' to Israel, for 
hecometh; he cometh in his splendour 
and his might, the great Messiah of our 
ancient hopes.' 



84 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" And, lo ! a mighty chariot now ap- 
peared, drawn by strange beasts, whose 
forms were half obscured by the bright 
flames on which they seemed to float. 
In that glorious car a warrior stood, proud 
and immovable, his form, his countenance 
—hold my hand, Jabaster, while I speak 
— that chieftain was myself !" 
" Proceed, proceed, my son/' 
" I started in my dream, and I awoke. 
I found myself upsitting on my couch. 
The pageantry had vanished. Nought 
was seen but the bright moonlight and 
the gloomy cave. And as I sighed to 
think I e'er had waken, and mused upon 
the strangeness of my vision, a small still 
voice descended from above and called 
6 Alroy ! ? I started, but I answered not. 
Methought it was my fancy. Again my 
name was called, and now I murmured — 






OF ALROY. 85 

' Lord, I am here, what wouldest thou ?' 
Nought responded, and soon great dread 
came o'er me, and I rushed out and called 
to thee, my master." 

" It was ' the Daughter of the Voice' I2 
that spake. Since the captivity 'tis the 
only mode by which the saints are sum- 
moned. Oft have I heard of it, but never 
in these sad degenerate days has its soft 
aspiration fallen upon us. These are 
strange times and tidings. The building 
of the temple is at hand. Son of David, 
my heart is full. Let us to prayer !" 



III. 

Day dawned upon Jabaster, still musing 
in solitude among his rocks. Within 
the cavern Alroy remained in prayer. 



86 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Often and anxiously the Cabalist shot 
a glance at his companion, and then again 
relapsed into reverie. 

" The time is come that I must to this 
youth reveal the secrets of my early life. 
Much will he hear of glory, much of 
shame. Nought must I conceal, and 
nought gloss over. 

" I must tell how in the plains of Ti- 
gris I upraised the sacred standard of our 
chosen race, and called them from their 
bondage ; how, despairing of his recreant 
fathers, and inspired by human power 
alone, I vainly claimed the mighty office 
for his sacred blood alone reserved. God 
of my fathers, grant that future service, 
the humble service of a contrite soul, 
may, in the coming glory that awaits us, 
atone for past presumption ! 

" But for him great trials are impend- 



OF ALROY. 87 

ing. Not lightly must that votary be 
proved, who fain would free a people. 
The Lord is faithful to his promise, but 
the Lord will choose his season and his 
minister. Courage, and faith, and deep 
humility, and strong endurance, and 
the watchful soul temptation cannot 
sully : these are the fruits we lay upon 
his altar, and meekly watch if some de- 
scending flame will vouchsafe to accept 
and brightly bless them. 

" It is written in the dread volume of 
our mystic lore, that not alone the Sa- 
viour shall spring from out our house of 
princes, but that none shall rise to free 
us until, alone and unassisted, he have 
gained the sceptre Solomon antiquely 
wielded within his cedar palaces. 

" That sceptre must he gain. This 
fragile youth, untried and delicate, un- 



88 THE WONDROUS TALE 

knowing in the ways of this strange 
world, where every step is danger. How 
much hardship, how much peril, what 
withering disappointment, what dull 
care, what long despondency, what never- 
ending lures, now lie in ambush for this 
gentle boy ! O ! my countrymen, is this 
thy hope ? And I, with all my lore, and 
all my courage, and all my deep intelli- 
gence of man ; unhappy Israel, why am 
I not thy prince ? 

" I check the blasphemous thought. 
Did not his great ancestor, as young and 
as untried, a beardless stripling, but with 
a pebble, a small, smooth stone, level a 
mailed giant to the ground, and save his 
people ? 

" He is clearly summoned. The Lord 
is with him. Be he with the Lord, and 
we shall prosper." 



OF ALROY. 89 



IV. 



It was at sunset, on the third day after 
the arrival of Alroy at the cave of the 
Cabalist, that the Prince of the Captivity 
commenced his pilgrimage in quest of the 
sceptre of Solomon. 

Silently the pilgrim and his master 
took their way to the brink of the ravine, 
and there they stopped to part — perhaps 
for ever. 

" It is a bitter moment, Alroy. Human 
feelings are not for beings like us, yet 
they will have their way. Remember, 
remember all. Cherish the talisman as 
thy life — nay ! welcome death with it 
pressing against thy heart, sooner than 
breathe without it. Be firm, be pious. 
Think of thy ancestors, think of thy 
God." 



90 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" Doubt me not, dear master ; if 
I seem not full of that proud spirit, which 
was perhaps too much my wont, ascribe 
it not to fear, Jabaster, nor even to the 
pain of leaving thee, dear friend. But 
ever since that sweet and solemn voice 
summoned me so thrillingly, — I know not 
how it is, — but a change has come over 
my temper ; yet I am firm, oh ! firmer 
far than when I struck down the Ish- 
maelite. Indeed, indeed, fear not for 
me. The Lord, that knoweth all things, 
knows full well I am prepared even 
to the death. Thy prayers, Jabaster, 

an d p 

" Stop, stop. I do remember me. 
See this ring : 'tis a choice emerald. 
Thou mayst have wondered I should 
wear a bauble. Alroy, I had a brother 
once : still he may live. When we 



OF ALROY. 91 

parted, this was the signal of his love : a 
love, my child, strong-, though we greatly 
differed. Take it. The hour may come 
that thou mayst need his aid. It will 
command it. If he live, he prospers. I 
know his temper well. He was made for 
what the worldly deem prosperity. God 
be with thee, sacred boy : the God of 
our great fathers — the God of Abraham, 
of Isaac, and of Jacob." 

They embraced. 

" We linger," exclaimed the Cabalist, 
" we linger. Oh ! in vain we quell the 
feelings of our kind. God, God, bless 
and be with thee. Art sure hast all ? 
thy dagger and thy wallet? That staff* 
has seen some service. I cut it on the 
Jordan. Ah ! that I could be thy mate ! 
T would be nothing then. At the worst, 
to die together. Such a fate seems sweeter 



92 THE WONDROUS TALE 

now than parting. I'll watch thy star, 
my child. Thou weepest ! And I too. 
Why ! what is this ? Am I indeed Ja- 

baster ? One more embrace, and so 

well not say farewell, but only think it." 



OF ALROY 93 



PART IV. 



I 



Tradition delivered that the sceptre of 
Solomon could be found only in the un- 
known sepulchres of the ancient Hebrew 
monarchs, and that none might dare to 
touch it but one of their descendants. 
Armed with the cabalistic talisman, 
which was to guide him in his awful and 
difficult researches, Alroy commenced 
his pilgrimage to the Holy City. At this 
time, the love of these sacred wanderings 
was a reigning passion among the Jews, 
as well as Christians. 



94 THE WONDROUS TALE 

The Prince of the Captivity was to 
direct his course into the heart of those 
great desarts which, in his flight from 
Hamadan, he had only skirted. Follow- 
ing the track of the caravan, he was to 
make his way to Babylon, or Bagdad. 
From the capital of the Caliphs, his 
journey to Jerusalem was one compara- 
tively easy ; but to reach Bagdad he must 
encounter hardship and danger, the pros- 
pect of which would have divested any 
one of hope, who did not conceive him- 
self the object of an omnipotent and par- 
ticular Providence. 

Clothed only in a coarse black frock, 
common among the Kourds, girded round 
his centre by a cord which held his dagger, 
his head shaven, and covered with a large 
white turban, which screened him from 
the heat, his feet protected only by slip- 



OF ALROY. - 95 

pers, supported by his staff, and bearing 
on his shoulders a bag of dried meat and 
parched corn, and a leathern skin of 
water, behold a youth toiling over the 
glowing sands of Persia, whose life had 
hitherto been a long '^broken dream of 
t domestic luxury and .nnocent indul- 
gence. 

He travelled during the warm night, or 
the early starlit morn. During the day 
he rested : happy if he could recline by 
the side of some charitable well, shaded 
by a palm tree, or frighten a gazelle from 
its resting-place among the rough bushes 
of some wild rocks. Were these resources 
wanting, he threw himself upon the sand, 
and made an awning with his staff and 
turban. 

Three weeks had elapsed since he 
quitted the cavern of the Cabalist. Hi- 



96 THE WONDROUS TALE 

therto he had met with no human being. 
The desart became less arid A scanty 
vegetation sprang up from a more genial 
soil, the ground broke into gentle undula- 
tions, his senses were invigorated with the 
odour of wild plants, and his sight re- 
freshed by the glancing form of some^ 
wandering bird, a pilgrim like himself, 
but more at ease. 

Soon sprang up a grove of graceful 
palm trees, with their tall thin stems, and 
bending feathery crowns, languid and 
beautiful. Around, the verdant sod 
gleamed like an emerald : silver streams, 
flowing from a bubbling parent spring, 
wound their white forms within the 
bright green turf. From the grove arose 
the softening song of doves, and showers 
of gay and sparkling butterflies, borne on 
their tinted wings of shifting light, danced 



OF ALROY. 97 

without danger in the liquid air. A fair 
and fresh Oasis ! 



II. 



Alroy reposed in this delicious retreat 
for two days, feeding on the living dates, 
and drinking of the fresh water. Fain 
would he have lingered, nor indeed until 
lie rested, had he been sufficiently con- 
scious of his previous exertion. But the 
remembrance of his great mission made 
him restless, and steeled him to the suf- 
fering which yet awaited him. 

At the dawn of the second day of his 
journey from the oasis, he beheld, to his 
astonishment, faintly but distinctly traced 
on the far horizon, the walls and turrets 
of an extensive city. 13 Animated by this 

VOLc I. F 



98 THE WONDROUS TALE 

unexpected prospect, he continued his 
progress for several hours after sunrise. 
At length, utterly exhausted, he sought 
refuge from the overpowering heat be- 
neath the cupola of the ruined tomb of 
some Moslemin saint. At sunset he con- 
tinued his journey, and in the morning 
found himself within a few miles of the 
city. He halted and watched with 
anxiety for some evidence of its inha- 
bitants. None was visible. No crowds 
or cavalcades issued from the gates. Not 
a single human being, not a solitary camel 
moved in the vicinity. 

The day was too advanced for the pil- 
grim to proceed, but so great was his 
anxiety to reach this unknown settlement, 
and penetrate the mystery of its silence, 
that ere sunset Alroy entered the gates. 

A magnificent city, of an architecture 



OF ALROY. 99 

with which he was unacquainted, offered 
to his entranced vision its gorgeous ruins 
and deserted splendour ; long streets of 
palaces, with their rich line of lessening- 
pillars, here and there broken by some 
fallen shaft, vast courts surrounded by 
ornate and solemn temples, and luxurious 
baths, adorned with rare mosaics, and yet 
bright with antique gilding : now an 
arch of triumph still haughty with its 
broken friezes, now a granite obelisk 
covered with strange characters, and 
proudly towering o'er a prostrate com- 
panion ; sometimes a void and crumbling 
theatre, sometimes a long and elegant 
aqueduct, sometimes a porphyry column, 
once breathing with the heroic statue 
that now lies shivered at its base— all suf- 
fused with the warm twilight of an Eastern 
eve. 

F2 



100 THE WONDROUS TALE 

He gazed with wonder and admira- 
tion upon the strange and fascinating 
scene. The more he beheld, the more his 
curiosity was excited. He breathed with 
difficulty ; he advanced with a blended 
feeling of eagerness and hesitation. Fresh 
wonders successively unfolded themselves. 
Each turn developed a new scene of still 
and solemn splendour. The echo of his 
step filled him with awe. He looked 
around him with an amazed air, a flutter- 
ing heart, and changing countenance. All 
was silent: alone the Hebrew Prince stood 
amid the regal creation of the Macedonian 
captains. Empires and dynasties flourish 
and pass away, the proud metropolis 
becomes a solitude, the conquering king- 
dom even a desart ; but Israel still remains, 
still a descendant of the most ancient 
kings breathed amid these royal ruins, 



OF ALROY. 101 

and still the eternal sun could never rise 
without gilding the towers of living 
Jerusalem. A word, a deed, a single day, 
a single man, and we might be a nation. 

A shout ; he turns, he is seized ; four 
ferocious Kourdish bandits grapple and 
bind him. 



Ill 



The bandits hurried their captive 
through a street which appeared to have 
been the principal way of the city. Nearly 
at its termination they turned by a small 
Ionian temple, and clambering over some 
fallen pillars, they entered a quarter of 
the city of a more ruinous aspect, than 
that which Alroy had hitherto visited. 
The path was narrow, often obstructed, 



102 THE WONDROUS TALE 

and around were signs of devastation for 
which the exterior of the city had not 
prepared him. 

The brilliant but brief twilight of the 
Orient was fast fading away ; a sombre 
purple tint succeeded to the rosy flush, 
the distant towers rose black, although 
defined in the clear and shadowy air, and 
the moon, which when he first entered, 
had studded the heavens like a small 
white cloud, now glittered with deceptive 
light. 

Suddenly before them rose a huge pile. 
Oval in shape, and formed by tiers of 
arches, it was evidently much dilapi- 
dated, and one enormous, irregular, and 
undulating rent, extending from the top 
nearly to the foundation, almost separated 
the side to which Alroy and his com- 
panions advanced. 



OF ALROY. ] 03 

Clambering up the remainder of this 
massy wall, the robbers and their pri- 
soner descended into an immense amphi- 
theatre, which seemed vaster in the sha- 
dowy and streaming moonlight. In it 
were groups of men, horses, and camels. 
In the extreme distance, reclining or 
squatting on mats and carpets, was a large 
assembly engaged in a rough but merry 
banquet. A fire blazed at their side, its 
red and uncertain flame mingling with 
the white and steady moonbeam, and 
throwing a flickering light over their 
ferocious countenances, their glistening ar- 
mour, ample drapery, and shawled heads. 

" A spy," exclaimed the captors, as 
they dragged Alroy before the leader of 
the band. 

'* Hang him, then/' said the chieftain, 
without even looking up. 



104 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" This wine, great Scherirah, is excel- 
lent, or I am no true Moslemin," said a 
principal robber ; "but you are too 
cruel ; I hate this summary punishment. 
Let us torture him a little, and extract 
some useful information." 

" As you like, Kisloch," said Sche- 
rirah ; " it may amuse us. Fellow, 
where do you come from ? He cannot 
answer. Decidedly a spy. Hang him up." 

The captors half untied the rope that 
bound Alroy , that it might serve him for 
another purpose, when another of the 
gentle companions of Scherirah inter- 
fered. 

" Spies always answer, captain. He 
is more probably a merchant in disguise." 

" And carries hidden treasure/' added 
Kisloch ; " these rough coats often cover 
jewels. We had better search him." 



OF ALROY. 105 

" Ay ! search him,* said Scherirah, 
with his rough, brutal voice ; " do what 
you like, only give me the bottle. This 
Greek wine is choice booty. Feed the 
fire, men. Are you asleep ? And then 
Kisloch, who hates cruelty, can roast him, 
if he likes/' 

The robbers prepared to strip their 
captive. " Friends, friends !" exclaimed 
Alroy, " for there is no reason why you 
should not be friends, spare me, spare me. 
I am poor, I am young, I am innocent. I 
am neither a spy nor a merchant. I have 
no plots, no wealth. I am a pilgrim." 

" A decided spy," exclaimed Scheri- 
rah ; " they are ever pilgrims." 

" He speaks too well to speak truth," 
exclaimed Kisloch. 

" All talkers are liars," exclaimed Sche- 
rirah. 

F 5 



106 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" That is why Kisloch is the most elo- 
quent of the band." 

" A jest at the banquet may prove a 
curse in the field," replied Kisloch. 

" Pooh !" exclaimed Scherirah. " Fel- 
lows, why do you hesitate ? Search the 
prisoner, I say !" 

They advanced, they seized him. In 
vain he struggled. 

" Captain," exclaimed one of the band, 
" he wears upon his breast a jewel VI 

" I told you so," said the third 
robber. 

" Give it me/' said Scherirah. 

But Alroy, in despair, at the thought 
of losing the talisman, remembering the 
injunctions of Jabaster, and animated by 
supernatural courage, burst from his 
searchers, and, seizing a brand from the 
fire, held them at bay. 



OF ALROY. 107 

" The fellow has spirit," said Scherirah 
calmly. " 'Tis pity it will cost him his 
life." 

" Bold man/' exclaimed Alroy, " for a 
moment hear me ! I am a pilgrim, poorer 
than a beggar. The jewel they talk of is 
a holy emblem, worthless to you, to me 
invaluable, and to be forfeited only by 
my life. You maybe careless of that. 
Beware of your own. The first man who 
advances, dies. I pray you humbly, 
chieftain, let me go." 

" Kill him !" said Scherirah. 

" Stab him !" exclaimed Kisloch. 

" Give me the jewel," said the third 
robber. 

" The God of David be my refuge, 
then !" exclaimed Alroy. 

" He is a Hebrew, he is a Hebrew," 
exclaimed Scherirah, jumping up. " Spare 



108 THE WONDROUS TALE 

him ! spare him ! my mother was a 
Jewess." 

The assailants lowered their arms, and 
withdrew a few paces. Alroy still re- 
mained upon his guard. 

" Valiant pilgrim," said Scherirah, ad- 
vancing, with a softened voice, " are you 
for the holy city ?" 

" The city of my fathers.' 

" A perilous journey. And whence 
from r 

" Hamadan." 

" A dreary way. You need repose. 
Your name ?" 

" David." 

" David, you are among friends. Rest 
and repose in safety. You hesitate. Fear 
not ! The memory of my mother is a 
charm that always changes me." Scheri- 
rah unsheathed his dagger, punctured his 



OF ALROY. 109 

arm, and, throwing* away the weapon, of- 
fered the bleeding member to Alroy. The 
prince of the Captivity touched the open 
vein with his lips. 

" My troth is pledged/' said the ban- 
dit ; " I can never betray him in whose 
veins my own blood is flowing-." 14 So say- 
ing", he led Alroy to his carpet. 



IV. 



" Eat, David/' said Scherirah. 

" I will eat bread," answered Alroy. 

" What have you had so much meat 
lately that you will refuse this delicate 
gazelle that I have brought down this 
morning with my own lance ? 'Tis food 
for a Caliph/' 

" I pray you give me bread " 



110 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" Oh ! bread if you like. But that a 
man should prefer bread to meat, and such 
meat as this, 'tis miraculous." 

" A thousand thanks, good Scherirah ; 
but with our people the flesh of the ga- 
zelle is forbidden. It is unclean. Its 
foot is cloven." 

u I have heard of these things/' replied 
Scherirah, with a thoughtful air. " My 
mother was a Jewess, and my father was 
a Kourd. Whichever be right, I hope to 
be saved." 

" There is but one God, and Mohammed 
is his prophet !" exclaimed Kisloch ; 
" though I drink wine. Your health, 
Hebrew." 

" I will join you," said the third robber. 
" My father was a Guebre, and sacrificed 
his property to his faith ; and the conse- 
quence is, his son has got neither." 



OF ALROY. 1 1 1 

" As for me," said a fourth robber, of 
very dark complexion and singularly 
small bright eyes, " I am an Indian, and 
I believe in the great golden figure with 
carbuncle eyes, in the Temple of Delhi." 

" I have no religion/' said a tall negro, 
in a red turban, grinning with his white 
teeth ; " they have none in my country ; 
but if I had heard of your God before, Ca- 
lidas, I would have believed in him." 

" I almost wish I had been a Jew," ex- 
claimed Scherirah musing. " My mother 
was a good woman." 

" The Jews are very rich," said the 
third robber. 

■" When you get to Jerusalem, David, 
you will see the Christians," continued 
Scherirah. 

" The accursed Giaours," exclaimed 
Kisloch, "we are all against them." 



112 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" With their white faces," exclaimed 
the Negro. 

" And their blue eyes," said the In- 
dian. 

" What can you expect of men who 
live in a country without a Sun ?" ob- 
served the Guebre. 



V. 



Alroy woke about two hours after mid- 
night. His companions were in deep 
slumber. The moon had set, the fire had 
died away, a few red embers alone re- 
maining ; dark masses of shadow hung 
about the amphitheatre. He arose and 
cautiously stepped over the sleeping ban- 
dits. He was not, in strictness, a prison- 
er ; but who could trust to the caprice of 



OF ALROY. 113 

these lawless men ? To-morrow might 
find him their slave, or their companion 
in some marauding" expedition, which 
might make him almost retrace his steps 
to the Caucasus or to Hamadan. The 
temptation to ensure his freedom was 
irresistible. He clambered up the t uined 
wall, descended into the intricate wind- 
ings that led to the Ionic fane, that served 
him as a beacon, hurried through the 
silent and starry streets, gained the great 
portal, and rushed once more into the 
desart. 

A vague fear of pursuit made him con- 
tinue his course many hours without 
resting. The desart again became sandy, 
the heat increased. The breeze that plays 
about the wilderness, and in early spring 
is often scented with the wild fragrance 
of aromatic plants, sank away. A lurid 



114. THE WONDROUS TALE 

brightness suffused the heavens. An ap- 
palling stillness pervaded nature ; even 
the insects were silent. For the first 
time in his pilgrimage, a feeling of deep 
despondency fell over the soul of Alroy. 
His energy appeared suddenly to have 
deserted him. A low hot wind began to 
rise, and fan his cheek with pestiferous 
kisses, and enervate his frame with its 
poisonous embrace. His head and limbs 
ached with a dull sensation, more terri- 
ble than pain ; his sight was dizzy, his 
tongue swollen. Vainly he looked around 
for aid, vainly he extended his forlorn 
arms, and wrung them to the remorseless 
heaven. Almost frantic with thirst, the 
boundless horizon of the desart disap- 
peared, and the unhappy victim, in the 
midst of his torture, found himself appa- 
rently surrounded by bright and running 



OF ALROY. 115 

streams, the fleeting waters of the false 
Mirage ! 

The Sun became blood-red, the sky 
darker, the sand rose in fierce eddies, the 
moaning wind burst into shrieks and 
respired a more ardent and still more 
malignant breath. The pilgrim could no 
longer sustain himself. 15 Faith, courage, 
devotion, deserted him with his failing 
energies. He strove no longer with his 
destiny, he delivered himself up to des- 
pair and death. He fell upon one knee 
with drooping head, supporting himself 
by one quivering hand, and then, full of 
the anguish of baffled purposes and lost 
affections, raising his face and arm to 
heaven, thus to the elements he poured 
his passionate farewell. 

" O Life once vainly deemed a 
gloomy toil, I feel thy sweetness now ; 



116 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Farewell, O life, farewell my high re- 
solves and proud conviction of almighty 
fame. My days, my short unprofitable 
days, melt into the past ; and death, with 
which I struggle, horrible death, arrests 
me in this wilderness. O my sister, 
could thy voice, thy sweet, sweet voice, 
but murmur in my ear one single sigh of 
love ; could thine eye with its soft radi- 
ance but an instant blend with my dim 
fading vision, the pang were nothing. 
Farewell, Miriam ! my heart is with thee 
by thy fountain's side. Fatal blast, bear 
her my dying words, my blessing. And 
ye, too, friends, whose too neglected love 
I think of now, farewell ! Farewell, my 
uncle, farewell pleasant home, and Ha- 
madan's serene and shadowy bowers ! 
Farewell, Jabaster, and the mighty lore 
of which thou wert the priest and I the 



OF ALROY. 117 

pupil ! Thy talisman throbs on my faith- 
ful heart. Green Earth and golden Sun, 
and all the beautiful and glorious sights 
ye fondly lavish on unthinking man, 
farewell, farewell ! I die in the desart, 
'tis bitter. No more, oh ! never more, for 
me the hopeful day shall break, and its 
fresh breeze rise on its cheering wings of 
health and joy. Heaven and earth, water 
and air, my chosen country, and my 
antique creed, farewell, farewell ! And 
thou, too, City of my soul, I cannot name 
thee, unseen Jerusalem—" 

Amid the roar of the wind, the bosom 
of the earth heaved and opened, swift 
columns of sand sprang up to the lurid 
sky, and hurried towards their victim. 
With the clang of universal chaos, im- 
penetrable darkness descended on the 
desart. 



118 THE WONDROUS TALE 



PART V 



I. 



" Now our dreary way is o'er, now the 
desart's toil is past. Soon the river broad- 
ly flowing, through its green and palmy 
banks, to our wearied limbs shall offer, 
baths which Caliphs cannot buy. Allah- 
illah, Allah-hu. Allah-illah, Allah-hu." 

" Blessed the man who now may bear 
a relic from our prophet's tomb, blessed 
the man who now unfolds the treasures 
of a distant mart, jewels of the dusky 
East, and silks of farthest Samarcand. 
Allah-illah, Allah-hu. Allah-illah, Al- 
lah-hu." 



OF ALROY. 119 

" Him the sacred Mosque shall greet 
with a reverence grave and low, him the 
busy Bezestein shall welcome with con- 
fiding smile. Holy merchant, now re- 
ceive the double triumph of thy toil. 
Allah-illah, Allah-hu, Allah-illah, Allah- 
hu." 

" The camel jibs, Abdallah ! See, there 
is something in the track." 

"Bythe holy stone, 16 a dead man. Poor 
devil ! One should never make a pil- 
grimage on foot. I hate your humble 
piety. Prick the beast and he will pass 
the corpse." 

" The prophet preaches charity, Ab- 
dallah. He has favoured my enterprize, 
and I will practice his precept. See if he 
be utterly dead." 

It was the Mecca caravan returning to 
Bagdad. The pilgrims were within a 



120 THE WONDROUS TALE 

day's journey of the Euphrates, and wel- 
comed their approach to fertile earth with 
a triumphant chorus. Far as the eye 
could reach, the long line of their strag- 
gling procession stretched across the wil- 
derness, thousands of camels in strings, 
laden with bales of merchandize, and each 
company headed by an animal of superior 
size leading with tinkling bells, groups of 
horsemen, clusters of litters ; all the pil- 
grims armed to their teeth, the van form- 
ed by a strong division of Seljukian 
cavalry, and the rear protected by a 
Kourdish clan, who guaranteed the secu- 
rity of the pious travellers through their 
country. 

Abdallah was the favourite slave of 
the charitable merchant Ali. In obe- 
dience to his master's orders, he unwill- 
ingly descended from his camel, and 



OF ALROY. 121 

examined the body of the apparently life- 
less Alroy. 

" A Kourd, by his dress," exclaimed 
Abdallah, with a sneer, " what does he 
here ?" 

" It is not the face of a Kourd," re- 
plied Ali, " perchance a pilgrim from 
the mountains ?" 

" Whatever he be, he is dead," an- 
swered the slave : " I doubt not an ac- 
cursed Giaour." 

" God is great," exclaimed Ali, " he 
breathes ; the breast of his caftan 
heaved." 

" 'Twas the wind," said Abdallah. 

" 'Twas the sigh of a human heart," 
answered Ali. 

Several pilgrims who were on foot had 
now gathered round the group. 

" I am a Hakim," 17 observed a dignified 

VOL. I. G 



] 22 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Armenian. " I will feel his pulse ; 'tis 
dull, but it beats." 

" There is but one God," exclaimed 
Ali. 

" And Mahomed is his prophet," re- 
sponded Abdallah. " You do not believe 
in him, you Armenian infidel." 

" I am a Hakim," replied the digni- 
fied Armenian. i( Although an infidel, 
God has granted me skill to cure true 
believers. Worthy Ali, believe me, the 
boy may yet live." 

" Hakim, you shall count your own 
dirhems if he breathe in my divan in 
Bagdad," answered Ali ; " I have taken 
a fancy to the boy. God has sent him 
to me. He shall carry my slippers." 

" Give me a camel, and I will save his 
life." 

" We have none," said the servant. 



OF ALROY, 123 

" Walk, Abdallah," said the master. 

" Is a true believer to walk to save the 
life of a Kourd ? Master slipper-bearer 
shall answer for this, if there be any 
sweetness in the bastinado/" murmured 
Abdallah. 

The Armenian blooded Alroy ; the 
blood flowed slowly but surely. The 
Prince of the Captivity opened his eyes. 

" There is but one God !" exclaimed 
Ali. 

"The evil eye fall on him!" 18 muttered 
Abdallah. 

The Armenian took a cordial from his 
vest, and poured it down his patient's 
throat. The blood flowed more freely. 

" He will live, worthy merchant," said 
the physician. 

" And Mahomed is his prophet," con- 
tinued Ali. 

G 2 



124 THE WONDROUS TALE 

u By the stone of Mecca, I believe it is 
a Jew," shouted Abdallah. 

" The dog !" exclaimed Ali. 

" Pah \" said a negro-slave, drawing 
hack with disgust. 

" He will die," said the Christian phy- 
sician, not even binding up the vein. 

" And be damned," said Abdallah, 
jumping again on his camel. 

The party rode on, the caravan pro- 
ceeded. A Kourdish horseman galloped 
forward. He curbed his steed as he pass- 
ed Alroy bleeding to death. 

" What accursed slave has wounded 
one of my clan ?" 

The Kourd jumped off his horse, strip- 
ped off a slip of his blue shirt, stanched 
the wound, and carried the unhappy Al- 
roy to the rear. 

The Desart ceased, the caravan entered 



OFALROY. 125 

upon a vast but fruitful plain. In the 
extreme distance might be detected a 
long undulating line of palm trees. The 
van guard gave a shout, shook their tall 
lances in the air, and rattled their scyme- 
tars in rude chorus against their small 
round iron shields. All eyes sparkled, 
all hands were raised, all voices sounded, 
save those that were breathless from 
overpowering joy. After months wan- 
dering in the sultry wilderness they 
beheld the great Euphrates. 

Broad, and fresh, and magnificent, and 
serene, the mighty waters rolled through 
the beautiful and fertile earth. A vital 
breeze rose from their bosom. Every 
being responded to their genial influ- 
ence. The sick were cured, the despond- 
ing became sanguine, the healthy and 
light-hearted broke into shouts of laughter, 



126 THE WONDROUS TALE 

jumped from their camels, and embraced 
the fragrant earth, or wild in their reno- 
vated strength, galloped over the plain, 
and threw their wanton jerreeds in the 
air, 19 as if to show their suffering and la- 
bour had not deprived them of that skill 
and strength, without which it were vain 
again to enter the haunts of their less ad- 
venturous brethren. 

The caravan halted on the banks of 
the broad river glowing in the cool sun- 
set. The camp was pitched, the plain 
glittered with tents. The camels falling on 
their knees, crouched in groups, the mer- 
chandize piled up in masses by their sides. 
The unharnessed horses rushed neigh- 
ing about the plain, tossing their glad 
heads, and rolling in the unaccustomed 
pasture. Spreading their mats, and kneel- 
ing towards Mecca, the pilgrims perform- 



OF ALROY. 127 

ed their evening orisons. Never was 
thanksgiving more sincere. They arose ; 
some rushed into the river, some lighted 
lamps, some pounded coffee. 20 Troops of 
smiling villagers arrived with fresh pro- 
visions eager to prey upon such light 
hearts and heavy purses. It was one of 
those occasions when the accustomed 
gravity of the Orient disappears. Long 
through the night the sounds of music 
and the shouts of laughter were heard on 
the banks of that starry river, long 
through the night you might have listen- 
ed with enchantment to the wild tales of 
the storier, or gazed with fascination on 
the wilder gestures of the dancing girls. 21 



128 THE WONDROUS TALE 



II 



The great Bazaar of Bagdad afforded a 
very animated and sumptuous spectacle 
on the day after the arrival of the caravan. 
All the rare and costly products of the 
world were collected in that celebrated 
mart : the shawls of Cashmere and the 
silks of Syria, the ivory, and plumes, and 
gold of Afric, the jewels of Ind, the talis- 
mans of Egypt, the perfumes and manu- 
scripts of Persia, the spices and gums of 
Araby, beautiful horses, more beautiful 
slaves, cloaks of sable, pelisses of ermine, 
armour alike magnificent in ornament 
and temper, rare animals, still rarer birds, 
blue apes in silver collars, white gazelles 
bound by a golden chain, greyhounds, 



OF ALROY. 129 

peacocks, paroquets. And every where 
strange, and busy, and excited groups ; 
men of all nations, creeds, and climes : 
the sumptuous and haughty Turk, the 
graceful and subtle Arab, the Hebrew 
with his black cap and anxious counte- 
nance ; the Armenian Christian, with his 
dark flowing robes, and mild demeanour, 
and serene visage. Here strutted the 
lively, affected, and superfine Persian ; 
and there the Circassian stalked with his 
long hair and chain cuirass. The fair 
Georgian jostled the ebony form of the 
merchant of Dongola or Sennaar. 

Through the long, narrow, arched, and 
winding streets of the Bazaar, lined on 
each side with loaded stalls, all was bustle, 
bargaining, and barter. A passenger ap- 
proached, apparently of no common rank. 
Two pages preceded him, beautiful Geor- 

G 5 



1 30 THE WONDROUS TALE 

gian boys, clothed in crimson cloth, and 
caps of the same material, setting tight to 
their heads, with long golden tassels. 
One bore a blue velvet bag, and the 
other a clasped and richly-bound volume. 
Four footmen, armed, followed their 
master, who rode behind the pages on a 
milk-white mule. He was a man of 
middle age, eminently handsome. His 
ample robes concealed the only fault in 
his appearance, a figure which indulgence 
had rendered somewhat too ample. His 
eyes were large, and soft, and dark ; his 
nose aquiline, but delicately moulded ; 
his mouth small, and beautifully propor- 
tioned ; his lip full and red ; his teeth re- 
gular, and dazzling white. His ebony 
beard flowed, but not at too great a length, 
in graceful and natural curls, and was 
richly perfumed; a delicate mustachio 



OF ALROY. 131 

shaded his upper lip, but no whisker was 
permitted to screen the form and shroud 
the lustre of his oval countenance and 
brilliant complexion. Altogether, the 
animal, perhaps, predominated too much 
in the expression of the stranger's coun- 
tenance, but genius beamed from his pas- 
sionate eye, and craft lay concealed in 
that subtle lip. The dress of the rider 
was sumptuous. His turban formed by 
a scarlet Cashmere shawl, was of great 
breadth, and, concealing half of his white 
forehead, increased by the contrast the 
radiant height of the other. His under 
vest was of white Damascus silk, stiif 
with silver embroidery, and confined by 
a girdle formed by a Brusa scarf of gold 
stuff, and holding a dagger, whose hilt 
appeared blazing with brilliants and 
rubies. His loose and exterior robe was 



132 THE WONDROUS TALE 

of crimson cloth. His white hands 
sparkled with rings, and his ears glittered 
with pendulous gems. 

" Who is this ?" asked an Egyptian 
merchant, in a low whisper, of the dealer 
whose stuffs he was examining. 

" Tis the Lord Honain," replied the 
dealer. 

" And who may he be }" continued 
the Egyptian. " Is he the Caliph's 
son ?" 

66 Poh ! a much greater man— his phy- 
sician." 

The white mule stopped at the very 
stall where this conversation was taking 
place. The pages halted, and stood on 
each side of their master — the footmen 
kept off the crowd. 

" Merchant," said Honain, with a gra- 
cious smile of condescension, and with a 



OF ALROY. 1 33 

voice musical as a flute. f< Merchant, 
did you obtain me my wish ?" 

" There is but one God," replied the 
dealer, who was the charitable Ali, " and 
Mahomed is his prophet. I succeeded, 
please your highness, in seeing at Aleppo 
the accursed Giaour, of whom I spoke, 
and behold that which you desired is 
here." So saying, Ali produced several 
Greek manuscripts, and offered them to 
his visitor. 

" Hah !" said Honain, with a spark- 
ling eye, " 'tis well — their cost ?" 

" The infidel would not part with 
them under five hundred dirhems," re- 
plied Ali. 

" Ibrahim, see that this worthy mer- 
chant receive a thousand." 

'*. As many thanks, my Lord Ho- 
nain." 



134 THE WONDROUS TALE 

The Caliph's physician bowed grace- 
fully. 

"Advance, pages," continued Honain ; 
" why this stoppage ? Ibrahim, see that 
our way be cleared. What is all this ?" 

A crowd of men advanced, pulling 
along a youth, who, almost exhausted, 
still singly struggled with his ungenerous 
adversaries. 

" The Cadi, the Cadi," cried the fore- 
most of them, who was Abdallah, " drag 
him to the Cadi." 

" Noble lord," cried the youth, ex- 
tricating himself by a sudden struggle 
from the grasp of his captors, and seizing 
the robe of Honain, " I am innocent and 
injured. I pray thy help." 

" The Cadi, the Cadi," exclaimed Ab- 
dallah ; " the knave has stolen my ring 
— the ring given me by my faithful 



OF ALROY. 135 

Fatima on our marriage day, and which I 
would not part with for my master's stores." 

The youth still clung to the robe of 
Honain, and mute from exhaustion, fixed 
upon him his beautiful and imploring eye. 

" Silence," proclaimed Honain; " I 
will judge this cause." 

" The Lord Honain, the Lord Honain, 
listen to the Lord Honain." 

(e Speak, thou brawler ; of what hast 
thou to complain ?" said Honain to Ab- 
dallah. 

" May it please your highness," said 
Abdallah, in a whining voice, " I am the 
slave of your faithful servant, Ali : often 
have I had the honour of waiting on your 
highness. This young knave here, a 
beggar, has robbed me, while slumbering 
in a coffee-house, of a ring ; I have my 
witnesses to prove my slumbering. Tis 



136 THE WONDROUS TALE 

a fine emerald, may it please your high- 
ness, and doubly valuable to me as a love 
token from my Fatima. No consideration 
in the world could induce me to part with 
it ; and so being asleep — here are three 
honest men who will prove the sleep — 
comes this little vagabond, may it please 
your highness, who, while he pretends to 
offer me my coffee, takes him my finger, 
and slips off this precious ring, which he 
now wears upon his own beggarly paw, and 
will not restore to me without the basti- 
nado. " 

" Abdallah is a faithful slave, may it 
please your highness, and a Hadgee," said 
Ali, his master. 

" And what sayest thou, boy ?" in- 
quired Honain. 

" That this is a false knave, who lies 
as slaves ever will." 



OF ALROY. 137 

" Pithy, and perhaps true/' said Ho- 
nain. 

" You call me a slave, you young 
scoundrel?" exclaimed Abdallah ; ''shall 
I tell you what you are ? Why, your 
highness, do not listen to him a moment. 
It is a shame to bring such a creature 
into your presence ; for by the holy 
stone, and I am a Hadgee, I doubt little 
he is a Jew." 

Honain grew somewhat pale, and bit 
his lip. He was perhaps annoyed that he 
had interfered so publicly in behalf of so 
unpopular a character as a Hebrew, but 
he was unwilling to desert one whom a 
moment before he had resolved to be- 
friend, and he inquired of the youth 
where he had obtained the ring. 

" The ring was given to me by my 
dearest friend when I first set out upon 



138 THE WONDROUS TALE 

an arduous pilgrimage not yet completed. 
There is but one person in the world, 
except the donor, to whom I would part 
with it, and with that person I am unac- 
quainted. All this may seem impro- 
bable, but all this is true. I have truth 
alone to support me. I am destitute and 
friendless ; but I am not a beggar, nor 
will any suffering induce me to become 
one. Feeling from various circumstances 
utterly exhausted, I entered a coffee- 
house and laid down, it may have been 
to die. I could not sleep although my 
eyes were shut, and nothing would have 
roused me from a tremulous trance, which 
I thought was dying, but this plunderer 
here, who would not wait until death had 
permitted him quietly to possess himself 
of a jewel I value more than life." 
" Show me the jewel." 



OF ALROY. 139 

The youth held up his hand to Honain, 
who felt his pulse, and then took off the 
ring. 

" O my Fatima!" exclaimed Abdallah. 

" Silence, sir !" said Honain. " Page, 
call a jeweller." 

Honain examined the ring very atten- 
tively. Whether he were near-sighted, 
or whether the deceptive light of the 
covered bazaar prevented him from ex- 
amining it with ease, he certainly raised 
his hand to his brow, and for some mo- 
ments his countenance was invisible. 

The jeweller arrived, and pressing his 
hand to his heart, bowed before Honain. 

" Value this ring," said Honain in a 
low voice. 

The jeweller took the ring, viewed it 
in all directions with a scrutinizing glance, 
held it to the light, pressed it to his 



140 THE WONDROUS TALE 

tongue, turned it over and over and 
finally declared that he could not sell 
such a ring' under a thousand dirhems. 

" Whatever be the justice of the case/' 
said Honain to Abdallah, " art thou 
ready to part with this ring for a thou- 
sand dirhems ?" 

" Most certainly," said Abdallah. 

" And thou, lad, if the decision be in 
thy favour, wilt thou take for the ring 
double the worth at which the jeweller 
prizes it ?" 

" My lord, I have spoken the truth. 
I cannot part with that ring for the pa- 
lace of the Caliph." 

" The truth for once is triumphant," 
said Honain. - ■ Boy, the ring is thine ; 
and for thee, thou knave," turning to 
Abdallah, " liar, thief, and slanderer ! — 
for thee the bastinado 22 thou destined for 



OF ALROY. 141 

this innocent youth. Ibraham, see that 
he receives five hundred. Young pil- 
grim, thou art no longer destitute or 
friendless. Follow me to my palace." 



III. 

The arched chamber was of great size 
and beautiful proportion. The cieling, 
encrusted with green fretwork, and 
studded with silver stars, rested upon 
clustered columns of white and green mar- 
ble. In the centre of a variegated pave- 
ment of the same material, a fountain rose 
and fell into a green porphyry basin, and 
by the side of the fountain, upon a couch 
of silver, reposed Honain. 

He raised his eyes from the illuminated 
volume on which he had been long in- 



142 THE WONDROUS TALE 

tent, he clapped his hands, and a Nubian 
slave advanced, and folding- his arms upon 
his breast, bowed in silence before his 
lord. 

" How fares the Hebrew boy, Al- 
naschar ?" 

" Master, the fever has not returned. 
We gave him the potion ; he slumbered 
for many hours, and has now wakened, 
weak but well." 

" Let him rise and attend me." 

The Nubian disappeared. 

" There is nothing stranger than Sym- 
pathy/' soliloquized the physician of the 
Caliph, with a meditative air ; " allresolves 
itself into this principle, and I confess this 
learned doctor treats it deeply and well. 
An erudite spirit truly, and an eloquent 
pen ; yet he refines too much. 'Tis too 
scholastic. Observation will teach us 



OF ALROY. 143 

more than dogma. Meditating upon my 
passionate youth, I gathered wisdom. I 
have seen so much that I have ceased 
to wonder. Howe'er we doubt, there is 
a mystery beyond our penetration. And 
yet 'tis near our grasp. I sometimes 
deem a step, a single step would launch 
us into light. Here comes my patient. 
The rose has left his cheek, and his deep 
brow is wan and melancholy. Yet 'tis a 
glorious visage — Meditation's throne ; and 
Passion lingers in that languid eye. I 
know not why, a strong attraction draws 
me to this lone child. 

" Gentle stranger, how fares it with 
thee ?" 

" Very well, my lord. I come to thank 
thee for all thy goodness. My only 
thanks are words, and those too weak 
ones ; and yet the orphan's blessing is a 
treasure." 



144 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" You are an orphan then ?" 

" I have no parent but my father's 
God. " 

" And that God is—" 

" The God of Israel." 

" So I deemed. He is a Deity we all 
must honour, if he be the great Creator, 
whom we all allow." 

" He is what he is, and we are what 
we are — a fallen people, but faithful still." 

" Fidelity is strength." 

" Thy words are truth, and strength 
must triumph." 

" A prophecy !" 

" Many a prophet is little honoured, 
till the future proves his inspiration." 

" You are young and sanguine/' 

" So was my ancestor within the vale 
of Elah. But I speak unto a Moslemin, 
and this is foolishness." 



OF ALROY. 145 

" I have read something, and can take 
your drift. As for my faith, I believe in 
Truth, and wish all men to do the same. 
By the bye, might I inquire the name of 
him who is the inmate of my house ?" 

" They call me David." 

" David, you have a ring, an emerald 
cut with curious characters, Hebrew, I 
believe." 

"Tishere/' 

" A fine stone, and this inscription 
means — " 

" A simple legend — < Parted, but one'— 
the kind memorial of a brother's love." 

" Your brother T 

" I never had a brother." 

" I have a silly fancy for this ring : 
you hesitate. Search my palace, and 
choose the treasure that you deem its 
match." 

VOL. I. H 



146 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" Noble sir, the gem is little worth ; 
but were it such might deck a Caliph's 
brow, 'twere a poor recompense for all 
thy goodness. This ring is a trust rather 
than a possession, and, strange to say, 
although I cannot offer it to thee who 
may command, as thou hast saved, the 
life of its unhappy wearer, some stranger 
may cross my path to-morrow, and almost 
claim it as his own." 

" And that stranger is — " 

" The brother of the donor." 

" The brother of Jabaster ?" 

" Jabaster !" 

" Even so. I am that parted brother." 

" Great is the God of Israel ! Take the 
ring. But what is this ? the brother of 
Jabaster a turbaned chieftain ! — a Mosle- 
min ! Say, oh ! but say that thou hast not 
assumed their base belief, — say, oh ! but 



OF ALROY. 147 

say, that thou hast not become a traitor 
to our covenant, and I will bless the for- 
tunes of this hour." 

" I am false to no God. Calm thy- 
self, sweet youth. These are higher ques- 
tions than thy faint strength can master 
now. Another time we'll talk of this, my 
boy. At present of my brother and thy- 
self. He lives and prospers?" 

" He lives in faith ; the pious ever 
prosper." 

" A glorious dreamer ! Though our 
moods are different, I ever loved him. 
And thyself? Thou art not what thou 
seemest. Tell me all. Jabaster's friend 
can be no common mind. Thy form has 
heralded thy fame. Trust me." 

" I am Alroy." 

" What! the Prince of our Captivity?" 

" Even so." 

H 2 



148 THE WONDROUS VALE 

" The slayer of Alschiroch >" 

" Ay!" 

" My sympathy was prophetic. I 
loved thee from the first. And what dost 
thou here ? A price is set upon thy 
head : thou knowest it ?" 

" For the first time; but I am neither 
astonished nor alarmed. I am upon the 
Lord's business." 

" What wouldst thou?" 

" Free his people." 

"The pupil of Jabaster: I see it all. 
Another victim to his reveries. I'll save 
this boy. David, for thy name must not 
be sounded within this city, the Sun is 
dying. Let us to the terrace, and seek 
the solace of the twilight breeze." 



ALROY. 149 



IV. 



" What is the hour, David ?" 

u Near on midnight. I marvel if thy 
brother may read in the stars our happy 
meeting." 

" Men read that which they wish. He 
is a learned Cabalist." 

" But what we wish comes from 
above." 

" So they say. We make our for- 
tunes, and we call them Fate." 

"Yet the Voice sounded — the daughter 
of the Voice that summoned Samuel." 

" You have told me strange things ; I 
have heard stranger solved." 

" My faith is a rock." 

" On which you may split." 



150 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" Art thou a Sadducee?" 

" I am a man, who knows men." 

" You are learned, but different from 
Jabaster." 

" We are the same, though different. 
Day and Night are both portions of Time." 

" And thy portion is — " 

" Truth." 

" That is, light." 

" Yes ; so dazzling that it sometimes 
seems dark." 

" Like thy meaning." 

" You are young." 

" Is youth a defect ?" 

" No, the reverse. But we cannot eat 
the fruit while the tree is in blossom." 

« What fruit ?" 

" Knowledge." 

" I have studied." 

« What ?" 



OF ALROY. 151 

" All sacred things." 

" How know you that they are sacred >" 

" They come from God." 

" So does every thing. Is every thing 
sacred ?" 

" They are the deep expression of his 
will." 

" According toJabaster. Ask the man 
who prays in yonder mosque, and he will 
tell you that Jabaster's wrong." 

" After all, thou art a Moslemin ?" 

" No." 

"What then?" 

" I have told you — a man." 

" But what dost thou worship }" 

" What is worship?" 

" Adoration due from the creature to 
the Creator." 

" Which is he ?" 

" Our God." 



152 THE WONDROUS TALE 

"The God of Israel?" 

" Even so." 

" A frail minority, then, burn him in- 
cense." 

" We are the chosen people." 

" Chosen for scoffs, and scorns, and con- 
tumelies. Commend me to such choice." 

" We forgot him, before he chastened us." 

" Why did we ?" 

" Thou knowest the records of our holy 
race." 

" Yes, I know them : like all records, 
annals of blood." 

" Annals of victory, that will dawn 
again." 

" If redemption be but another name 
for carnage, I envy no Messiah." 

" Art thou Jabaster's brother ?" 

" So our mother was wont to say : a 
meek and blessed woman." 



ALROY. 153 

" Lord Honain, thou art rich and wise 
and powerful. Thy fellow-men speak of 
thee only with praise or fear, and both are 
cheering. Thou hast quitted our antique 
ark ; why — no matter. We'll not dis- 
cuss it. Tis something, if a stranger, at 
least thou art not a renegade. The world 
goes well with thee, my Lord Honain. 
But if instead of bows and blessings, thou, 
like thy brethren, wert greeted only with 
the cuff and curse ; if thou didst rise each 
morning only to feel existence was dis- 
honour, and to find thyself marked out 
among surrounding men as something foul 
and fatal : if it were thy lot, like theirs, 
at best to drag on a mean and dull career, 
hopeless and aimless, or with no other 
hope or aim but that which is degrading, 
and all this too with a keen sense of thy 
intrinsic worth, and deep conviction of 

H o 



154 THE WONDROUS TALE 

superior race ; why then perchance 
Honain might even discover 'twere worth 
a struggle to be free and honoured." 

" I pray your pardon, sir ; I thought 
you were Jabasters pupil, a dreaming 
student. I see you have a deep ambi- 
tion ." 

" I am a prince ; and I fain would be 
a prince without my fetters/' 

" Listen to me, Alroy/' said Honain 
in a low voice, and he placed his arm 
round his waist, " I am your friend. 
Our acquaintance is very brief : no mat- 
ter, I love you, I rescued you in injury, 
I tended you in sickness, even now your 
life is in my power, I would protect it 
with my own. You cannot doubt me. 
Our affections are not under our own 
controul ; and mine are yours. The 
sympathy between us is entire. You see 



OF ALROY. 1,55 

me, you see what 1 am : a Hebrew, 
though unknown, one of that despised, 
rejected, persecuted people, of whom you 
are the chief. I too would be free and 
honoured. Freedom and honour are 
mine, but I was my own Messiah. I 
quitted in good time our desperate cause, 
but I gave it a trial. Ask Jabaster how 
I fought. Youth could be my only ex- 
cuse for such indiscretion. I left this 
country, I studied, and resided among 
the Greeks. I returned from Constanti- 
nople with all their learning, some of 
their craft. No one knew me. I as- 
sumed their turban, and I am — the Lord 
Honain. Take my experience, child, and 
save yourself much sorrow. Turn your 
late adventure to good account. No one 
can recognize you here. I will introduce 
you among the highest as my child, by 



156 THE WONDROUS TALE 

some fair Greek. The world is before 
you. You may fight, you may love, you 
may revel . War, and women, and luxury, 
are all at your command. With your 
person and talents you may be Grand 
Vizier. Clear your head of nonsense. 
In the present disordered state of the em- 
pire, you may even carve yourself out a 
kingdom, infinitely more delightful than 
the barren land of milk and honey. I 
have seen it, child; a rocky wilder- 
ness, where I would not let my courser 
graze." 

He bent down, and fixed his eyes upon 
his companion with a scrutinizing glance. 
The moonlight fell upon the resolved vi- 
sage of the Prince of the Captivity. 

" Honain," he replied, pressing his 
hand, " I thank thee. Thou knowest 
not me, but still I thank thee." 



OF ALROY. 157 

" You are resolved then on destruc- 
tion/' 

" On glory, eternal glory." 

" Is it possible to succeed ?" 

" Is it possible to fail ?" 

" You are mad ?" 

" I am a believer." 

" Enough. Not another word. You 
have yet one chance. My brother has 
saddled your enterprize with a condition, 
and an impossible one. Gain the sceptre 
of Solomon, and I will agree to be your 
subject. You will waste a year in this 
frolic. You are young, and can afford it. 
I trust you will experience nothing worse 
than a loss of time, which is, however, 
very valuable. My duty will be, after all 
your sufferings, to send you forth on your 
adventures in good condition, and to pro- 
vide you means for a less toilsome pilgrim- 



158 THE WONDROUS TALE 

age than has hitherto been your lot. Trust 
me you will return to Bagdad to accept 
my offers. At present, the dews are de- 
scending, and we will return to our 
divan, and take some coffee." 



V. 



Some few days after this conversation 
on the terrace, as Alroy was reclining in 
a bower, in the beautiful garden of his 
host, meditating on the future, some one 
touched him on the back. He looked 
up. It was Honain. 

" Follow me," said the brother of Ja- 
baster. 

The prince rose, and followed him in 
silence. They entered the house, and, 
passing through the saloon already de- 



OF ALROY. 159 

scribed, they proceeded down a long gal- 
lery, which terminated in an arched flight 
of broad steps, leading to the river. A 
boat was fastened to the end of the stairs, 
floating on the blue line of the Tigris 
bright in the sun. 

Honain now gave to Alroy a velvet 
bag, which he requested him to carry, 
and then they descended the steps and 
entered the covered boat ; and, without 
any directions to the rower, they were 
soon skimming over the water. By the 
sound of passing vessels and the occa- 
sional shouts of the boatmen, Alroy, al- 
though he could observe nothing, was 
conscious that for some time their course 
lay through a principal thoroughfare of 
the city ; but by degrees the sounds be- 
came less frequent, and in time entirely 
died away, and all that caught his ear 



160 THE WONDROUS TALE 

was the regular and monotonous stroke of 
their own oar. 

At length, after the lapse of nearly an 
hour from their entrance, the boat stopped, 
and was moored against a quay. The 
curtains were withdrawn, and Honain 
and his companion disembarked. 

A low but very extensive building, 
painted in white and gold arabesque, and 
irregular but picturesque in form, with 
many small domes, and tall thin towers, 
rose amid groves of cypress on the bank 
of the broad and silent river. The rapid 
stream had carried them far from the city, 
which was visible, but distant. Around 
was no habitation, no human being. The 
opposite bank was occupied by enclosed 
gardens. Not even a boat passed. 

Honain, beckoning to Alroy to accom- 
pany him, but still silent, advanced to a 



OF ALROY. l6i 

small portal, and knocked. It was in- 
stantly opened by a single Nubian, who 
bowed reverently as the visitors passed 
him. They proceeded along a low and 
gloomy passage, covered with arches of 
fretwork, until they arrived at a door of 
tortoiseshell and mother of pearl. 23 Here 
Honain, who was in advance, turned 
round to Alroy, and said, " Whatever 
happen, and whoever may address you, 
as you value your life and mine, do not 
speak." 

The door opened, and they found them- 
selves in a vast and gorgeous hall. Pillars 
of many coloured marbles rose from a 
red and blue pavement of the same mate- 
rial, and supported a vaulted, circular, and 
highly-embossed roof of purple, scarlet 
and gold. 24 Around a fountain, which 
rose fifty feet in height from an immense 



162 THE WONDROUS TALE 

basin of lapiz-lazuli, and reclining on 
small yellow Barbary mats, was a group 
of Nubian eunuchs dressed in rich habits 
of scarlet and gold, 25 and armed with ivory 
battle-axes, the white handles worked 
in precious arabesque finely contrasting 
with the blue and brilliant blades. 

The commander of- the eunuch-guard 
rose on seeing Honain, and pressing his 
hand to his head, mouth, and heart, sa- 
luted him. The physician of the Caliph 
motioning Alroy to remain, advanced 
some paces in front of him, and entered 
into a whispering conversation with the 
eunuch. After a few minutes, this offi- 
cer resumed his seat, and Honain, beckon- 
ing to Alroy to rejoin him, crossed the 
hall. 

Passing through an open arch, they 
entered a quadrangular court of roses, 26 



OF ALROY. 163 

each bed of flowers surrounded by a 
stream of sparkling water, and floating 
like an enchanted islet upon a fairy 
ocean. The sound of the water and the 
sweetness of the flowers blended together, 
and produced a lulling sensation which 
nothing but his strong and strange cu- 
riosity might have enabled Alroy to re- 
sist. Proceeding along a cloister of light 
airy workmanship which connected the 
hall with the remainder of the buildings, 
they stood before a lofty and sumptuous 
portal. 

It was a monolite gate, thirty feet in 
height, formed of one block of green and 
red jasper, and cut into the fanciful un- 
dulating arch of the Saracens. The con- 
summate artist had seized the advantage 
afforded to him by the ruddy veins of 
the precious stone, and had formed them 



164 THE WONDROUS TALE 

in bold relief into two vast and sinuous 
serpents, which shot forth their crested 
heads and glittering eyes at Honain and 
his companion. 

The physician of the Caliph taking his 
dagger from his girdle, struck one of the 
heads of the serpents thrice. The massy 
portal opened with a whirl and a roar, 
and before them stood an Abyssinian 
giant, 27 holding in his leash a roaring lion. 

w Hush ! Haroun," said Honain to the 
animal, raising at the same time his arm, 
and the beast crouched in silence. " Wor- 
thy Morgargon, I bring you a remem- 
brance." The Abyssinian showed his 
tusks, larger and whiter than the lion's, 
as he grinningly received the tribute of 
the courtly Honain ; and he uttered a 
few uncouth sounds, but he could not 
speak, for he was a mute. 



OF ALROY. 165 

The jasper portal introduced the com- 
panions to a long and lofty and arched 
chamber, lighted by high windows of 
stained glass, hung with tapestry of silk 
and silver, covered with prodigious car- 
pets, and surrounded by immense couches. 
And thus through similar chambers they 
proceeded, in some of which were signs 
of recent habitation, until they arrived 
at another quadrangle nearly filled by a 
most singular fountain which rose from a 
basin of gold encrusted with pearls, and 
which was surrounded by figures of every 
rare quadruped 28 in the most costly ma- 
terials. Here a golden tiger with flaming 
eyes of ruby, and flowing stripes of opal, 
stole, after some bloody banquet, to the 
refreshing brink ; a cameleopard raised 
its slender neck of silver from the centre 
of a group of every inhabitant of the 



; 



166 THE WONDROUS TALE 

forest, and brilliant bands of monkeys 
glittering with precious stones, rested, in 
every variety of fantastic posture, on the 
margin of the basin. 

The fountain itself was a tree of gold 
and silver 29 spreading into innumerable 
branches, covered with every variety of 
curious birds, their plumage appropriately 
imitated by the corresponding tints of 
precious stones, and which warbled in 
beautiful melody as they poured forth 
from their bills the musical and refresh- 
ing element. 

It was with difficulty that Alroy could 
refrain from an admiring exclamation, 
but Honain, ever quick, turned to him, 
with his finger pressed on his mouth, and 
quitting the quadrangle, they entered the 
gardens. 

Lofty terraces, dark masses of cypress, 



OF ALROY. 167 

winding walks of acacia, in the distance 
an interminable paradise, and here and 
there a glittering pavilion and bright 
kiosk ! Its appearance on the river had 
not prepared Alroy for the extent of the 
palace itself. It seemed infinite, and it 
was evident that he had only viewed a 
very small portion of it. While they 
were moving on, there suddenly arose 
the sound of trumpets. The sound grew 
nearer and nearer, louder and louder : 
soon was heard the tramp of an approach- 
ing troop. Honain drew Alroy aside. 
A procession appeared advancing from a 
dark grove of cypress. Four hundred 
men led as many white blood-hounds 
with collars of gold and rubies. 30 Then 
came one hundred men, each with a 
hooded hawk. Then six horsemen in 
rich dresses. After them a single horse- 



168 THE WONDROUS TALE 

man, mounted on a steed, marked on its 
forehead with a star. 31 The rider was mid- 
dle aged, handsome, and dignified. He 
was plainly dressed, but the staff of his 
hunting spear was entirely of diamonds 
and the blade of gold. He was followed 
by a company of Nubian eunuchs, with 
their scarlet dresses and ivory battle- 
axes, and the procession closed. 

" The Caliph," whispered Honain, 
when they had passed, placing at the 
same time his finger on his lip, to pre- 
vent any inquiry. This was the first in- 
timation that had reached Alroy of what 
he had already suspected, that he was a 
visitor to the palace of the Commander of 
the Faithful. 

The companions turned down a wild 
and winding walk, which, after some 
time, brought them to a small and gently 



OF ALROY. 169 

sloping lawn, surrounded by cedar trees 
of great size. Upon the lawn was a 
kiosk, a long and many windowed build- 
ing, covered with blinds, and further 
screened by an overhanging roof. The 
kiosk was built of white and green mar- 
ble, and ascended by a flight of steps the 
length of the building, alternately of 
white and green marble, and nearly 
covered with rose trees. Honain as- 
cended these steps alone, and entered the 
kiosk. After a few minutes, he looked 
out from the blinds and beckoned to 
Alroy. David advanced, but Honain, 
fearful of some indiscretion, met him, and 
said to him in a low whisper between his 
teeth, " Remember you are deaf, a mute, 
and an eunuch." Alroy could scarcely 
refrain from smiling, and the Prince of 
the Captivity and the physician of the 
vol. 1. 1 



170 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Caliph entered the kiosk together. Two 
women, veiled, and two eunuchs of the 
guard received them in an ante-chamber. 
And then they passed into a room which 
ran nearly the whole length of the kiosk, 
opening on one side to the gardens, and 
on the other supported by an ivory wall 
with niches painted in green fresco, and 
in each niche a rose-tree. Each niche, 
also, was covered with an almost invi- 
sible golden grate, which confined a 
nightingale, and made him constant to 
the rose he loved. At the foot of each 
niche was a fountain, but instead of 
water, each basin was replenished with 
the purest quicksilver. 32 The roof of the 
kiosk was of mother-of-pearl, inlaid with 
tortoise-shell ; the pavement, a mosaic of 
rare marbles and precious stones, repre- 
senting the most delicious fruits, and the 



OF ALROY. 171 

most beautiful flowers. Over this pave- 
ment a Georgian page flung- at intervals 
refreshing perfumes. At the end of 
this elegant chamber was a divan of light 
green silk, embroidered with pearls, and 
covered with cushions of white satin and 
gold. Upon one of these cushions, in 
the middle of the divan, sat a lady, her 
eyes fixed in abstraction upon a volume 
of Persian poesy reclining on her knees, 
one hand playing with a rosary of pearls 
and emeralds/ 3 and the other holding a 
long gold chain, which imprisoned a 
white gazelle. 

The lady looked up as Honain and his 
companion entered. She was very young, 
as youthful as Alroy. Her long light 
brown hair, drawn off a high white fore- 
head covered with blue veins, fell braided 
with pearls over each shoulder. Her 

1 2 



172 THE WONDROUS TALE 

eyes were very large, and deeply blue. 
Her nose small, but high and aquiline. 
The fairness of her face was dazzling, 
and when she looked up and greeted 
Honain, her lustrous cheeks broke into 
dimples, which were more fascinating 
from their contrast with the general ex- 
pression of her countenance, which was 
haughty and derisive. The lady was 
dressed in a robe of crimson silk, girded 
round her waist by a green shawl, from 
which peeped forth the diamond hilt of a 
very small poignard. 34 Her round white 
arms looked infinitely small, as they oc- 
casionally flashed forth from their large 
loose hanging sleeves. One was covered 
with jewels, and the right arm was quite 
bare. 

Honain advanced, and bending, kissed 
the lady's proffered hand. Alroy fell 
into the back -ground. 



OF ALROY. 173 

" They told me that the Rose of the 
World drooped this morning," said the 
physician, bending- again as he smiled, 
" and her slave hastened at her command 
to tend her." 

" It was a south wind. The wind has 
changed, and the Rose of the World is 
better," replied the lady, laughing. 

Honain touched her pulse. 

" Irregular," said the physician. 

" Like myself," said the lady. " Is 
that a new slave ?" 

" A recent purchase, and a great bar- 
gain. He is good looking, has the ad- 
vantage of being deaf and dumb, and is 
harmless in every respect." 

" 'Tis a pity," replied the lady ; " it 
seems that all good-looking people are 
born to be useless. I, for instance." 

" Yet rumour whispers the reverse," 
remarked the physician. 



174 THE WONDROUS TALE 

ft How so ?" inquired the lady. 

" The young King of Karasme." 

(i Poh ! I have made up my mind to 
detest him. A barbarian !" 

" A hero !" 

(i Did you ever see him ?" 

" I have/' 

" Handsome ?" 

" An archangel." 

" And sumptuous ?" 

" Is he not a conqueror ? All the 
plunder of the world will be yours." 

" I am tired of magnificence. I built 
this kiosk to forget it," 

" It is not in the least degree splen- 
did," said Honain, looking round with a 
smile. 

" No," answered the lady, with a self- 
satisfied air; " here, at least, one can 
forget one has the misfortune to be a 
princess." 



OF ALROY. 175 

" It is certainly a great misfortune," 
said the physician. 

" And yet it must be the only tolera- 
ble lot," replied the lady. 

" Assuredly," replied Honain. 

" For our unhappy sex at least." 

" Very unhappy/' 

" If I were only a man !" 

M What a hero you would be !" 

" I should like to live in endless con- 
fusion." 

" I have not the least doubt of it." 

" Have you got me the books ?" eagerly 
inquired the Princess. 

" My slave bears them," replied Honain. 

* Let me see them directly." 

Honain took the bag from Alroy, and 
unfolded its contents — the very volumes 
of Greek romances which Ali, the mer- 
chant, had obtained for him. 



176 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" I am tired of poetry," said the Prin- 
cess, glancing over the costly volumes, 
and tossing them away. " I long to see 
the world." 

" You would soon be tired of that," re- 
plied the Physician. 

" I suppose common people are never 
tired," said the Princess. 

" Except with labour/' said the Phy- 
sician ; " care keeps them alive." 

" What is Care ?" asked the Princess, 
with a smile. 

" It is a god," replied the Physician, 
" invisible, but omnipotent. It steals 
the bloom from the cheek and lightness 
from the pulse — it takes away the appe- 
tite, and turns the hair grey." 

" It is no true divinity, then," replied 
the Princess, " but an idol we make our- 
selves. I am a sincere Moslemin, and 



OF ALROY 177 

will not worship it. Tell me some news, 
Honain ." 

u The young King of Karasme — * 

" Again ! the barbarian ! You are in 
his pay. I'll none of him. To leave one 
prison, and to be shut up in another — 
why do you remind me of it ? No, my 
dear Hakim, if I marry at all, I will 
marry to be free." 

" An impossibility," said Honain. 

" My mother was free till she was a 
queen and a slave. I intend to end as 
she began. You know what she 
was." 

Honain knew well, but he was too 
politic not to affect ignorance. 

" The daughter of a bandit," continued 
the Princess, " who fought by the side of 
her father. That is existence ! I must be 
a robber. Tis in the blood. I want my 

1 5 



178 THE WONDROUS TALE 

fate foretold, Honain. You are an as- 
trologer; do it." 

" I have already cast your nativity. 
Your star is a comet." 

"That augurs well; brilliant 'confu- 
sion and erratic splendor. I wish I were 
a star/' added the Princess in a deep 
rich voice, and with a pensive air ; * a 
star in the clear blue sky, beautiful and 
free. Honain, Honain, the gazelle has 
broken her chain, and is eating my 



roses/' 



Alroy rushed forward and seized the 
graceful truant. Honain shot him an 
anxious look ; the Princess received the 
chain from the hand of Alroy, and cast at 
him a scrutinizing glance. 

" What splendid eyes the poor beast 
has got !" exclaimed the Princess. 

" The gazelle ?" inquired the physician. 



OF ALROY. 179 

" No, your slave/' replied the Princess. 
" Why he blushes ! Were he not deaf as 
well as dumb, I could almost believe he 
understood me/' 

" He is very modest," replied Honain, 
rather alarmed ; " and is frightened at 
the liberty he has taken." 

" I like modesty," said the Princess ; 
"it is so interesting. I am modest ; 
don't you think so ?" 

" Certainly," said Honain. 

" And interesting ?" 

"Very." 

" I detest an interesting person. After 
all, there is nothing like plain dul- 
ness." 

" Nothing," said Honain. 

" The day flows on so serenely in such 
society." 

" It does," said Honain. 



180 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" No confusion ; no scenes." 

" None." 

" I make it a rule only to have ugly 
slaves." 

" You are quite right." 

" Honain, will you ever contradict me ? 
You know very well I have the hand- 
somest slaves in the world." 

c< Every one knows it." 

" And do you know, I have taken 
a very great fancy to your new purchase, 
who, according to your account, is emi- 
nently qualified for the post. Why, you 
don't agree with me !" 

"Why, yes ; I doubt not your Highness 
would find him eminently qualified, and 
certainly few things would give me 
greater pleasure than offering him for 
your acceptance ; but I got into such dis- 
grace by that late affair of the Circassian, 
that—" 



OFALROY. 181 

" Oh ! leave it to me, leave it to me/' 
said the Princess. 

" Certainly," said the Physician, turn- 
ing the conversation ; " and when the 
young King of Karasme arrives at Bag- 
dad, you can offer him to his majesty as 
a present." 

" Delightful ! and the King is really 
handsome and young as well as brave ; 
but has he any taste ?" 

u You have enough for both." 

" If he would but make war against the 
Greeks !" 

4 'Why so violent against the poor 
Greeks }" 

"You know they are Giaours. Be- 
sides, they might beat him, and then I 
should have the pleasure of being taken 
prisoner." 

" Delightful !" 



182 THE WONDROUS TALE 

ctf Charming ! to see Constantinople, 
and marry the Emperor/' 

" Marry the Emperor !" 

' ' To be sure. Of course he would fall 
in love with me." 

" Of course." 

i( And then — and then, I might conquer 
Paris." 

" Paris!" 

" You have been at Paris ?" 35 

"Yes.* 

" The men are shut up there," said the 
Princess, with a smile, " are they not ? 
and the women do what they like ?" 

"You will always do what you like," 
said Honain, rising. 

" You are going ?" 

" My visits must not be too long." 

" Farewell, dear Honain !" said the 
Princess with a melancholy air. " You 



OF ALROY. 183 

are the only person who has an idea in 
all Bagdad, and you leave me. A mi- 
serable lot is mine, to feel every thing, 
and be nothing. These books and flowers, 
these sweet birds, and this fair gazelle — 
ah ! poets may feign as they please, but 
how cheerfullly would I resign all these 
elegant consolations of- a captive life for 
one hour of freedom. I wrote some verses 
on myself, yesterday ; take them, and get 
them blazoned for me by the finest scribe 
in the city ; letters of silver on a violet 
ground with a fine flowing border ; I 
leave the design to you. Adieu ! Come 
hither, mute. 1 ' Alroy advanced to her 
beckon, and knelt. " There, take that 
rosary for thy master's sake, and those 
dark eyes of thine." 

The companions withdrew and reached 
their boat in silence. It was Sunset. 



184 THE WONDROUS TALE 

The musical and sonorous voice of the 
Muezzin resounded from the innumerable 
minarets of the splendid city. Honain 
drew back the curtains of the barque. 
Bagdad rose before them in huge masses 
of sumptuous dwellings, seated amid 
groves and gardens. An infinite popula- 
tion, summoned by the invigorating twi- 
light, poured forth in all directions. The 
glowing river was covered with sparkling 
caiques, the glittering terraces with showy 
groups. Splendour, and power, and lux- 
ury, and beauty, were arrayed before 
them in their most captivating forms, 
and the heart of Alroy responded to their 
magnificence. 

" A glorious vision !" said the Prince 
of the Captivity. 

" Very different to Hamadan," said 
the physician of the Caliph. 



OF ALROY. 185 

" To-day I have seen wonders," said 
Alroy. 

" The world is opening to you," said 
Honain. 

Alroy did not reply ; but, after some 
minutes, he said, in a hesitating voice, 
" Who was that lady ?" 

" The Princess Schirene," replied Ho- 
nain, " the favourite daughter of the 
Caliph. Her mother was a Georgian and 
a Giaour." 



II. 



The moonlight fell upon the figure of 
Alroy lying on a couch ; his countenance 
was hidden in his arm. He was motion- 
less, but did not sleep. 

He rose and paced the chamber with 



186 THE WONDROUS TALE 

agitated steps ; sometimes he stopped, and 
gazed on the pavement, fixed in abstrac- 
tion. He advanced to the window, and 
cooled his feverish brow in the midnight 
air. 

An hour passed away, and the young 
Prince of the Captivity remained fixed 
in the same position. Suddenly he turn- 
ed, dashed to a tripod of porphyry, and 
seizing a rosary of jewels, pressed it to 
his lips. 

cc The Spirit of my dreams, she comes 
at last, the form for which I have sighed 
and wept, the form which rose upon my 
radiant vision when I shut my eyes 
against the jarring shadows of this gloomy 
world. 

" Schirene ! Schirene ! here in this 
solitude I pour to thee the passion long 
stored up— the passion of my life, no 






OF ALROY. 187 

common life, a life full of deep feeling 
and creative thought. Oh ! beautiful, 
oh, more than beautiful, for thou to 
me art as a dream unbroken — why art 
thou not mine, why lose a moment in our 
glorious lives, and baulk our destiny of 
half its bliss ? 

" Fool, fool, hast thou forgotten ? The 
rapture of a prisoner in his cell, whose 
wild fancy for a moment belies his fet- 
ters ! The daughter of the Caliph and 
a — Jew ! 

" Give me my father's sceptre ! 

" A plague on talismans ! Oh ! I need 
no inspiration but her memory, no magic 
but her name. By heavens, I'll enter 
this glorious city a conqueror, or I'll 
die. 

" Why what is Life, for meditation 
mingles ever with my passion — why, 



188 THE WONDROUS TALE 

what is Life ! Throw accidents to the 
dogs, and tear off the painted mask of 
false society ! Here am I a hero ; with a 
mind that can devise all things, and a 
heart of superhuman daring, with youth, 
with vigour, with a glorious lineage, 
with a form that has made full many a 
lovely maiden of our tribe droop her 
fair head by Hamadan's sweet fount, and 
I am — nothing. 

" Out on Society ; 'twas not made for 
me. I'll form my own, and be the deity 
I sometimes feel. 

" We make our fortunes and we call 
them Fate. Thou saidst well, Honain. 
Most subtle Sadducee ! The saintly blood 
flowed in my fathers' veins, and they 
did nothing ; but I have an arm formed 
to wield a sceptre, and I will win 
one. 






OF ALROY. 189 

" I cannot doubt my triumph. Tri- 
umph is a part of my existence. I am 
born for glory, as a tree is born to bear 
its fruit, or to expand its flowers. The 
deed is done. Tis thought of, and 'tis 
done. Ill confront the greatest of my 
diademed ancestors, and in his tomb. 
Mighty Solomon ! he wedded Pharaoh's 
daughter. Hah ! what a future dawns 
upon my hope. An omen, a choice 
omen ! 

" Heaven and Earth are mingling to 
form my fortunes. My mournful youth 
I have so often cursed, I hail thee — thou 
wert a glorious preparation ; and when, 
feeling no sympathy with the life around 
me, I deemed myself a fool, I find I was 
a most peculiar being. By heavens, I 
am joyful ; for the first time in my life 
lam joyful. I could laugh, and fight^ 



190 THE WONDROUS TALE 

and drink. I am new-born ; I am an- 
other being ; I am mad ! 

" O ! Time, great Time, the world be- 
lies thy fame. It calls thee swift. Me 
thinks thou art wondrous slow. Fly on, 
great Time, and on thy coming wings 
bear me my sceptre ! 

" All is to be. It is a lowering thought. 
My fancy, like a bright and wearied 
bird, will sometimes flag and fall, and 
then I am lost. The young King of Ka- 
rasme, a youthful hero ! Would he had 
been Alschiroch ! My heart is sick even 
at the very name. Alas ! my trials have 
not yet begun. Jabaster warned me : 
good, sincere, Jabaster! His talisman 
presses on my frantic heart, and seems to 
warn me. I am in danger. Braggart to 
stand here, filling the careless air with 
idle words, while all is unaccomplished. 



OF ALROY. 191 

I grow dull. The young King of Ka- 
rasme ! Why, what am I compared to 
this same Prince ? Nothing, but in my 
thoughts. In the full bazaar, they would 
not deem me worthy even to hold his 
stirrup or his slipper Oh ! this con- 
test, this constant, bitter, never-ending 
contest between my fortune and my 
fancy ! Why do I exist ? or, if existing, 
why am I not recognized as I would be ? 
" Sweet Voice, that in Jabasters dis- 
tant cave descended from thy holy home 
above, and whispered consolation, breathe 
again ! Again breathe thy still sum- 
mons to my lonely ear, and chase away 
the thoughts that hover round me. 
Thoughts dark and doubtful, like fell 
birds of prey hovering around an expect- 
ed hero's fall, and gloating on their tri- 
umph o'er the brave. There is something 



192 THE WONDROUS TALE 

fatal in these crowded cities. Faith flou- 
rishes in solitude." 

He threw himself upon the couch, and, 
leaning down his head, seemed lost in 
meditation. He started up, and, seiz- 
ing his tablets, wrote upon them these 
words : — 

" Honain, I have been the whole night 
like David in the wilderness of Ziph ; 
but, by the aid of the Lord, I have con- 
quered. I fly from this dangerous city 
upon his business, which I have too much 
neglected. Attempt not to discover me, 
and accept my gratitude." 



OF ALROY. 193 



PART VI. 



I 



A scorching Sun, a blue and burning 
sky, on every side lofty ranges of black 
and barren mountains, dark ravines, deep 
caverns, unfathomable gorges ! 

A solitary being moved in the distance. 
Faint and toiling, a pilgrim slowly clam- 
bered up the steep and stony track. 

The sultry hours moved on, the pil- 
grim at length gained the summit of the 
mountain, a small and rugged table land 
strewn with huge masses of loose and 
heated rock. All around was desolation: 

VOL. I. K 



194 THE WONDROUS TALE 

no spring, no herbage ; the bird and 
the insect were alike mute. Yet still it 
was the summit : no loftier peaks frowned 
in the distance ; the pilgrim stopped, and 
breathed with more facility, and a faint 
smile played over his worn and solemn 
countenance. 

He rested a few minutes, he took from 
his wallet some locusts and wild honey, 
and a small skin of water. His meal was 
short as well as simple. An ardent de- 
sire to reach his place of destination be- 
fore night-fall, urged him to proceed. 
He soon passed over the table-land, and 
commenced the descent of the mountain. 
A straggling olive tree occasionally ap- 
peared, and then a group, and soon the 
groups swell into a grove. His way 
wound through the grateful and unac- 
customed shade. He emerged from the 



OF ALROY. 195 

grove, and found that he had proceeded 
down more than half the side of the 
mountain. It ended precipitously in a 
very dark and narrow ravine, formed on 
the other side by an opposite mountain, 
the lofty steep of which was crested by a 
city gently rising on a very gradual 
slope. 

Nothing could be conceived more bar- 
ren, wild, and terrible, than the sur- 
rounding scenery, unillumined by a sin- 
gle trace of culture. The city stood like 
the last gladiator in an amphitheatre of 
desolation. 

It was surrounded by a lofty turretted 
wall, of an architecture to which the pil- 
grim was unaccustomed : gates with draw- 
bridge and portcullis, square towers, and 
loop-holes for the archer. Sentinels, 
clothed in steel, and shining in the sun- 

K 2 



30 



196 THE WONDROUS TALE 

set, paced, at regular intervals, the cau- 
tious wall, and on a lofty tower a stand- 
ard waved, a snowy standard, with a red, 
red cross ! 

The Prince of the Captivity at length 
beheld the lost capital of his fathers 



II. 



A few months back and such a specta- 
cle would have called forth all the latent 
passion of Alroy ; but time and suffering, 
and sharp experience, had already some- 
what curbed the fiery spirit of the He- 
brew Prince. He gazed upon Jerusalem, 
he beheld the City of David garrisoned 
by the puissant warriors of Christendom, 
and threatened by the innumerable ar- 
mies of the Crescent. The two great 






OF ALROY. 197 

divisions of the world seemed contending 
for a prize, which he, a lonely wanderer, 
had crossed the desart to rescue. If his 
faith restrained him from doubting the 
possibility of his enterprize, he was at 
least deeply conscious that the world was 
a very different existence to what he had 
fancied amid the gardens of Hamadan 
and the rocks of Caucasus, and that if his 
purpose could be accomplished, it could 
only be effected by one means. Calm, 
perhaps somewhat depressed, but full of 
pious humiliation, and not deserted by 
holy hope, he descended into the Valley 
of Jehosaphat, and so slaking his thirst 
at Siloah, and mounting the opposite 
height, David Alroy entered Jerusalem 
by the gate of Sion. 37 

He had been instructed that the quarter 
of his people was portioned near this 



198 THE WONDROUS TALE 

entrance. He inquired the direction of 
the sentinel, who did not condescend to 
answer him. An old man in very shabby 
robes, who was passing, beckoned to him. 

" What want you, friend ?" inquired 
Alroy. 

" You were asking for the quarter of 
our people. You must be a stranger in- 
deed, in Jerusalem, to suppose that a 
Frank would speak to a Jew. You 
were lucky to get neither kicked nor 
cursed." 

" Kicked and cursed ! Why these 
dogs- — " 

" Hush ! hush ! for the love of God," 
said his new companion, very much 
alarmed. i( Have you lent money to their 
captain that you speak thus? In Jeru- 
salem our people speak only in a whis- 
per." 






OF ALROY. 199 

" No matter : the cure is not by words. 
Where is our quarter ?" 

" Was the like ever seen ! Why he 
speaks as if he were a Frank. I save 
him from having his head broken by a 
gauntlet, and " 

" My friend, I am tired. Our 
quarter ? ' 

" Whom may you want ?" 

« The chief Rabbi." 

" You bear letters to him ?" 

" What is that to you?" 

" Hush ! hush ! You don't know 
what Jerusalem is, young man. You 
must not think of going on in this way. 
Where do you come from ?" 

" Bagdad." 

" Bagdad ! Jerusalem is not Bagdad. 
A Turk is a brute, but a Christian is a 
demon." 



200 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" But our quarter, our quarter ?" 

" Hush ! hush ! You want the chief 
Rabbi ?" 

« Ay ! ay !" 

" Rabbi Zimri >» 

" It may be so. I neither know nor 
care." 

" Neither knows nor cares ! This will 
never do : you must not go on in this 
way at Jerusalem. You must not think 
of it." 

" Fellow, I see thou art a miserable 
prattler. Show me our quarter, and I 
will pay thee well — or be off." 

"Be off ! Art thou a Hebrew ? to 
say ' be off ' to any one. You come from 
Bagdad ! I'll tell you what — go back 
to Bagdad. You will never do for Jeru- 
salem." 

" Your grizzled beard protects you. 



OF ALROY 201 

Old fool, I am a pilgrim just arrived, 
wearied beyond expression, and you 
keep me here listening to your flat 
talk !" 

" Flat talk ! Why ! what would you >" 

" Lead me to the Rabbi Zimri — if that 
be his name." 

" If that be his name ! Why every 
one knows Rabbi Zimri, the chief Rabbi 
of Jerusalem, the successor of Aaron. 
We have our temple yet, say what they 
like. A very learned Doctor is Rabbi 
Zimri/' 

" Wretched driveller. I am ashamed 
to lose my patience with such a dotard." 

" Driveller ! dotard ! Why, who are 
you r 

" One you cannot comprehend. With- 
out another word, lead me to your 
chief." 

K 5 



202 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" Chief! you have not far to go. I 
know no one of the nation who holds 
his head higher than I do here, and they 
call me Zimri." 

" What, the chief Rabbi™ that very 
learned Doctor !" 

'* No less ; I thought you had heard 
of him." 

" Let us forget the past, good Zimri. 
When great men play the incognito, they 
must sometimes hear rough phrases. It 
is the Caliph's lot as well as yours. I 
am glad to make the acquaintance of so 
great a Doctor. Though young, and 
roughly habited, I have seen the world a 
little, and may offer next Sabbath in the 
Synagogue more dirrhems than you would 
perhaps suppose. Good and learned 
Zimri, I would be your guest/' 

" A very worshipful young man ! 



OF ALROY. 203 

And he speaks low and soft now ! But 

it was lucky I was at hand. Good 

what's your name ?" 

" David." 

ie A very honest name — good David. 
It was lucky I was at hand when you 
spoke to the sentinel, though. A Jew 
speak to a Frank, and a sentinel too ! 
Hah ! hah ! hah ! that is very good. 
How Rabbi Maimon will laugh ! Faith 
it was very lucky, now, was not it ?" 

" Indeed, most fortunate." 

" Well, that is candid ! Here ! this 
way. Tis not far. We number few, 
Sir, of our brethren here, but a better 
time will come — a better time will come." 

" I think so. This is your door ?" 

"A humble one. Jerusalem is not 
Bagdad, but you are welcome." 



204 THE WONDROUS TALE 



III. 

"King Pirgandicus 38 entered them/' 
said Rabbi Maimon, " but no one since." 

ce And when did he live ?'' inquired 
Alroy. 

" His reign is recorded in the Tal- 
mud/' answered Rabbi Zimri, " but in 
the Talmud there are no dates." 

" A long while ago ?" said Alroy. 

" Since the Captivity," answered Rabbi 
Maimon. 

" I doubt that," said Rabbi Zimri, " or 
why should he be called king ?" 

" Was he of the house of David ?" said 
Alroy. 

"Without doubt," said Rabbi Maimon ; 
" he was one of our greatest kings, and 
conquered Julius Csesar." 39 



OF ALROY. 205 

" His kingdom was in the northern- 
most parts of Africa," said Rabbi Zimri, 
l( and exists to this day, if we could but 
find it." 

" Ay, truly," added Rabbi Maimon, 
" the sceptre has never departed out of 
Judah ; and he rode always upon a white 
elephant." 

" Covered with cloth of gold," added 
Rabbi Zimri. 

" And he visited the Tombs of the 
Kings ?" 40 inquired Alroy. 

" Without doubt," said Rabbi Maimon. 
" The whole account is in the Talmud." 

" And no one can now find them ?" 

■" No one," replied Rabbi Zimri ; " but 
according to that learned Doctor, Moses 
Hallevy, they are in a valley in the Moun- 
tains of Lebanon, which was sealed up by 
the Archangel Michael." 

" The illustrious Doctor Abarbanel, of 



206 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Babylon/' said Rabbi Maimon, "gives 
one hundred and twenty reasons in his 
commentary on the Gemara to prove that 
they sunk under the earth at the taking 
of the Temple." 

" No one reasons like Abarbanel of 
Babylon," said Rabbi Zimri. 

" The great Rabbi Akiba, of Punde- 
bita, has answered them all/' said Rabbi 
Maimon, " and holds that they were 
taken up to Heaven." 

" And which is right ?" inquired Rabbi 
Zimri. 

" Neither," said Rabbi Maimon. 

" One hundred and twenty reasons 
are strong proof," said Rabbi Zimri. 

"The most learned and illustrious 
Doctor Aaron Mendola, of Granada," said 
Rabbi Maimon, " has shown that we 
must look for the tombs of the kings in 
the south of Spain/' 



OF ALROY. 207 

" All that Mendola writes is worth at- 
tention," said Rabbi Zimri. 

" Rabbi Hillel, 41 of Samaria, is worth two 
Mendolas any day," said Rabbi Maimon. 

" 'Tis a most learned Doctor," said 
Rabbi Zimri; " and what thinks he ?" 

" Hillel proves that there are two 
Tombs of the Kings," said Rabbi Maimon* 
" and that neither of them are the right 



ones." 



" What a learned Doctor !" exclaimed 
Rabbi Zimri. 

" And very satisfactory/' remarked 
Alrov. 

" These are high subjects," continued 
Maimon, his blear eyes twinkling with 
complacency. " Your guest, Rabbi 
Zimri, must read the treatise of the 
learned Shimei, of Damascus, on ' Effect- 
ing impossibilities/ " 

" That is a work !" exclaimed Zimri. 



208 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" I never slept for three nights after 
reading that work/' zaid Rabbi Maimon. 
"It contains twelve thousand five hun- 
dred and thirty-seven quotations from 
the Pentateuch, and not a single original 
observation ." 

" There were giants in those days," said 
Zimri ; u we are children now." 

'* The first chapter makes equal sense, 
read backward or forward," continued 
Rabbi Maimon. 

" Ichabod !" exclaimed Rabbi Zimri. 

" And the initial letter of every sec- 
tion is a cabalistical type of a king of 
Judah !" 

" The temple will yet be built," said 
Rabbi Zimri. 

" Ay, ay ! that is learning !" exclaimed 
Rabbi Maimon ; " but what is the great 
Treatise on Effecting Impossibilities to 
that profound, admirable, and — " 



OF ALROY. 209 

"Holy Rabbi !" said a youthful reader 
of the synagogue, who now entered, " the 
hour is at hand." 

" You don't say so ! Learned Mai- 
mon, I must to the synagogue. I could 
sit here all day listening to you. Come, 
David, the people await us." 

Zimri and Alroy quitted the house, and 
proceeded along the narrow hilly streets 
to the chief temple of the Hebrews 

" It grieves the venerable Maimon 
much that he cannot join us/' said Rabbi 
Zimri. " You have doubtless heard of 
him at Bagdad ; a most learned doctor/' 

Alroy bowed in silence. 

" He bears his years w r ell. You would 
hardly believe that he was my master." 

" I perceive that you inherit much of 
his erudition." 

" You are kind. If he have breathed 



210 THE WONDROUS TALE 

one year, Rabbi Maimon will be a hun- 
dred and ten next Passover." 

" I doubt it not." 

" When he is gathered to his fathers, a 
great light will be extinguished in Israel. 
You wanted to know something about the 
Tombs of the Kings ; I told you he was 
your man. How full he was ! His mind, 
sir, is an egg" 

" A somewhat ancient one. I fear his 
guidance will hardly bring me the en- 
viable fortune of King Pirgandicus." 

" Between ourselves, good David, talk- 
ing of King Pirgandicus, I cannot help 
fancying that the learned Maimon made 
a slight mistake. I hold Pirgandicus 
was only a prince. It was after the Cap- 
tivity, and I know no authority for any 
of our rulers since the destruction, as- 
suming a higher title. Clearly a prince, 



OF ALROY. 211 

eh ? But, though I would whisper it to 
no one but you, I think our worthy friend 
grows a little old. We should remember 
his years, sir. A hundred and ten next 
passover. 'Tis a great burthen." 

" Ay ! with his learning added, a very 
fearful burthen, indeed !" 

st You have been a week in Jerusalem, 
and have not yet visited our synagogue. 
It is not of cedar and ivory, but it is still 
a temple. This way. Is it only a week 
that you have been here ? Why, you 
look another man ! I shall never forget 
our first meeting : you did not know me. 
That was good, eh ? And when I told 
you I was the chief Rabbi Zimri,howyou 
changed ! You have quite regained your 
appetite. Ah ! 'tis pleasant to mix once 
more with our own people. To the left. 
So ! we must descend a little. We hold 



212 THE WONDROUS TALE 

our meeting's in an ancient cemetery. 
You have a finer temple, I warrant me, 
in Bagdad. Jerusalem is not Bagdad. 
But this has its conveniences. 'Tis safe, 
and we are not very rich, nor wish to 
seem so." 



i 



IV. 



A long passage brought them to a num- 
ber of small, square, low chambers, lead- 
ing into each other. 42 They were lighted 
by brass lamps, placed at intervals in 
vacant niches, that once held corpses, 
and which were now soiled by the smoky 
flame. Between two and three hundred 
individuals were assembled in these cham- 
bers, at first scarcely distinguishable by 
those who descended from the broad day- 



OF ALROY. 213 

light : but by degrees the eyesight became 
accustomed to the dim and vaporous at- 
mosphere, and Alroy recognized in the 
final and more illumined chamber a high 
cedar cabinet, the type of the ark, and 
which held the sacred vessels, and the 
sanctified copy of the law. 

Standing in lines, with their heads mys- 
tically covered, 43 the forlorn remnant of 
Israel, captives in their ancient city, 
avowed, in spite of all their sufferings, 
their fidelity to their God, and notwith- 
standing all the bitterness of hope de- 
layed, their faith in the fulfilment of his 
promises. Their simple service was com- 
pleted, their prayers were read, their 
responses made, their law exhibited, and 
their charitable offerings announced by 
their High Priest. After the service, the 
venerable Zimri, opening a volume of the 



214 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Talmud, and fortified by the opinions of 
all these illustrious and learned doctors, 
the heroes of his erudite conversations 
with the aged Maimon, expounded the 
law to the congregation of the people. 44 

" It is written/' said the Rabbi, " 'thou 
shalt have none other God but me.' 
Now know ye what our father Abraham 
said when Nimrod ordered him to worship 
fire ? ' Why not water,' answered Abra- 
ham, ' which can put out fire? why not the 
clouds, which can pour forth water ? why 
not the winds, which can produce clouds ? 
why not God, which can create winds ?' ' 

A murmur of approbation sounded 
throughout the congregation. 

Ci Eliezer," said Zimri, addressing him- 
self to a young Rabbi, " it is written, 
that he took a rib from Adam when he 
was asleep. Is God then a robber ?" 



OF ALROY. 215 

The young Rabbi looked puzzled, and 
cast his eyes on the ground. The con- 
gregation was very perplexed and a little 
alarmed. 

ff Is there no answer ?" said Zimri. 

" Rabbi," said a stranger, a tall, swar- 
thy African pilgrim, standing in a cor- 
ner, and enveloped in a red mantle, over 
which a lamp threw a flickering light. 
" Rabbi, some robbers broke into my 
house last night, and stole an earthen 
pipkin, but they left a golden vase in its 
stead/' 

"It is well said, it is well said," ex- 
claimed the congregation. The applause 
w T as loud. 

" Learned Zimri," continued the Afri- 
can, " it is written in the Gemara, that 
there was a youth in Jerusalem who fell 
in love with a beautiful damsel, and she 



21 6 THE WONDROUS TALE 

scorned him. And the youth was so 
stricken with his passion that he could 
not speak ; but when he beheld her, he 
looked at her imploringly, and she laugh- 
ed. And one day the youth, not know- 
ing what to do with himself, went out 
into the desart; and towards night he 
returned home, but the gates of the city 
were shut. And he went down into the 
valley of Jehosaphat, and entered the 
tomb of Absalom and slept ; 45 and he 
dreamed a dream : and next morning he 
came into the city smiling. And the 
maiden met him, and she said, c Is that 
thou ; art thou a laugher >' And he an- 
swered, ' Behold, yesterday being dis- 
consolate, I went out of the city into the 
desart, and I returned home, and the 
gates of the city were shut, and I went 
down into the valley of Jehosaphat, and 



OF ALROY. 217 

I entered the tomb of Absalom, and I 
slept, and I dreamed a dream, and ever 
since then I have laughed/ And the 
damsel said, ( Tell me thy dream/ And 
he answered and said, e I may not tell 
my dream only to my wife, for it regards 
her honour/ And the maiden grew sad 
and curious, and said, ' I am thy wife, 
tell me thy dream/ And straightforth 
they went and were married, and ever 
after they both laughed/ Now, learned 
Zimri, what means this tale, an idle jest 
for a master of the law, yet it is written 
by the greatest Doctor of the Captivity?" 

" It passeth my comprehension/' said 
the chief Rabbi. 

Rabbi Eliezer was silent ; the congre- 
gation groaned. 

" Now hear the interpretation," said 
the African. " The youth is our people 

VOL. I. L 



218 THE WONDROUS TALE 

and the damsel is our lost Sion, and the 
tomb of Absalom proves that salvation 
can only come from the house of David. 
Dost thou hear this, young man ?" said 
the African, coming forward, and laying 
his hand on Alroy, € ' I speak to thee, be- 
cause I have observed a deep attention in 
thy conduct/* 

The Prince of the Captivity started, 
and shot a glance at the dark visage be- 
fore him, but the glance read nothing. 
The upper part of the countenance of the 
African was half concealed by masses of 
dark matted hair, and the lower by his 
uncouth robes. A flashing eye was its 
only characteristic, which darted forth 
like lightning out of a black cloud. 

" Is my attention the only reason that 
induces you to address me ?" inquired 
Alroy. 



OF ALROY. 219 

" Whoever gave all his reasons ?" re- 
plied the African, with a laughing 
sneer. 

? I seek not to learn them. Suffice it, 
stranger, that how much soever you may 
mean, as much I can understand." 

e< Tis well : learned Zimri, is this thy 
pupil ? I congratulate thee. I will match 
him against the hopeful Eliezer." So 
saying, the lofty African stalked out of 
the chamber. The assembly also broke 
up. Alroy would willingly have imme- 
diately followed the African, and held 
some further and more private conversa- 
tion with him; but some minutes elapsed, 
owing to the officious attentions of Zimri, 
before he could escape ; and when he did, 
his search after the stranger was vain. 
He inquired among the congregation, but 
none knew the African. He was no 

l 2 



220 THE WONDROUS TALE 

man's guest, and no man's debtor, and 
apparently had never before been seen. 



V. 



The trumpet was sounding to close the 
gates, as Alroy passed the Sion entrance. 
The temptation was irresistible. He 
rushed out, and ran for more than one 
hundred yards without looking back, and 
when he did, he had the satisfaction of 
ascertaining that he was fairly shut out 
for the night. The Sun had set, still the 
Mount of Olives was flushed with the 
reflection of his dying beams, but Jeho- 
saphat at its feet was in deep shadow. 

He wandered among the mountains for 
some time, beholding Jerusalem from a 
hundred different points of view, and 



OF ALROY. 221 

watching* the single planets and cluster- 
ing* constellations that gradually burst 
into beauty or gathered into light. At 
length, somewhat exhausted, he descend- 
ed into the vale. The scanty rill of Siloah 46 
looked like a thread of silver winding in 
the moonlight. Some houseless wretches 
were slumbering' under the arch of its 
fountain. Several isolated tombs of con- 
siderable size 47 rose at the base of Olivet, 
and into the largest of these Alroy en- 
tered. He entered through a narrow pas- 
sage into a small square chamber. On 
each side was an empty sarcophagus of 
granite, one with its lid broken . Between 
these the Prince of the Captivity laid his 
robe, and, wearied by his ramble, soon 
soundly slept. 

After some hours he woke He fancied 
that he had been wakened by the sound 



222 THE WONDROUS TALE 

of voices. The chamber was not quite 
dark. A straggling moonbeam fought its 
way through an open fret-work pattern 
in the top of the tomb, and just revealed 
the dim interior. Suddenly a voice spoke 
— a strange and singular voice. 

" Brother, brother, the sounds of the 
night begin." 

Another voice answered, 

(( Brother, brother, I hear them, too." 

" The woman in labour \" 

-The thief at his craft!" 

" The sentinel's challenge !" 

" The murderer's step !" 

iC Oh ! the merry sounds of the night !" 

" Brother, brother, let us come forth 
and wander about the world." 

i( We have seen all things. I'll lie 
here and listen to the baying hound. 
Tis music for a tomb." 



OF ALROY. 223 

" Choice and rare. You are idle. I 
like to sport in the starry air. Our hours 
are few, they should be fair." 

" What shall we see, Heaven or Earth ?" 

" Hell for me, 'tis more amusing-/' 

" As for me, I am sick of Hades. » 

" Let us visit Solomon !" 

" In his unknown metropolis ?" 

" That will be rare." 

u But where, oh ! where ?" 

" Even a spirit cannot tell. But they 
say, but they say — I dare not whisper 
what they say." 

" Who told you ?" 

" No one. I overheard an Afrite whisp- 
ering to a female Ghoul he wanted to 
seduce." 

" Hah, hah ! hah, hah ! choice pair, 
choice pair ! We are more etherial." 

" She was a beauty in her way. Her 



224 THE WONDROUS TALE 

eyes were luminous, though somewhat 
dank, and her cheek tinged with carna- 
tion caught from infant blood/' 

" Oh ! gay, oh ! gay ; what said 
they ?" 

" He was a deserter without leave from 
Solomon's body-guard. The trull wrig- 
gled the secret out." 

" Tell me, kind brother." 

" 111 show, not tell/" 

" I pr'ythee tell me. 55 

" Well, then, well. In Genthesma's 
gloomy cave there is a river none has 
reached, and you must sail, and you must 
sail Brother !" 

" Ay." 

" Methinks I smell something too 
earthly." 

" What's that ?" 

" The breath of man/' 



OF ALROY. 0,9,5 

66 Scent more fatal than the morning 
air ! Away, away !" 



VI 



In the range of mountains that lead 
from Olivet to the river Jordan is the 
great cavern of Genthesma, a mighty 
excavation formed by the combined and 
immemorial work of Nature and of Art. 
For on the high basaltic columns are cut 
strange characters and unearthly forms/ 8 
and in many places the natural ornaments 
have been completed by the hands of the 
sculptor into symmetrical entablatures 
and fanciful capitals. The work, they 
say, of captive Dives and conquered 
Afrites, for the great king. 

It was midnight ; the cold full moon 

L 5 



226 THE WONDROUS TALE 

showered its brilliancy upon this narrow 
valley, shut in on all sides by black and 
barren mountains. A single being stood 
at the entrance of the cave. 

It was Alroy. Desperate and deter- 
mined, after listening to the two spirits 
in the tomb, he was resolved to penetrate 
the mysteries of Genthesma. He took 
from his girdle a flint and steel, with 
which he lighted a torch and then he 
entered. 

The cavern narrowed as he cautiously 
advanced, and soon he found himself at 
the head of an evidently artificial gallery. 
A crowd of bats rushed forward and ex- 
tinguished his torch. 49 He leant down to 
relight it, and in so doing observed that 
he trod upon an artificial pavement. 

The gallery was of great extent, with a 
gradual declination. 50 Being in a straight 



OF ALROY. 227 

line with the mouth of the cavern, 
the moonlit scene was lon£ visible, but 
Alroy on looking round now perceived 
that the exterior was shut out by the 
eminence that he had left behind him. 
The sides of the gallery were covered 
with strange and sculptured forms. 

The Prince of the Captivity proceeded 
along this gallery for nearly two hours. 
A distant murmur of falling water, which 
might have been distinguished nearly from 
the first, increased in sound as he advanced, 
and now, from the loud roar and dash at 
hand, he felt that he was on the brink of 
some cataract. It was very dark. His 
heart trembled. He felt his footing ere 
he ventured to advance. The spray sud- 
denly leaped forward, and extinguished 
his torch. His imminent danger filled 
him with terror, and he receded some 



228 THE WONDROUS TALE 

paces, but in vain endeavoured to re-il- 
lumine his torch, which was soaked with 
the water. 

His courage deserted him . Energy and 
exertion seemed hopeless. He was about 
to deliver himself up to despair, when an 
expanding lustre attracted his attention 
in the opposing gloom. 

A small and bright red cloud seemed 
sailing towards him. It opened, dis- 
charged from its bosom a silvery star, 
and dissolved again into darkness. But 
the star remained, the silvery star, and 
threw a long line of tremulous light upon 
the vast and raging rapid, which now, 
fleet and foaming, revealed itself on all 
sides to the eye of Alroy. 

The beautiful interposition in his fa- 
vour re-animated the adventurous pil- 
grim. A dark shadow in the fore- 



OF ALROY. 229 

ground, breaking the line of light shed 
by the star upon the waters, attracted his 
attention. He advanced, regained his 
former footing, and more nearly examined 
it. It was a boat, and in the boat, mute 
and immovable, sat one of those vast, sin- 
gular, and hideous forms, which he had 
observed sculptured on the walls of the 
gallery. 

David Alroy, committing his fortunes 
to the God of Israel, leapt into the boat. 



VII. 

And at the same moment the Afrite, 51 
for it was one of those dread beings, 
raised the oars, and the boat moved. The 
falling waters suddenly parted in the 
long line of the star's reflection, and the 



230 THE WONDROUS TALE 

barque glided through their high and 
severed masses. 

In this wise they proceeded for a few 
minutes, until they entered a beautiful 
and moonlit lake. In the distance was 
a mountainous country. Alroy examined 
his companion with a feeling of curiosity 
not unmixed with terror. It was re- 
markable that Alroy could never succeed 
in any way attracting his notice. The 
Afrite seemed totally unconscious of the 
presence of his passenger. At length 
the boat reached the opposite shore of 
the lake, and the Prince of the Captivity 
disembarked. 

He disembarked at the head of an 
avenue of colossal lions of red granite 52 
which extended far as the eye could 
reach, and which ascended the side of 
the mountain, which was cut into a flight 



OF ALROY. 231 

of magnificent steps. The easy ascent 
was in consequence soon accomplished, 
and Alroy proceeding along the avenue 
of lions, soon gained the summit of the 
mountain. 

To his infinite astonishment, he beheld 
Jerusalem. That strongly-marked locality 
could not be mistaken : at his feet was 
Jehosaphat, Kedron, Siloah : he stood 
upon Olivet ; before him was Sion. But 
in all other respects, how different was 
the landscape to the one he had gazed 
upon a few days back, for the first time ! 
The surrounding hills sparkled with vine- 
yards, and glowed with summer palaces, 
and voluptuous pavilions, and glorious 
gardens of pleasure. The city, extend- 
ing all over Mount Sion, was encompassed 
with a wall of white marble, with battle- 
ments of gold, a gorgeous mass of gates 



232 THE WONDROUS TALE 

and pillars, and gardened terraces, lofty 
piles of rarest materials, cedar, and ivory, 
and precious stones, and costly columns 
of the richest workmanship, and the most 
fanciful orders, capitals of the lotus and 
the palm, and flowing friezes of the olive 
and the vine. 

And in the front a mighty Temple 
rose, with inspiration in its very form, 
a Temple so vast, so sumptuous, there 
required no priest to tell us that no 
human hand planned that sublime mag- 
nificence ! 

" God of my fathers !" said Alroy, " I 
am a poor, weak thing, and my life has 
been a life of dreams and visions, and I 
have sometimes thought my brain lacked 
a sufficient master — where am I ? Do 
I sleep or live ? Am I a slumberer or a 
ghost ? This trial is too much." He 



OF ALROY. 233 

sank down, and hid his face in his hands : 
his over-exerted mind appeared to desert 
him ; he wept hysterically. 

Many minutes elapsed before Alroy 
grew composed. His wild bursts of weep- 
ing sank into sobs, and the sobs died off 
into sighs. And at length, calm from 
exhaustion, he again looked up, and lo ! the 
glorious city was no more ! Before him 
was a moon-lit plain, over which the 
avenue of lions still advanced, and ap- 
peared to terminate only in the moun- 
tainous distance. 

This limit, the Prince of the Captivity 
at length reached, and stood before 
a stupendous portal, cut out of the solid 
rock, four hundred feet in height, and 
supported by clusters of colossal Cary- 
atides. 53 Upon the portal were engraven 
some Hebrew characters, which, upon 



234 THE WONDROUS TALE 

examination, proved to be the same as 
those upon the talisman of Jabaster. And 
so taking from his bosom that all-precious 
and long-cherished deposit, David Alroy, 
in obedience to his instructions, pressed 
the signet against the gigantic portal. 

The portal opened with a crash of 
thunder louder than an earthquake. Pale, 
panting, and staggering, the Prince of 
the Captivity entered an illimitable hall, 
illumined by pendulous and stupendous 
balls of glowing metal. On each side of 
the hall, sitting on golden thrones, was 
ranged a line of kings, and as the pilgrim 
entered, the monarchs rose, and took off 
their diadems, and waved them thrice, 
and thrice repeated, in solemn chorus, 
" All hail, Alroy ! Hail to thee, brother 
King. Thy crown awaits thee !" 

The Prince of the Captivity stood 



OF ALROY. 235 

trembling, with his eyes fixed upon the 
ground, $nd leaning breathless against 
a column. And when at length he had 
a little recovered himself, and dared again 
to look up, he found the monarchs were 
reseated ; and, from their still and vacant 
visages, apparently unconscious of his 
presence. And this emboldened him, 
and so staring alternately at each side of 
the hall, but with a firm, perhaps des- 
perate step, Alroy advanced. 

And he came to two thrones which 
were set apart from the others in the 
middle of the hall. On one was seated a 
noble figure, far above the common 
stature, with arms folded and downcast 
eyes. His feet rested upon a broken 
sword, and a shivered sceptre, which told 
he was a monarch, in spite of his dis- 
crowned head. 



236 THE WONDROUS TALE 

And on the opposite throne was a ve- 
nerable personage, with a long flowing 
beard, and dressed in white raiment. 
His countenance was beautiful, although 
ancient. Age had stole on without its 
imperfections, and Time had only in- 
vested it with a sweet dignity and solemn 
grace. The countenance of the King 
was upraised with a seraphic gaze, and 
as he thus looked up on high, with eyes 
full of love, and thanksgiving, and praise, 
his consecrated fingers seemed to touch 
the trembling wires of a golden harp. 

And further on, and far above the rest, 
upon a throne that stretched across the 
hall, a most imperial presence straight- 
way flashed upon the startled vision of 
Alroy. Fifty steps of ivory, and each 
step guarded by golden lions, 54 led to a 
throne of jasper. A dazzling light blazed 



OF ALROY. 237 

forth from the glittering diadem and 
radiant countenance of him who sat upon 
the throne — one beautiful as a woman, 
but with the majesty of a god. And in 
one hand he held a seal, and in the other 
a sceptre. 

And when Alroy had reached the foot 
of the throne, he stopped, and his heart 
misgave him. And he prayed for some 
minutes in silent devotion, and without 
daring to look up, he mounted the first 
step of the throne, and the second, and 
the third, and so on, with slow and 
faltering feet, until he reached the forty- 
ninth step. 

The Prince of the Captivity raised his 
eyes. He stood before the monarch face 
to face. In vain Alroy attempted to at- 
tract his attention, or to fix his gaze. 
The large black eyes, full of supernatural 



i 



238 THE WONDROUS TALE 

lustre, appeared capable of piercing all 
things, and illuminating all things, but 
they flashed on without shedding a ray 
upon Alroy. 

Pale as a spectre, the pilgrim, whose 
pilgrimage seemed now on the point of 
completion, stood cold and trembling be- 
fore the object of all his desires, and all 
his labours. But he thought of his 
country, his people, and his God, and 
while his noiseless lips breathed the name 
of Jehovah, solemnly he put forth his 
arm, and with a gentle firmness grasped 
the unresisting sceptre of his great an- 
cestor. 

And as he seized it, the whole scene 
vanished from his sight ! 



OF ALROY. 239 



VIII. 

Hours or years might have passed 
away, as far as the sufferer was con- 
cerned, when Alroy again returned to 
self-consciousness. His eyes slowly open- 
ed, he cast around a vacant stare, he was 
lying in the Cavern of Genthesma. The 
moon had set, but the morn had not 
broken. A single star glittered over the 
brow of the black mountains. He faintly 
moved his limbs, he would have raised 
his hand to his bewildered brain, but 
found that it grasped a sceptre. The 
memory of the past returned to him. 
He tried to rise, and found that he was 



240 



THE WONDROUS TALE 



reposing in the arms of a human being. 
He turned his head— he met the anxious 
gaze of Jabaster ! 



OF ALROY. 241 



PART VII. 

I. 

" Your pace is troubled, uncle." 

" So is my mind/' 

" All may go well." 

" Miriam, we have seen the best. 
Prepare yourself for sorrow, gentle girl. 
I care not for myself, for I am old, and 
age makes heroes of us all. I have en- 
dured, and can endure more. As we ap- 
proach our limit it would appear our 
minds grow callous. I have seen my 
wealth, raised with the labours of a 

VOL. I. M 



242 THE WONDROUS TALE 

thoughtful life, vanish in a morn : my 
people, a fragile remnant, nevertheless a 
people, dispersed, or what is worse. I 
have wept for them, although no tear of 
selfish grief has tinged this withered 
cheek. And were I but alone— ay ! 
there's the pang. The solace of my 
days is now my sorrow." 

" Weep not for me, dear uncle. Ra- 
ther let us pray our God will not desert 
us." 

" We know not when we are well. 
Our hours stole tranquilly along, and 
then we murmured. Prospering, we 
murmured, and now we are rightly 
stricken. The legend of the past is 
Israel's bane. The past is a dream ; and 
in the waking present we should discard 
the enervating shadow. Why would we 
be free ? We murmured against cap- 



OF ALROY. 243 

tivity. This is captivity : this damp, 
dim cell, where we are brought to die. 

" Oh ! Youth, rash Youth, thy being- 
is Destruction. But yesterday a child — 
it seems but yesterday I nursed him in 
these arms, a thoughtless child — and now 
our house has fallen by his deeds. I'll 
not think of it ; 'twill make me mad." 

" Uncle, dearest, dearest uncle, we 
have lived together, and we will die to- 
gether, and both in love : but, but, I 
pray you,— speak no harsh word of 
David." 

" Shall I praise him ?" 

" Say nothing. What he has done, 
if done in grief, has been done all in 
honour. Would you that he had spared 
Alschiroch ?" 

" Never ! I would have struck him 
myself. Brave boy, he did his duty, and 

M 2 



244 THE WONDROUS TALE 

I — I, Miriam, thy uncle, at whom they 
wink behind his back and call him nig- 
gard, was I wanting in that hour of 
trial ? Was my treasure spared to save 
my people ? Did I shrink from all the 
toil and trouble of that time ? A trying 
time, my Miriam, but compared with 
this, the building of the Temple." 

" You were then what you have ever 
been, the best and wisest. And since our 
fathers' God did not desert us, even in 
that wilderness of wildest woe, I offer 
gratitude in present faith, and pay him 
for past mercies by my prayers for 
more." 

"Well, well; life must end. The 
hour approaches when we must meet our 
rulers and mock trial ; precious justice 
that begins in threats and ends in tor- 
ture. You are silent, Miriam." 



OF ALROY. 245 

" I am speaking* to my God/' 

" What is that noise ? A figure moves 
behind the dusky grate. Our gaoler. 
No, no, it is Caleb ! Faithful child, I 
fear you have perilled much." 

" I enter with authority, my Lord, 
and bear good tidings." 

" He smiles ! Is't possible ? Speak 
on, speak on !" 

" Alroy has captured the Harem of our 
governor, as they journeyed from Bagdad 
to this city, guarded by his choicest 
troops. And he has sent to offer that 
they shall be exchanged for you and for 
your household. And Hassan has an- 
swered that his women shall owe their 
freedom to nothing but his sword. But 
in the meantime it is agreed between him 
and the messenger of your nephew, that 
both companies of prisoners shall be 



246 THE WONDROUS TALE 

treated with all becoming' courtesy. 
You, therefore, are remanded to your 
palace, and the trumpet is now sounding 
before the great mosque to summon all 
the host against Alroy, whom Hassan has 
vowed to bring to Hamadan dead or 
alive." 

" The harem of the governor, guarded 
too by his choicest troops. Tis a great 
deed. He did remember us. Faithful 
boy ! The harem of the governor ! — his 
choicest troops ! 'Tis a very great deed. 
Methinks the Lord is with him. He has 
his great father's heart. Only think of 
David — a child ! I nursed him — often. 
Caleb ! Can this be David, our David, 
a child, a girl ! Yet he struck Alschiroch ! 
Miriam ! where is she ? Worthy Caleb, 
look to your mistress; she has fallen. 
Dead, quite dead. Fetch water. 'Tis 



OF ALROY. 047 

not very pure — but we shall be in our 
palace soon. The harem of the gover- 
nor ! I can't believe it. Sprinkle, 
sprinkle. David take them prisoners ! 
Why, when they pass, we are obliged to 
turn our heads, and dare not look. More 
water : Til rub her hand. Tis warmer ! 
Her eyes open ! Miriam, choice news, 
my darling ! The harem of the gover- 
nor ! — I'll not believe it !" 



II. 



" Once more within our walls, Caleb. 
Life is a miracle. I feel young again. 
This is home ; and yet I am a prisoner. 
You said the host were assembling ; he 
can have no chance. Think you, Caleb, 
he has any chance ? I hope he will die. 



248 THE WONDROUS TALE 

I would not have him taken. I fear their 
tortures. We will die too ; we will all 
die. Now I am out of that dungeon, 
methinks I even could fight. Is it true 
that he has joined with robbers ?" 

" I saw the messenger, and learnt that 
he first repaired to some bandits in the 
ruins in the desart. He had become ac- 
quainted with them in his pilgrimage. 
They say their leader is one of our 
people." 

" I am glad of that. He can eat with 
him. I would not have him eat unclean 
things with the Ishmaelites. ,, 

" Lord, sir ! our people gather to him 
from all quarters. Tis said Jabaster, the 
great Cabalist, has joined him from the 
mountains with ten thousand men." 

" The great Jabaster ! then there is 
some chance. I know Jabaster well. He 



OF ALROY. 24$ 

is too wise to join a desperate cause. Ar't 
sure about Jabaster ? Tis a great name, 
a very potent spirit. I have heard such 
things of that Jabaster, sir, would make 
you stare like Saul before the spirit ! 
Only think of our David, Caleb, making 
all this noise ! I am full of hope. I feel 
not like a prisoner. He beat the Harem 
guard, and now he has got Jabaster, 
he will beat them all." 

" The messenger told me he captured 
the Harem only to free his uncle and his 
sister." 

" He ever loved me ; I have done my 
duty to him ; I think I have. Jabaster ! 
why, man, the name is a spell ! There are 
men at Bagdad who will get up in the 
night to join Jabaster. I hope David will 
follow his counsels in all things. I would 

M 5 



250 THE WONDROUS TALE 

I had seen his servant, I could have sent 
him a message " 

" Lord, sir ! the Prince Alroy has no 
great need of councillors, I can tell you. 
'Tis said he bears the sceptre of great 
Solomon, which he himself obtained in 
the unknown tombs of Palestine/ 1 

" The sceptre of Solomon !— could I but 
believe it ! Tis an age of wonders ! 
Where are we ? Call for Miriam, I'll 
tell her this. Only think of David — a 
mere child — our David with the sceptre 
of Solomon ! and Jabaster too ! I have 
great faith. The Lord confound his 
enemies !" 



OF ALROY. &51 



III. 

" Gentle Rachel, I fear I trouble you ; 
sweet Beruna, I thank you for your zeal. 
I am better now ; the shock was great. 
These are strange tidings, maidens." 

" Yes, dear lady ! who would have 
thought of your brother turning out a 
captain ?" 

" I am sure I always thought he was 
the quietest person in the world/' said 
Beruna, " though he did kill Alschiroch." 

" One could never get a word out of 
him," said Rachel. 

" He was always moping alone/' said 
Beruna. 

" And when one spoke to him he 
always turned away," said Leah. 



252 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" Or blushed/' added Imra. 

" Well, for my part," said the beauti- 
ful Bathsheba, " I always thought Prince 
David was a genius. He had such beau- 
tiful eyes !" 

(( I hope he will conquer Hassan/' said 
Rachel. 

" So do I" said Beruna. 

" I wonder what he has done with the 
Harem/' said Leah. 

" I don't think he will dare to speak to 
them/' said Imra. 

" You are very much mistaken/' said 
Bathsheba. 

" Hark !" said Miriam. 

" Tis Hassan/' said Bathsheba ; "may 
he never return !'' 

The wild drum of the Seljuks sounded, 
then a flourish of their fierce trumpets, 
and soon the tramp of horse. Behind the 



OF ALROY. 253 

blinds of their chamber, Miriam and her 
maidens beheld the magnificent troop of 
turbaned horsemen, who, glittering* with 
splendid armour and bright shawls, and 
proudly bounding on their fiery steeds, 
now went forth to crush and conquer 
the only hope of Israel. Upon an Arab, 
darker than night, rode the superb Has- 
san, and as he passed the dwelling of his 
late prisoners, whether from the exulting 
anticipation of coming triumph, or from 
a soft suspicion that, behind that lattice, 
bright eyes and brilliant faces were gazing 
on his state, the haughty but handsome 
Seljuk flourished his scimetar over his 
head, as he threw his managed steed into 
attitudes that developed the skill of its 
rider. 

" He is handsomer than Alschiroch," 
said Rachel. 



£54 



THE WONDROUS TALE 



ie What a shawl !" said Beruna. 

" His scimetar was like lightning," said 
Leah. 

" And his steed like thunder/ 5 said 
Imra. 

" The evil eye fall on him \" said 
Bathsheba. 

" Lord, remember David!" exclaimed 
Miriam; " and all his afflictions \" 



IV. 



The deserted city of the wilderness 
presented a very different appearance to 
that which met the astonished gaze of 
Alroy when he first beheld its noble tur- 
rets, and wandered in its silent streets of 
palaces. 

Without the gates was pitched a nu- 



OF ALROY. 255 

merous camp of those low black tents 
common among the Kourds and Turk- 
mans ; the principal street was full of 
busy groups engaged in all the prepara- 
tions of warfare, and all the bustling ex- 
pedients of an irregular and adventurous 
life ; steeds were stalled in ruined cham- 
bers, and tall camels raised their still 
visages among the clustering columns, or 
crouched in kneeling tranquillity amid 
fallen statues and prostrate obelisks. 

Two months had scarcely elapsed since 
Alroy and Jabaster had sought Scherirah 
in his haunt, and announced to him their 
sacred mission. The callous heart of 
him, whose "mother was a Jewess," had 
yielded to their inspired annunciations. 
He embraced their cause with all the fer- 
vour of conversion, and his motley band 
were not long sceptical of a creed which, 



Q56 THE WONDROUS TALE 

while it assuredly offered danger and ad- 
venture, held out the prospects of wealth 
and even empire. From the city of the 
wilderness the new Messiah sent forth his 
messengers to the neighbouring cities to 
announce his advent to his brethren in 
captivity. The Hebrews, a proud and 
stiff-necked race, ever prone to rebellion, 
received the announcement of their fa- 
vourite Prince with transport. The de- 
scendant of David, and the slayer of 
Alschiroch, had double claims upon their 
confidence and allegiance, and the flower 
of the Hebrew youth in the neighbouring 
cities of the Caliphate repaired in crowds 
to pay their homage to the recovered 
sceptre of Solomon. 

The affair was at first treated by the 
government with contempt, and the sul- 
tan of the Seljuks contented himself with 



OF ALROY. 257 

setting a price upon the head of the mur- 
derer of his brother ; but when several 
cities had been placed under contribu- 
tion, and more than one Moslemin cara- 
van stopped and plundered in the name 
of the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of 
Jacob, orders were despatched from Bag- 
dad to the new governor of Hamadan, 
Hassan Subah, to suppress the robbers, 
or the rebels, and to send David Alroy 
dead or alive to the capital. 

The Hebrew malcontents were well ap- 
prised by their less adventurous, but still 
sympathizing, brethren of every thing 
that took place at the head-quarters of 
the enemy. Spies arrived on the same 
day at the city of the wilderness who in- 
formed Alroy that his uncle was thrown 
into a dungeon at Hamadan, and that a 
body of chosen troops were about to 



258 THE WONDROUS TALE 

escort a royal harem from Bagdad into 
Persia. 

Alroy attacked the escort in person, 
utterly discomfited them, and captured 
their charge. It proved to be the harem 
of the Governor of Hamadan, and if for 
a moment, the too sanguine fancy of the 
captor experienced a passing pang of dis- 
appointment, the prize at least obtained, 
as we have seen, the freedom and security 
of his dear, though distant, friends. This 
exploit precipitated the expedition which 
was preparing at Hamadan for his de- 
struction. The enraged Hassan Subah 
started from his divan, seized his sci- 
metar, and without waiting for the aux- 
iliaries he had summoned from the 
neighbouring chieftains, called to horse, 
and at the head of two thousand of the 
splendid Seljukian cavalry, hurried to 



OF ALROY. 259 

vindicate his love, and satiate his re- 
venge. 

Within the amphitheatre which he 
first entered as a prisoner, Alroy sat in 
council. On his right was Jabaster, Sche- 
rirah on his left. A youth, little his 
senior, but tall as a palm tree, and strong 
as a young lion, was the fourth captain. 
In the distance, some standing, some re- 
clining, were about fifty men completely 
armed. 

" Are the people numbered, Abner r" 
inquired Alroy of the youth. 

" Even so : three hundred effective 
horsemen, and two thousand footmen ; 
but the footmen lack arms." 

" The Lord will send them in good 
time," said Jabaster, " meanwhile let them 
continue to make javelins." 

" Trust in the Lord," murmured Sche- 



260 THE WONDROUS TALE 

rirah, bending his head, with his eyes fixed 
on the ground. 

A loud shout was heard throughout the 
city. Alroy started from his carpet. The 
messenger had returned. Pale and hag- 
gard, covered with sweat and sand, the 
faithful envoy was borne into the amphi- 
theatre almost upon the shoulders of the 
people. In vain the guard endeavoured 
to stem the passage of the multitude. 
They clambered up the tiers of arches, 
they filled the void and crumbling seats 
of the antique circus, they supported 
themselves upon each other's shoulders, 
they clung to the capitals of the lofty 
columns. The whole multitude had as- 
sembled to hear the intelligence ; the 
scene recalled the ancient purpose of 
the building, and Alroy and his fellow- 
warriors seemed like the gladiators of some 
old spectacle. 



OF ALROY. 2(31 

V Speak/* said Alroy, " speak the 
worst. No news can be bitter to those 
whom the Lord will avenge." 

f Ruler of Israel ! thus saith Hassan 
Subah," answered the messenger ; " my 
harem shall owe their freedom to nothing 
but my sword. I treat not with rebels, 
but I war not with age or woman ; and 
between Bostenay and his household on 
one side, and the prisoners of thy master 
on the other, let there be peace. Go, tell 
Alroy, I will seal it in his best blood. 
And lo ! thy uncle and thy sister are 
again in their palace." 

Alroy placed his hand for a moment 
to his eyes, and then instantly resuming 
his self-possession, he inquired as to the 
movements of the enemy. 

" I have crossed the desart on a swift 
dromedary 56 lent to me by Shelomi of the 



Q6<2 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Gate, whose heart is with our cause. I have 
not tarried, neither have I slept. Ere to- 
morrow's sunset, the Philistines will be 
here, led by Hassan Subah himself. The 
Lord of Hosts be with us ! Since we con- 
quered Canaan, Israel hath not struggled 
with such a power !" 

A murmur ran through the assembly. 
Men exchanged inquiring glances, and 
involuntarily pressed each other's arms. 

" The trial has come," said a middle- 
aged Hebrew, who had fought twenty 
years ago with Jabaster. 

" Let me die for the Ark !" said a 
young enthusiast of the band of Abner. 

" I thought we should get into a 
scrape," whispered Kisloch, the Kourd, to 
Calidas, the Indian. " What could have 
ever induced us to give up robbing in a 
quiet manner ?" 



OF ALROY. 263 

" And turn Jews !" said the Guebre, 
with a sneer. 

" Look at Scherirah," said the Negro, 
grinning. "If he is not kissing the 
sceptre of Solomon !" 

" I wish to heaven he had only hung 
Alroy the first time he met him/' said 
Calidas. 

" Sons of the Covenant !" exclaimed 
Alroy, " the Lord hath delivered them 
into our hands. To-morrow eve we 
march to Hamadan !" 

A cheer followed this exclamation. 

" It is written," said Jabaster, opening 
a volume, u e Lo ! I will defend this city, 
to save it, for mine own sake, and for my 
servant David's sake. 

" ' And it came to pass that night that 
the angel of the Lord went out, and smote 
in the camp of the Assyrians, an hundred 



264 THE WONDROUS TALE 

four score and five thousand : and when 
they arose early in the morning, behold ! 
they were all dead corpses.' 

" Now, as I was gazing upon the stars 
this morn, reading that celestial alphabet 57 
known to the true Cabalist, behold ! the 
star of the house of David and seven other 
stars moved, and met together, and 
formed into a circle. And the word they 
formed was a mystery to me ; but lo ! I 
have opened the book, and each star is 
the initial letter of each line of the 
Targum that I have now read to you. 
Therefore the fate of Sennacherib is the 
fate of Hassan Subah !" 

" Trust in him at all times, ye 
people; pour out your heart before 
him : God is a refuge for us. 
Selah r 

Suddenly a female form appeared upon 



OF ALROY. 265 

the very top of the amphitheatre, upon 
the slight remains of the uppermost tier, of 
which a solitary arch alone was left. The 
chorus instantly died away, every tongue 
was silent, every eye fixed. Hushed, mute, 
and immoveable, even Kisloch and his 
companions were appalled as they gazed 
upon Esther the Prophetess. 

Her eminent position, her imposing ac- 
tion, the flashing of her immense eyes, her 
beautiful, but awful countenance, her black 
hair, that hung almost to her knees, and 
the white light of the moon, just rising 
over the opposite side of the amphi- 
theatre, and which threw a silvery flash 
upon her form, and seemed to invest her 
with some miraculous emanation, while 
all beneath her were in deep gloom, all 
these circumstances combined, rendered 
her an object of universal interest and at- 

VOL. I. N 



266 THE WONDROUS TALE 

tention, while in a powerful, but very 
high voice, she thus addressed them. 

" They come, they come ! But will 
they go ? Lo ! hear ye this, O house of 
Jacob, which are called by the name of 
Israel, and are come forth out of the 
waters of Judah ! I hear their drum in 
the desart, and the voice of their 
trumpets is like the wind of Eve, but 
a decree hath gone forth, and it says, 
that a mortal shall be more precious 
than fine gold, yea, a man than the rich 
ore of Ophir. 

" They come, they come ! But will 
they go ? I see the flash of their scimi- 
tars, I mark the prancing of their cruel 
steeds ; but a decree hath gone forth, and 
it says, a gleaning shall be left among 
them, as in the shaking of the olive tree ; 
two or three berries on the top of the up- 



OF ALROY. 267 

permost bough ; four or five on the strag- 
gling branches. 

" They come, they come ! But will 
they go ? Lo ! a decree hath gone forth, 
and it says, Hamadan shall be to thee for 
a spoil, and desolation shall fall upon 
Babylon. And there shall the wild beasts 
of the desart lodge, and howling monsters 
shall fill their houses, and there shall the 
daughters of the ostrich dwell, and there 
shall the screech-owl pitch her tent, and 
there shall the night raven lay her eggs, 
and there shall the satyrs hold their 
revels. And wolves shall howl to one 
another in their palaces, and dragons in 
their voluptuous pavilions. Her time is 
near at hand, her days shall not be pro- 
longed, the reed and the lotus shall wither 
in her rivers, and the meadows by her 
canals shall be as the sands of the desart. 

N 2 



268 THE WONDROUS TALE 

For, is it a light thing that the Lord 
should send his servant to raise up the 
tribes of Jacob, and to restore the pre- 
served of Israel ? Sing, O heavens, and 
be joyful, O earth, and break forth into 
singing, O mountains, for the Lord hath 
comforted his people, and will have mercy 
upon his afflicted !" 

She ceased, she descended the precipi- 
tous side of the amphitheatre, with rapid 
steps, vaulting from tier to tier, and 
bounding with wonderful agility from 
one mass of ruin to the other. At length 
she reached the level ; and then, foaming 
and panting, she rushed to Alroy, threw 
herself upon the ground, embraced his 
feet, and wiped off the dust from his san- 
dals with her hair. 

The assembly broke into long and loud 
acclamations of supernatural confidence, 



OF ALROY. 269 

and sanguine enthusiasm. They beheld 
their Messiah wave his miraculous sceptre. 
They thought of Hassan Subah and his 
Seljuks only as of victims, and of to-mor- 
row only as of a day which was to com- 
mence a new aera of Triumph, Freedom, 
and Empire ! 



NOTES 



NOTES 

TO VOLUME THE FIRST. 



Note 1. — Page 7. 
We shall yet see an ass mount a ladder. 
Hebrew Proverb. 

Note 2. — Page 28. 
Our walls are hung with flowers you love. 

It is the custom of the Hebrews in many of their 
festivals, especially in the feast of the Tabernacle, to 
hang the walls of their chambers with garlands of 
flowers. 

Note 3.— Page 32. 
The traditionary tomb of Esther and Mordecai. 

" I accompanied the Priest through the town over 
much ruin and rubbish to an enclosed piece of 



274 NOTES. 

ground, rather more elevated than any in its imme- 
diate vicinity. In the centre was the Jewish tomb — 
a square building of brick, of a mosque-like form, 
with a rather elongated dome at the top. The door 
is in the ancient sepulchral fashion of the country, 
very small, consisting of a single stone of great 
thickness, and turning on its own pivots from one 
side. Its key is always in possession of the eldest of 
the Jews resident at Hamadan. Within the tomb 
are two sarcophagi, made of a very dark wood, 
carved with great intricacy of pattern and richness 
of twisted ornament, with a line of inscription in 
Hebrew, 1 '' &c. — Sir R. K. Porter's Travels in Persia, 
vol. ii. p. 107. 



Note 4.— Page 36. 

A marble fountain, the richly-carved cupola supported by twisted 
columns. 

The vast magnificence and elaborate fancy of the 
tombs and fountains is a remarkable feature of Ori- 
ental architecture. The Eastern nations devote to 
these structures the richest and the most durable 
materials. While the palaces of Asiatic monarchs 



NOTES. 275 

are in general built only of wood, painted in fresco, 
the rarest marbles are dedicated to the sepulchre and 
the spring, which are often richly gilt, and adorned 
even with precious stones. 



Note 5. — Page 38. 

The chorus of our maidens. 

It is still the custom for the women in the East to 
repair at Sunset in company to the fountain for their 
supply of water. In Egypt you may observe at 
twilight the women descending the banks of the Nile 
in procession from every town and village. Their 
graceful ^drapery, their long veils not concealing 
their flashing eyes, and the classical forms of their 
vases, render this a most picturesque and agreeable 
spectacle. 

Note 6. — Page 53. 

I describe the salty desarts of Persia, a locality 
which my tale required, but I have ventured to in- 
troduce here, and in the subsequent pages, the prin- 
cipal characteristics of the great Arabian desarts — 
the Mirage, the Simoom, the Gazelle, the Oasis. 



276 NOTES. 

Note 7. — Page 62. 
Jackals and martin-cat. 

At night-fall, especially in Asia Minor, the lonely 
horseman will often meet the jackals at their evening 
prowl. Their moaning is often heard during the 
night. I remember, when becalmed off Troy, the 
most terrible and singular screams were heard at in- 
tervals throughout the night, from a forest on the 
opposite shore, which a Greek sailor assured me pro- 
ceeded from a martin-cat, which had probably found 
the carcass of some horse. 

Note 8.— Page 67. 

Elburx, or Elborus, the highest range of the 
Caucasus. 

Note 9.— Page 68. 
A cornelian talisman covered with strange characters. 

Talismans have not in any degree lost their influ- 
ence in the East. Most that I have seen have been 



NOTES. 277 

cut upon cornelian. A very precious one of this na- 
ture, obtained at great cost and peril, of the most 
celebrated Sorcerer in Cairo, lies at this moment by 
my side. It secures to its possessor a constancy of 
good fortune. Unfortunately its present holder is 
the exception that proves the rule. 



Note 10.— Page 70. 

A circular and brazen table, sculptured with strange charac- 
ters and mysterious figures ; near it was a couch on which 
lie several volumes. 

A cabalistic table, perhaps a zodiac. The books 
were doubtless Sepher Happeliah, the Book of Won- 
ders ; Sepher Hakkaneh, the Book of the Pen ; and 
Sepher Habbahir, the Book of Light. This last un- 
folds the most sublime mysteries. 



Note.— Page 71. 

Answered the Cabalist. 

" Simeon ben Jochai, who flourished in the second 
century, and was a disciple of Akibha, is called by 
the Jews, the Prince of the Cabalists. After the 



278 NOTES. 

suppression of the sedition, in which his master had 
been so unsuccessful, he concealed himself in a cave, 
where, according to the Jewish historians, he received 
revelations, which he afterwards delivered to his 
disciples, and which they carefully preserved in the 
book called Sohar. His master Akibha, who lived 
soon after the destruction of Jerusalem, was the 
author of the famous book Jesirah, quoted by the 
Jews as of Divine authority. When Akibha was far 
advanced in life appeared the famous impostor Bar- 
chochebas, who, under the character of the Messiah, 
promised to deliver his countrymen from the power 
of the Emperor Adrian. Akibha espoused his cause, 
and afforded him the protection and support of his 
name, and an army of two hundred thousand men re- 
paired to his standard. The Romans at first slighted 
the insurrection ; but when they found the insur- 
gents spread slaughter and rapine wherever they 
came, they sent out a military force against them. 
At first, the issue of the contest was doubtful. The 
Messiah himself was not taken until the end of four 
years." — Enfield ; Philosophy of the Jews, vol. ii. 

" Two methods of instruction were in use among 
the Jews ; the one public, or exoteric ; the other 



NOTES. 279 

secret, or esoteric. The exoteric doctrine was that 
which was openly taught the people from the law of 
Moses, and the traditions of the fathers. The eso- 
teric was that which treated of the mysteries of the 
Divine nature, and other sublime subjects, and was 
known by the name of the Cabbala. The latter was 
after the manner of the Pythagorean and Egyptian 
mysteries, taught only to certain persons, who were 
bound, under the most solemn anathema, not to 
divulge it. Concerning the miraculous origin and 
preservation of the Cabbala, the Jews relate many 
marvellous tales. They derive these mysteries from 
Adam ; and assert, that while the first man was in 
Paradise, the angel Rasiel brought him a book from 
Heaven, which contained the doctrines of heavenly 
wisdom, and that when Adam received this book, 
angels came down to him to learn its contents, but 
that he refused to admit them to the knowledge of 
sacred things entrusted to him alone ; that after the 
fall, this book was taken back into Heaven ; that 
after many prayers and tears God restored it to 
Adam, from whom it passed to Seth. In the dege- 
nerate age before the flood, this book was lost, and 
the mysteries it contained almost forgotten ; but they 



280 NOTES. 

were restored by special revelation to Abraham, who 
committed them to writing in the book Jezirah." — 
Vid. Enfield, vol. ii. p. 219. 

" The Hebrew word Cabala, 7 ' says Dom Calmet, 
" signifies tradition, and the Rabbins, who are named 
Cabalists, apply themselves principally to the combi- 
nation of certain words, numbers, and letters, by the 
means of which they boasted they could reveal the 
future, and penetrate the sense of the most difficult 
passages of Scripture. This science does not appear 
to have any fixed principles, but depends upon cer- 
tain ancient traditions, whence its name Cabala. 
The Cabalists have a great number of names which 
they style sacred, by means of which they raise spirits, 
and affect to obtain supernatural intelligence." — See 
Calmet, art. Cabala. 

" We spake before,' 1 says Lightfoot, " of the com- 
monness of Magick among them, one singular means 
whereby they kept their own in delusion, and where- 
by they affronted ours. The general expectation of 
the nation of Messias coming when he did, had this 
double and contrary effect, that it forwarded those that 
belonged to God to believe and receive the Gospel ; 
and those that did not, it gave encouragement to some to 



NOTES. 281 

take upon them they were Christ, or some great pro- 
phet, and to others it gave some persuasion to be de- 
luded by them. These deceivers dealt most of them 
with Magick, and that cheat ended not when Jeru- 
salem ended, though one would have thought that 
had been a fair term of not further expecting Mes- 
sias ; but since the people were willing to be deceived 
by such expectation, there rose up deluders still that 
were willing to deceive them." — Lightfoot, vol. ii. 
p. 371. 

For many curious details of the Cabalistical 
Magic, Vid. Basnage, vol. v. p. 384, &c. 



Note 11. — Page 75. 
Read the stars no longer. 

" The modern Jews," says Basnage, " have a 
great idea of the influence of the stars." Vol. iv. p. 
454. But astrology was most prevalent among the 
Babylonian Rabbins, of whom Jabaster was one. 
Living in the ancient land of the Chaldeans, these 
sacred sages imbibed a taste for the mystic lore 
of their predecessors. The stars moved, and formed 



282 NOTES. 

letters and lines, when consulted by any of the high- 
initiated of the Cabalists. This they styled the 
Celestial Alphabet. 

Note 12. — Page 85. 
The Daughter of the Voice. 
" Both the Talmudick and the latter Rabbins," 
says Lightfoot, " make frequent mention of Bath 
Kol, or Filia Vocis, or an echoing voice which served 
under the second temple for their utmost refuge of 
revelation. For when Urim and Thummim, the 
oracle was ceased, and prophecy was decayed 
and gone; they had, as they say, certain strange 
and extraordinary voices upon certain extraordinary 
occasions, which were their warnings and advertise- 
ments in some special matters. Infinite instances 
of this might be adduced, if they might be believed. 
Now here it may be questioned, why they called 
it Bath Kol, the daughter of a voice, and not a 
voice itself ? If the strictness of the Hebrew word 
Bath be to be stood upon, which always it is not, it 
may be answered, that it is called the Daughter of a 
Voice in relation to the oracles of Urim and Thummim. 
For whereas that was a voice given from off the 



NOTES. 283 

mercy seat, within the vail, and this, upon the decay 
of that oracle, came as it were in its place, it might 
not unfitly or improperly be called a daughter, or 
successor of that voice. " — Lightfoot, vol. i. p. 
485, 486. 

Consult also the learned Doctor, vol. ii. p. 128, 
129 : " It was used for a testimony from heaven, 
but was indeed performed by magic art." 



Note 13.— Page 97. 

The walls and turrets of an extensive city. 

In Persia, and the countries of the Tigris and 
Euphrates, the traveller sometimes arrives at deserted 
cities of great magnificence and antiquity. Such, 
for instance, is the city of Anneh. I suppose Alroy 
to have entered one of the deserted capitals of the 
Seleucidae. They are in general the haunt of bandits. 

Note 14.— Page 109. 
Punctured his arm. 
From a story told by an Arab. 



284 NOTES. 



Note 15. — Page 115. 

The pilgrim could no longer sustain himself, 

I have endeavoured to paint the simoom as I 
myself experienced it in the desarts of Upper Egypt. 
My friend and fellow traveller, Mr. Clay, has, 
I venture to state, not forgotten the awful day. 

Note 16.— Page 119. 
By the holy stone. 

The Caaba. — The Caaba is the same to the Maho- 
medan, as the Holy Sepulchre to the Christian. It 
is the most unseemly, but the most sacred, part of the 
mosque at Mecca, and is a small, square, stone 
building. 

Note 17.— Page 121. 
/ am a Hakim. 

i. e. Physician, an almost sacred character in the 
East. As all Englishmen travel with medicine 
chests, the Turks are not to be wondered at for 
considering us physicians. 



NOTES. 285 

Note 18.— Page 123. 
The evil eye fall on him ! 

The superstition of the Evil Eye is well known, 
and is prevalent throughout the Levant. 

Note 19. — Page 126. 
Threw their wanton jer reeds in the air. 

The Persians are more famous for throwing the 
jerreed than any other nation. A Persian gentleman, 
while riding quietly by your side, will suddenly dash 
off at full gallop, then suddenly check his horse, and 
take a long aim with his lance with admirable pre- 
cision. I should doubt, however, whether he could 
hurl a lance a greater distance, or with greater force 
and effect, than a Nubian, who will fix a mark at 
sixty yards with his javelin. 

Note 20.~Page 127. 

Some pounded coffee. 

The origin of the use of coffee is obscure; but there 
is great reason to believe that it had not been intro- 



286 NOTES. 

duced in the time of Alroy. When we consider that 
the life of an Oriental at the present day mainly 
consists in drinking coffee and smoking tobacco, we 
cannot resist from asking ourselves, " What did he 
do before either of these comparatively modern in- 
ventions was discovered ?" For a long time, I was 
inclined to suspect that tobacco might have been in 
use in Asia before it was introduced into Europe ; 
but a passage in old Sandys, in which he mentions 
the wretched tobacco smoked in Turkey, and ac- 
counts for it by that country being supplied by 
" the dregs of our markets," demonstrates, that in his 
time, there was no native growth in Asia. Yet the 
choicest tobaccos are now grown on the coast of 
Syria, the real Levant. But did the Asiatics smoke 
any other plant or substance before tobacco? In 
Syria, at the present day, they smoke a plant called 
timbac ; the Chinese smoke opium ; the artificial 
preparations for the hookah are known to all Indians. 
I believe, however, that these are all refinements, 
and for this reason, that in the classic writers, who 
were as well acquainted with the Oriental nations as 
ourselves, we find no allusion to the practice of 
smoking. The anachronism of the pipe I have not 



NOTES. 287 

therefore ventured to commit, and that of coffee will, 
I trust, be pardoned. See a short Essay on Oriental 
Smoking in the New Monthly Magazine for Septem- 
ber, 1832, for an account of the Eastern tobaccos. 



Note 21.— Page 127, 

Wilder gestures of the dancing girls. 

These dancing girls abound throughout Asia. 
The most famous are the Alwyn of Egypt, and the 
Nautch of India. These last are a caste, the first 
only a profession. 

Note 22.— Page 140. 

For thee the bastinado, 

The bastinado is the common punishment of the 
East, and an effective and dreaded one. It is admi- 
nistered on the soles of the feet, the instrument 
a long cane or palm branch. Public executions are 
very rare. 



288 NOTES. 

Note 23. -Page 161. 
A door of tortoise-shell and mother -6' -pearl. 

This elegant mode of inlay, common in Oriental 
palaces, and may be observed also in Alhambra, at 
Granada. 



Note 24.— Page 161. 

A vaulted, circular, and highly embossed roof, of purple, 
scarlet, and gold* 

In the very first style of Saracenic architecture. 
See the Hall of the Ambassadors in Alhambra, and 
many other chambers in that exquisite creation. 



Note 25.— Page 162. 

Nubian eunuchs dressed in rich habits of scarlet and gold. 

Thus the guard of Nubian Eunuchs of the present 
Pacha of Egypt, Mehemet AH, or rather Caliph, a 
title which he wishes to assume. They ride upon 
white horses. 



NOTES. 289 

Note 26. — Page 162. 

A quadrangular court of roses. 

So in Alhambra, " The Court of Myrtles," 
leading to the Court of Columns, wherein is the fa- 
mous Fountain of Lions. 

Note 27.— Page 164. 
An Abyssinian giant. 

A giant is still a common appendage to an Ori- 
ental court even at the present day. See a very 
amusing story in the picturesque " Persian Sketches 1 ' 
of that famous elchee, Sir John Malcolm. 

Note 28. — Page 165. 

Surrounded by figures of every rare quadruped. 

" The hall of audience," says Gibbon, from Car- 
donne, speaking of the magnificence of the Saracen 
of Cordova, " was encrusted with gold and pearls, 
and a great basin in the centre was surrounded 
with the curious and costly figures of birds and quad- 
rupeds." — Decline and Fall, vol. x. p. 39. 

VOL. i. o 



290 NOTES. 

Note 29 Page 166. 

A tree of gold and silver. 

" Among the other spectacles of rare and stupen- 
dous luxury, was a tree of gold and silver, spreading 
into eighteen large branches, on which, and on the 
lesser boughs, sat a variety of birds made of the same 
precious metals, as well as the leaves of the tree. 
While the machinery effected spontaneous motions, 
the several birds warbled their natural harmony." — 
Gibbon, vol. x. p. 38. from Abulfeda, describing 
the court of the Caliphs of Bagdad in the decline of 
their power. 

Note 30.— Page 167. 

Four hundred men led as many white bloodhounds, with collars 
of gold and rubies. 
I have somewhere read of an Indian or Persian 
monarch whose coursing was conducted in this gor- 
geous style : if I remember right, it was Mahmoud 
the Gaznevide. 

Note 31.— Page 168. 
A steed marked on its forehead with a star. 
The sacred steed of Solomon. 



NOTES. 291 



Note 32.— Page 170. 

Instead of water, each basin was replenished with the purest 
quicksilver. 

" In a lofty pavilion of the gardens, one of those 
basins and fountains so delightful in a sultry climate, 
was replenished, not with water, but with the purest 
quicksilver." — Gibbon, vol. x. from Cardonne. 



Note 33.— Page 171. 
Playing with a rosary of pearls and emeralds. 

Moslemin of rank are never without the rosary, 
sometimes of amber and rare woods, sometimes of 
jewels. The most esteemed is of that peculiar sub- 
stance called Mecca wood. 



Note 34 Page 172. 

The diamond hilt of a very small poignard. 

The insignia of a royal female. 

o 2 



Q9% NOTES. 

Note 35.— Page 182. 
You have been at Paris. 

Paris was known to the Orientals at this time as a 
city of considerable luxury and importance. The 
embassy from Haroun Alraschid to Charlemagne at 
an earlier date, is of course recollected. 

Note 36.— Page 196. 

At length beholds the lost capital of his fathers. 

The finest view of Jerusalem is from the Mount of 
Olives. It is little altered since the period when 
David Alroy is supposed to have gazed upon it, but 
it is enriched by the splendid Mosque of Omar, built 
by the Moslemin conquerors on the supposed site of 
the temple, and which, with its gardens, and arcades, 
and courts and fountains, may fairly be described as 
the most imposing of Moslemin fanes. I endea- 
voured to enter it at the hazard of my life. I was 
detected, and surrounded by a crowd of turbaned 
fanatics, and escaped with difficulty ; but I saw 
enough to feel that minute inspection would not belie 



NOTES. 293 

the general character I formed of it from the Mount 
of Olives. I caught a glorious glimpse of splendid 
courts, and light airy gates of Saracenic triumph, 
flights of noble steps, long arcades, and interior 
gardens, where silver fountains spouted their tall 
streams amid the taller cypress. 



Note 37— Page 197. 
Entered Jerusalem by the gate of Sion. 

The gate of Sion still remains, and from it you 
descend into the valley of Siloa. 

Note 38.— Page 204. 
King Pirgandicus. 
According to a Talmudical story, however, of 
which I find a note, this monarch was not a Hebrew 
but a Gentile, and a very wicked one. He once 
invited eleven famous doctors of the holy nation to 
supper. They were received in the most magnificent 
style, and were then invited, under pain of death, 
either to eat pork, to accept a pagan mistress, or to 
drink wine consecrated to idols. After long con- 



294. NOTES. 

sultation, the Doctors, in great tribulation, agreed to 
save their heads by accepting the last alternative, 
since the two first were forbidden by the law of 
Moses, and the last only by the Rabbins. The King 
assented, the Doctors drank the impure wine, and, as 
it was exceedingly good, drank freely. The wine, as 
will sometimes happen, created a terrible appetite ; 
the table was covered with dishes, and the Doctors, 
heated by the grape, were not sufficiently careful 
of what they partook. In short, the wicked King 
Pirgandicus contrived that they should sup off 
pork, and being carried from the table quite tipsey, 
each of the eleven had the mortification of finding 
himself next morning in the arms of a Pagan mistress. 
In the course of the year all the eleven died sudden 
deaths, and this visitation occurred to them, not 
because they had violated the law of Moses, but 
because they had believed that the precepts of the 
Rabbins could be outraged with more impunity than 
the word of God. 

Note 39.— Page 204. 
And conquered Julius Ccesar. 

This classic hero often figures in the erratic pages 
of the Talmud. 






NOTES. 295 

Note 40 — Page 205. 

The Tombs of the Kings. 

The present pilgrim to Jerusalem will have less 
trouble than Alroy in discovering the Tombs of the 
Kings, though he probably would not as easily obtain 
the sceptre of Solomon. The tombs that bear this 
title are of the time of the Asmonean princes, and of a 
more ambitious character than any other of the re- 
mains. An open court about fifty feet in breadth, 
and extremely deep, is excavated out of the rock. 
One side is formed by a portico, the frieze of which 
is sculptured in a good Syro- Greek style. There is 
no grand portal ; you crawl into the tombs by a 
small opening on one of the sides. There are a few 
small chambers with niches, recesses, and sarco- 
phagi, some sculptured in the same flowing style as 
the frieze. This is the most important monument at 
Jerusalem; and Dr. Clarke, who has lavished won- 
der and admiration on the tombs of Zachariah and 
Absalom, has announced the Tombs of the Kings as 



296 NOTES. 

one of the marvellous productions of antiquity. But 
the truth is, all that we see of art in Jerusalem is 
of the most mean and contemptible character, exhibit- 
ing not the slightest feeling for the beautiful or the 
grand, and not for a moment to be mentioned with 
the creations of a neighbouring country. It is of 
course out of the question to speak of the pyramids 
of Memphis, and the obelisks of Heliopolis, the tem- 
ples of Karnak, and the palaces of Luxoor, the gi- 
gantic cavern fanes of Ipsambul, the imaginative 
Dendera, and the refined Philae : but it is not too 
much to say, that there are in many Egyptian 
towns, to which the satiated traveller cannot spare a 
parting glance, more surprising monuments than in 
all Jerusalem together ; ranges of painted sepulchres, 
in finitely more striking, from their extent and beauty, 
than the Tombs of the Kings ; and relics of temples 
which must have cost more time and treasure than the 
whole valley of Jehosaphat. 



NOTES. 297 



Note 41. — Page 207, 

" Rabbi Hillel was one of the eminentest that ever 
was among the Jewish Doctors, both for birth, learn- 
ing, rule, and children. He was of the seed of David 
by his mother's side, being of the posterity of She- 
phatiah, the son of Abital, David's wife. He was 
brought up in Babel, from whence he came up to 
Jerusalem at forty years old, and there studied the 
law forty years more under Shemaiah and Abtalion, 
and after them he was President of the Sanhedrim 
forty years more. The beginning of his Presidency 
is generally concluded upon to have beeen just one 
hundred years before the Temple was destroyed : by 
which account, he began eight-and-twenty years be- 
fore our Saviour was born, and died when he was 
about twelve years old. He is renowned for his 
fourscore scholars." — Lightfoot, vol. ii. p. 2008. 

The great rival of Hillel was Shammai. Their 
controversies, and the fierceness of their partizans, are 
a principal feature of Rabbinical history. They 
were the same as the Scotists and Thomists. At last 
the Bath Kol interfered, and decided for Hillel, but 



298 fc NOTES. 

in a spirit of conciliatory dexterity. " The Bath 
Kol came forth and spake thus : — c . The words both 
of the one party and the other are the words of the 
living God, but the certain decision of the matter is 
according to the decrees of the school of Hillel. 
And from henceforth, whoever shall transgress the 
decrees of the school of Hillel is guilty of death.' " 



Note 42.— Page 212. 

A number of small, square, low chambers. 

These excavated cemeteries which abound in Pales- 
tine and Egypt were often converted into places of 
worship by the Jews and early Christians. Sandys 
thus describes the Synagogue at Jerusalem in his 
time. 



Note 43. — Page 213. 

Their heads mystically covered. 

The Hebrews cover their heads during their 
prayers with a sacred shawl. 



NOTES. 299 



Note 44. — Page 214. 
Expounded the law to the congregation of the people. 

The custom, I believe, even to the present day 
among the Hebrews, a remnant of their old acade- 
mies, once so famous. 

Note 45.— Page 216* 

The Valley ofJehosaphat and the Tomb of Absalom. 

In the Vale of Jehosaphat, among many other 
tombs, are two of considerable size, and which, al 
though of a corrupt Grecian architecture, are digni- 
fied by the titles of the Tombs of Zachariah and 
Absalom. 



Note 46.— Page 221. 
The scanty rill of Siloah. 

The sublime Siloah is now a muddy rill; you 
descend by steps to the fountain which is its source, 
and which is covered with an arch. Here the blind 



300 NOTES. 

man received his sight ; and singular enough, to this 
very day the healing reputation of its waters pre- 
vails, and summons to its brink all those neighbour- 
ing Arabs who suffer from the ophthalmic affections 
not uncommon in this part of the world. 

Note 47.— Page 221. 
Several isolated tombs of considerable size. 

There are no remains of ancient Jerusalem, or 
the ancient Jews. Some tombs there are which 
may be ascribed to the Asmonean princes ; but all 
the monuments of David and Solomon, and their 
long posterity, have utterly disappeared. 

Note 48.— Page 225. 

Are cut strange characters and unearthly forms. 

As at Benihassan, and many other of the sculp- 
tured catacombs of Egypt. 

Note 49. — Page 226. 
A crowd of bats rushed forward and extinguished his torch. 

In entering the Temple of Dendera, our torches 
were extinguished by a crowd of bats. 



NOTES. 301 

Note 50 Page 226. 

The gallery is of great extent, with a gradual declination. 
So, in the great Egyptian tombs. 

Note 51.— Page 229. 

The Af rite, for it was one of these dread beings. 

Beings of a monstrous form, the most terrible of 
all the orders of the Dives. 

Note 52.— Page 230. 

An avenue of colossal lions of red granite. 

An avenue of Sphinxes more than a mile in 
length connected the quarters of Luxoor and Carnak 
in Egyptian Thebes. Its fragments remain. Many 
other avenues of Sphinxes and lion-headed Kings 
may be observed in various parts of Upper Egypt. 



302 NOTES. 



Note 53 Page 233. 

A stupendous portal cut out of the solid rock, four hundred 
feet in height, and supported by clusters of colossal Caryatides. 

See the great rock temple of Ipsambul in Lower 
Nubia. The sitting colossi are nearly seventy feet 
in height. But there is a Torso of a statue of Ra- 
meses the Second at Thebes, vulgarly called the 
great Memnon, which measures upwards of sixty 
feet round the shoulders. 



Note 54.— Page 236. 
Fifty steps of ivory, and each one guarded by golden lions. 

See 1st Kings, cap. x. 18—20. 

Note 56.— Page 261. 

Crossed the desart on a feet dromedary. 

The difference between a Camel and a Drome- 
dary is the difference between a hack and a tho- 
rough-bred horse. There is no other. 



NOTES. 303 



Note 57.— Page 264. 
That celestial alphabet known to the true Cabalist. 
See former note. 



BSD OF VOL. I. 
PART VII.— (continued.) 



VOL. II. B 



THE WONDROUS 



TALE OF ALROY, 



PART VII.— (CONTINUED.) 



V. 



Hassan Subah, after five days of forced 
marches, pitched his sumptuous pavilion 
in that beautiful Oasis, which had afforded 
such delightful refreshment to Alroy 
when a solitary pilgrim. Around, for 
nearly half a mile, were the tents of his 
warriors, and of the numerous caravan 

B 2 



4 THE WONDROUS TALE 

that had accompanied him, laden with 
water and provisions for his troops. Here, 
while he reposed, he also sought informa- 
tion as to the position of his enemy. 

A party of observation, which he had 
immediately dispatched, returned almost 
instantly with a small caravan that had 
been recently plundered by the robbers. 
The merchant, a venerable and pious 
Moslemin, was ushered into the presence 
of the Governor of Hamadan. 

'' From the robbers' haunt ?" inquired 
Hassan. 

" Unfortunately so," answered the 
merchant. 

'^ Is it far ?" 

'' A day's journey." 

'' And you quitted it ?" 

*' Yesterday morn." 

'' What is their force ?'' 



OF ALROY. 5 

The merchant hesitated. 

" Do they not make prisoners ?" in- 
quired the Governor, casting a scruti- 
nizing glance at his companion. 

'' Holy prophet ! what a miserable 
wretch am I !" exclaimed the venerable 
merchant, bursting into tears. " A faith- 
ful subject of the Caliph, I am obliged to 
serve rebels — a devout Moslemin, I am 
forced to aid Jews ! Order me to be 
hanged at once, my Lord," continued the 
unfortunate merchant, wringing his 
hands. " Order me to be hanged at 
once. I have lived long enough/' 

" What is all this ?" inquired Hassan ; 
'' speak, friend, without fear.'' 

" I am a faithful subject of the Ca- 
liph," answered the merchant ; *' I am 
a devout Moslemin, but I have lost ten 
thousand dirhems." 



6 THE WONDROUS TALE 

*' I am sorry for you. Sir ; I also have 
lost something, but my losses are nothing 
to you, nor yours to me." 

'' Accursed be the hour when these 
dogs tempted me ! Tell me, is it sin to 
break faith with a Jew ?" 

'' On the contrary, I could find you 
many reverend Mollahs, who will tell 
you that such a breach is the highest 
virtue. Come, come, I see how it is : 
you have received your freedom on con- 
dition of not betraying your merciful 
plunderers. Promises exacted by terror 
are the bugbears of fools. Speak, man, 
all you know. Where are they ? What 
is their force ? Are we supposed at 
hand ?" 

*' I am a faithful subject of the Caliph, 
and I am bound to serve him," replied 
the merchant ; '' I am a devout Mosle- 



OF ALROY. 7 

min, and 'tis my duty to destroy all 
Giaours, but I am also a man, and I must 
look after my own interest. Noble Go- 
vernor, the long and the short is, these 
scoundrels have robbed me of ten thou- 
sand dirhems, as my slaves will tell you : 
at least, goods to that amount. No one 
can prove that they be worth less. It is 
true that I include in that calculation the 
fifty per cent. I was to make on my 
shawls at Hamadan, but still to me it is 
as good as ten thousand dirhems. x\sk 
my slaves if such an assortment of shawls 
was ever yet beheld." 

" To the point, to the point. The 
robbers ?" 

" I am at the point. The shawls is 
the point. For when I talked of the 
shawls and the heaviness of my loss, you 
must know that the captain of the rob- 
bers " 



8 THE WONDROUS TALE 

'' Alroy ?" 

'' A very fierce young gentleman ; I 
don't know how they call him. Says the 
captain to me, ' Merchant, you look 
gloomy.' ' Gloomy/ says I, ' you would 
look gloomy if you were a prisoner, and 
had lost ten thousand dirhems/ ' What, 
is this trash worth ten thousand dirhems >' 
says he. ' With the fifty per cent. I was 
to make at Hamadan,' says I. ' Fifty per 
cent.,' says he, ' you are an old knave/ 
' Knave,' says I, ' I should like to hear 
any one call me knave at Bagdad.' 
^ Well, knave or not,' says he, ' you may 
get out of this scrape.' ' How?' says I. 
' Why you are a very respectable looking 
man,' says he, ' and are a good Moslemin 
into the bargain, I warrant.' ' That I 
am,' says I, ' although you be a Jew : but 
how the faith is to serve me here I am 



OF ALROY. 



sure I do not know, unless the angel 
Gabriel, as in the fifty-fifth verse of the 
twenty-seventh chapter of the Koran — " 

'' Hush, hush, hush !" exclaimed Has- 
san ; '' to the point ! — to the point !" 

" I always am at the point, only you 
put me out. However, to make it as 
short as possible, the Captain knows all 
about your coming, and is frightened out 
of his wits, although he did talk big ; 1 
could easily see that. And he let me go, 
you see, with some of my slaves, and gave 
me an order for five thousand dirhems on 
one Bostenay, of Hamadan, (perhaps you 
know him, I don't ; is he a good man ?) 
on condition that I would fall in with you, 
and, Mohamed forgive me, tell you a lie !" 

- A lie !" 

'' Yes! a lie; but these Jewish dogs 
don't understand what a truly religious 

B 5 



10 THE WONDROUS TALE 

man is, and when I began to tell the lie, 
I was soon put out. Now, noble Hassan, 
if a promise to a Jew be not binding* on a 
true believer, and you will see me straight 
with the five thousand dirhems, I will 
betray every thing at once." 

" Be easy about the five thousand dir- 
hems, good man, and tell me all." 

'^ You will see me paid ?" 

'' My honour upon it." 

" 'Tis well ! Know then, the infamous 
dogs are very weak, and terrified at the 
news of your progress : one, whom I 
think they call Jabaster, has departed 
with the great majority of the people 
into the interior of the desart, about 
seven hundred strong. I heard so ; 
but mind, I don't know it. The young 
man, whom you call Alroy, being wounded 
in a recent conflict, could not depart 



OF ALROY. 11 

with them, but remains among the ruins 
with some female prisoners, some trea- 
sure, and about an hundred companioas 
hidden in sepulchres. He gave me my 
freedom on condition I fell in with you, 
and assured you that the dogs, full five 
thousand strong, had given you the go 
by in the night, and marched towards 
Hamadan. They wanted me to frighten 
you ; it was a lie, and I could not tell it. 
And now you know the plain truth ; and 
if it be a sin to break faith with an infi- 
del, you are responsible for it, as well as 
for the five thousand dirhems, which, by 
the bye, ought to have been ten." 

'' Where is your order V 

" 'Tis here," said the merchant, draw- 
ing it from his vest, '' a very business- 
like document, drawn upon one Bos- 
tenay, whom they described as very rich, 



12 THE WONDROUS TALE 

and who is here enjoined to pay me five 
thousand dirhems, if in consequence of my 
information, Hassan Subah, that is your- 
self, return forthwith to Hamadan with- 
out attacking them/' 

'' Old Bostenay's head shall answer for 
this." 

«« Pm glad of it. But were I you, I 
would make him pay me first." 

'' Merchant," said Hassan, ^' have you 
any objection to pay another visit to your 
friend Ah'oy ?" 

'^ Allah forbid!" 

'' In my company?" 

'' That makes a difference.'' 

'' Be our guide. The dirhems shall 
be doubled." 

'' That will make up for the fifty per 
cent. I hardly like it; but in your com- 
pany, that makes a difference. Lose no 



OF ALROY. IS 

time. If you push on, Alroy must be 
captured. Now or never ! The Jewish 
dogs, to rifle a true believer !" 

'' Oglu/' said Hassan to one of his 
officers. '' To horse ! You need not 
strike the tents. Can we reach the city 
by sunset, merchant ?" 

'' An hour before, if vou be off* at 
once." 

'' Sound the drums. To horse ! to 
horse !" 



VI 



The Seljuks halted before the walls of 
the deserted city. Their commander or- 
dered a detachment to enter and recon- 
noitre. They returned and reported its 
apparent desolation. Hassan Subah, then 



14 THE WONDROUS TALE 

directing that a guard should surround 
the walls to prevent any of the enemy 
from escaping, passed with his warriors 
through the vast portal into the silent 
street. 

The still magnificence of the strange 
and splendid scene influenced the temper 
even of this ferocious cavalry. They 
gazed around them with awe and admira- 
tion. The fierceness of their visages was 
softened, the ardour of their impulse 
stilled. A supernatural feeling of repose 
stole over their senses. No one bran- 
dished his scimitar, the fiery courser 
seemed as subdued as his lord, and no 
sound was heard but the melancholy, me- 
chanical tramp of the disciplined march, 
unrelieved by martial music, inviolate by 
oath or jest, and unbroken even by the 
ostentatious caracoling of any showy 
steed. 



OF ALROY. 15 

It was Sunset ; the star of Eve glittered 
over the white Ionian fane that rose 
serene and delicate in the flashins: and 
purple sky. 

" This way, my lord !'' said the mer- 
chant guide, turning round to Hassan 
Subah, who, surrounded by his officers, 
led the van. The whole of the great way 
of the city was filled with the Seljukian 
warriors. Their ebon steeds, their snowy 
turbans, adorned with plumes of the black 
eagle and the red heron, their dazzling 
shawls, the blaze of their armour in the 
sunset, and the long undulating perspec- 
tive of beautiful forms and brilliant co- 
lours, — this regiment of heroes in a street 
of palaces, — War had seldom afforded a 
more imposing, or more picturesque spec- 
tacle. 

'' This way, my lord !" said the mer- 



16 THE WONDROUS TALE 

chant, pointing to the narrow turning 
that, at the foot of the temple, led, 
through ruined streets, to the amphi- 
theatre. 

*' Halt !" exclaimed a wild shrill voice. 

Each warrior suddenly arrested his 
horse. 

" Who spoke ? •' exclaimed Hassan 
Subah. 

'' I !" answered a voice. A female 
form stood in the portico of the temple, 
with uplifted arms. 

'' And who art thou ?" inquired Hassan 
Subah, not a little disconcerted. 

'' Thy evil genius, Seljuk !" 

Hassan Subah, pale as his ivory battle- 
axe, did not answer ; every man within 
hearing shuddered ; still the dread woman 
remained immoveable within the porch of 
the temple. 



OF ALROY. 17 

" Woman, witch, or g-oddess," at 
length exclaimed Hassan Subah, '^ what 
wouldst thou here ?" 

'' Seljuk ! behold this star. Tis a sin- 
gle drop of light, yet who even of thy 
wild band can look upon it without awe. 
And yet thou worse than Sisera, thou 
comest to combat against those, for whom 
even ' the stars in their courses fought/ '' 

" A Jewish witch !" exclaimed the Sel- 
juk. 

" A Jewish witch ! Be it so ; behold 
then my spell falls upon thee, and that 
spell is Destruction. 

'' Awake, awake, Deborah : awake, 
awake, utter a song ; arise Barak, and 
lead thy captivity captive, thou son of 
Abinoam !'' 

Immediately the sky appeared to 
darken, a cloud of arrows and javelins 



18 THE WONDROUS TALE 

broke from all sides upon the devoted 
Seljuks : immense masses of stone and 
marble were hurled from all directions, 
horses were stabbed by spears impelled 
by invisible hands, and riders fell to the 
ground without a struggle, and were 
trampled upon by their disordered and 
affrighted brethren. 

'' We are betrayed," exclaimed Hassan 
Subah, hurling a javelin at the merchant, 
but the merchant was gone. The Seljuks 
raised their famous war cry. 

'' Oglu, regain the desart," ordered the 
chieftain. 

But no sooner had the guard without 
the walls heard the war cry of their com- 
panions, than, alarmed for their safety, 
they rushed to their assistance. The re- 
treating forces of Subah, each instant 
diminishing as they retreated, were baffled 



OF ALROY. 19 

in their project by the very eagerness of 
their auxiliaries. The unwilling conten- 
tion of the two parties increased the con- 
fusion ; and when the Seljuks, recently 
arrived, having at length formed into 
some order, had regained the gate, they 
found to their dismay that the portal was 
barricadoed and garrisoned by the enemy. 
Uninspired by the presence of their com- 
mander, who was in the rear, the puzzled 
soldiers were seized with a panic, and 
spurring their horses, dispersed in all di- 
rections of the city. In vain Hassan 
Subah endeavoured to recall order. The 
moment was past. Dashing with about 
thirty men to an open ground, which his 
quick eye had observed in his progress 
down the street, and dealing destruction 
with every blow, the dreaded governor of 
Hamadan, like a true soldier, awaited an 



20 THE WONDROUS TALE 

inevitable fate, not wholly desperate that 
some chance might yet turn up to extri- 
cate him from his forlorn situation. 

And now, as it were by enchantment, 
wild armed men seemed to arise from 
every part of the city. From every mass 
of ruin, from every crumbling temple and 
mouldering mansion, from every cata- 
comb and cellar, from behind every co- 
lumn and every obelisk, upstarted some 
desperate warrior with a bloody weapon. 
The massacre of the Seljuks was univer- 
sal. The horsemen dashed wildly about 
the ruined streets, pursued by crowds of 
footmen ; sometimes formed in small com- 
panies, the Seljuks frequently charged 
and fought desperately ; but however 
stout might be their resistance to the 
open foe, it was impossible to withstand 
their secret enemies. They had no place 



OF ALROY. 21 

of refuge, no power of gaining even a 
moment's breathing time. If they re- 
treated to a wall, it instantly bristled 
with spears ; if they endeavoured to form 
in a court, they sank under the falling 
masses which were showered upon them 
from all directions. Strange shouts of 
denunciation blended with the harsh cry- 
ing of horns, and the clang and clash of 
cymbals and tambours sounded in every 
quarter of the city. 

" If we could only mount the walls, 
Ibrahim, and leap into the desart," ex- 
claimed Hassan Subah to one of his few re- 
maining comrades, " 'tis our only chance. 
We die here like dogs ! Could I but meet 
Alroy !" 

Three of the Seljuks dashed swiftly 
across the open ground in front, followed 
by several Hebrew horsemen. 



22 THE WONDROUS TALE 

'' Smite all, Abner. Spare none, re- 
member Amalek," exclaimed their youth- 
ful leader, waving his bloody scimitar. 

*' They are down, — one, two, — there 
goes the third. My javelin has done for 
him." 

" Your horse bleeds freely. Where's 
Jabaster ?" 

" At the gates : my arm aches with 
slaughter. The Lord hath delivered them 
into our hands. Could I but meet their 
chieftain !" 

" Turn, blood-hound, he is here,'" ex- 
claimed Hassan Subah." 

" Away, Abner, this affair is mine." 

'' Prince, you have already slain your 
thousands." 

'' And Abner his tens of thousands. Is 
it so ? This business is for me only. 
Come on, Turk." 



OF ALROY. 23 

'' Art thou Alroy ?'' 

'' The same/' 

'' The slayer of Alschiroch ?" 

'' Even so." 

'' A rebel and a murderer.'* 

" What you please. Look to yourself." 

The Hebrew Prince flung a javelin at 
the Seljuk. It glanced from the breast- 
plate ; but Hassan Subah staggered in his 
seat. Recovering, he charged Alroy with 
great force. Their scimitars crossed, and 
the blade of Hassan shivered. 

*' He who sold me that blade, told me 
it was charmed, and could be broken 
only by a Caliph,'* said Hassan Subah. 
'' He was a liar !" 

" As it may be," said Alroy, and he 
cut the Seljuk to the ground. Abner had 
dispersed his comrades. Alroy leaped 
from his fainting steed, and mounting the 



84 THE WONDROUS TALE 

ebon courser of his late enemy, dashed 
again into the thickest of the fight. 

The shades of night descended, the 
clamour gradually decreased, the struggle 
died away. A few unhappy Moslemin, 
who had quitted their saddles and sought 
concealment among the ruins, were occa- 
sionally hunted out, and brought forward 
and massacred. Long ere midnight the 
last of the Seljuks had expired. 

The moon shed a broad light upon the 
street of palaces crowded with the accu- 
mulated slain, and the living victors. 
Fires were lit, torches illumined, the con- 
querors prepared the eager meal as they 
sang hymns of praise and thanksgiving. 

A procession approached. Esther, the 
prophetess, clashing her cymbals, danced 
before the Messiah of Israel, who leant 
upon his victorious scimitar, surrounded 



OF ALROY. 25 

by Jabaster, Abner, Scherirah, and his 
chosen chieftains. Who could now doubt 
the validity of his mission ? The wide 
and silent desart rang with the acclama- 
tions of his enthusiastic votaries. 



VII. 

Heavily the anxious hours crept on in 
the Jewish quarter of Hamadan. Again, 
and again the venerable Bostenay dis- 
cussed the chances of success with the 
sympathizing but desponding elders. Mi- 
riam was buried in constant prayer. Their 
most sanguine hopes did not extend be- 
yond the escape of their Prince. 

A fortnight had elapsed, and no news 
had been received of the progress of the 

VOL. II. c 



g6 THE WONDROUS TALE 

expedition, when suddenly towards sun- 
set, a sentinel on a watch-tower announc- 
ed the appearance of an armed force in 
the distance. The walls were instantly 
lined with the anxious inhabitants, the 
streets and squares filled with curious 
crowds. Exultation sat on the triumph- 
ant brow of the Moslemin : a cold tre- 
mour stole over the fluttering heart of 
the Hebrew. 

" There is but one God," said the cap- 
tain of the gate. 

" And Mohammed is his prophet," re- 
sponded a sentinel. 

'* To-morrow we will cut off the noses 
of all these Jewish dogs." 

''The sceptre has departed," exclaimed 
the despairing Bostenay. 

'' Lord, remember David !" whispered 
Miriam, as she threw herself upon the 



OF ALROY. 27 

court of the palace, and buried her face 
in ashes. 

The Mollahs in solemn procession ad- 
vanced to the ramparts to shed their 
benediction on the victorious Hassan Su- 
bah. The Muezzin ascended the minarets 
to watch the setting* sun, and proclaim 
the power of Allah with renewed enthu- 
siasm. 

" I wonder if Alroy be dead or alive,'* 
said the captain of the gate. 

'' If he be alive, he will be impaled,'' 
responded a sentinel. 

'' If dead, the carcase will be given to 
the dogs," rejoined the captain ; '' that 
is the practice.'' 

'' Bostenay will be hung," said the 
sentinel. 

" And his niece, too," answered the 
captain. 

c2 



28 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" Hem !" said the sentinel. '' Hassan 
Subah loves a black eye." 

'' I hope a true Moslemin will not 
touch a Jewess/' exclaimed an indignant 
black eunuch. 

" They approach. What a dust !" said 
the captain of the gate. 

'' I see Hassan Subah !" said the sen- 
tinel. 

'' So do I/* said the eunuch, '' I know 
his black horse.'' 

'' I wonder how many dirhems old 
Bostenay is worth/' said the captain. 

" Immense !" said the sentinel. 

"No plunder, 1 suppose?" said the 
eunuch. 

'' We shall see/' said the captain ; '' at 
any rate, I owe a thousand to old 
Shelomi. We need not pay now, you 
know." 



OF ALROY. 29 

" Certainly not," said the black eu- 
nuch. '' The rebels !" 

A body of horsemen dashed forward. 
Their leader in advance reined in his 
fiery charger beneath the walls. 

'' In the name of the prophet, who is 
that ?" exclaimed the captain of the gate, 
a little confused. 

'' I never saw him before," said the 
sentinel, "although he is in the Seljuk 
dress. 'Tis some one from Bagdad, I 
guess." 

A trumpet sounded. 

'' Who keeps the gate ?" called out the 
warrior. 

" I am the captain of the gate," an- 
swered our friend. 

'' Open it then to the King of Israel." 

'' To w^hom ?" inquired the astonished 
captain. 



so THE WONDROUS TALE 

" To King David. The Lord hath de- 
livered Hassan Subah and his host into 
our hands, and of all thy proud Seljuks 
none remaineth. Open thy gates, I say, 
and lose no time. I am Jabaster, a lieu- 
tenant of the Lord ; this scimitar is my 
commission. Open thy gates, and thou 
and thy people shall have that mercy 
which they have never shown ; but if 
thou delayest one instant, thus saith the 
King our master—^ I will burst open 
your portal, and smite, and utterly de- 
stroy all that you have, and spare them 
not; but slay both man and woman, in- 
fant and suckling, ox and sheep, camel 
and ass/ " 

'' Call forth the venerable Lord Boste- 
nay," said the captain of the gate, with 
chattering teeth. '' He will intercede 
for us." 



OF ALROY. 31 

" And the gentle Lady Miriam/' said 
the sentinel. '' She is ever charitable." 

" I will head the procession," said the 
black eunuch ; ''I am accustomed to 
women." 

The procession of Mollahs shuffled back 
to their college with most profane preci- 
pitation ; the Sun set, and the astounded 
Muezzin stood with their mouths open, 
and quite forgot to announce the power 
of tlieir deity, and the validity of their 
prophet. The people all called out for 
the venerable Lord Bostenay and the 
gentle Lady Miriam, and ran in crowds 
to see who could first kiss the hem of 
their garments. 

The principal gate of Hamadan opened 
into the square of the great mosque. Here 
the whole population of the city appeared 
assembled. The gates were thrown open 



32 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Jabaster and his companions mounted 
guard. The short twilight died away, 
the shades of night descended. The 
minarets were illumined/ the houses hung 
with garlands, the ramparts covered with 
tapestry and carpets. 

A clang of drums, trumpets, and cym- 
bals announced the arrival of the Hebrew 
army. The people shouted, the troops 
without responded with a long cheer of 
triumph Amid the blaze of torches, a 
youth, waving his scimitar, upon a coal 
black steed, bounded into the city, at the 
head of his guards— the people fell upon 
their knees, and shouted, '' Long live 
Alroy !" 

A venerable man, leading a beauteous 
maiden, with downcast eyes, advanced. 
They headed a deputation of the chief in- 
habitants of the city. They came to 



OF ALROY. 33 

solicit mercy and protection. At their 
sight the youthful warrior leaped from 
his horse, flung away his scimitar, and 
clasping the maiden in his arms, ex- 
claimed, " Miriam, my sister, this, this 
indeed is triumph !" 



VIII. 

'' Drink," said Kisloch the Kourd, 
to Calidas the Indian ; " you forget, 
comrade, we are no longer Moslemin." 

" Wine, methinks, has a peculiarly 
pleasant flavour in a golden cup," said 
the Guebre. '' I got this little trifle to- 
day in the Bazaar," he added, holding up 
a magnificent vase studded with gems. 

'' I thought plunder was forbidden," 
grinned the Negro. 

c 5 



34 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" So it is," replied the Guebre : '' but 
we may purchase what we please — upon 
credit/' 

'' Well, for my part, I am a moderate 
man,'' exclaimed Calidas the Indian, 
'' and would not injure even these ac- 
cursed dogs of Turks. I have not cut my 
host's throat, but only turned him into 
my porter, and content myself with his 
harem, his baths, his fine horses, and 
other little trifles." 

'' What quarters we are in ! There is 
nothing like a true Messiah !" exclaimed 
Kisloch, very devoutly. 

'' Nothing,'' said Calidas ; " though, 
to speak truth, I did not much believe in 
the efficacy of Solomon's sceptre, till his 
majesty clove the head of the valiant 
Seljuk with it." 

'' But now there's no doubt of it ?'' said 
the Guebre. 



OF ALROY. 35 

" We should indeed be infidels if we 
doubted now," replied the Indian. 

'' How lucky/' grinned the Negro, 
'' as I had no religion before, that I have 
now fixed upon the right one !" 

'' Most fortunate !" said the Guebre. 
" What shall we do to amuse ourselves to 
night ?". 

" Let's go to the coffee-houses and 
make the Turks drink wine," said Calidas 
the Indian. 

'' What say you to burning down a 
mosque ?" said Kisloch the Kourd. 

'' I had great fun with some Der- 
vishes this morning," said the Guebre. 

" I met one asking alms with a wire 
run through his cheek,'^ so I caught ano- 
ther, bored his nose, and tied them both 
together !" 

'' Hah ! hah ! hah !" burst the Negro. 



36 THE WONDROUS TALE 



IX 



Asia resounded with the insurrection 
of the Jews, and the massacre of the Sel- 
juks. Crowds of Hebrews, from the rich 
cities of Persia, and the populous settle- 
ments on the Tigris and the Euphrates, 
hourly poured into Hamadan. 

The irritated Moslem in persecuted the 
brethren of the successful rebel, and this 
impolicy precipitated their flight. The 
wealth of Bagdad flowed into the He- 
brew capital. Seated on the divan of 
Hassan Subah, and wielding the sceptre 
of Solomon, the King of Israel received 
the homage of his devoted subjects, and 
dispatched his envoys to Syria and to 
Egypt. The well-stored magazines and 



OF ALROY. 37 

arsenals of Hamadan soon converted the 
pilgrims into warriors. The city was 
unable to accommodate the increased and 
increasing population. An extensive 
camp, under the command of Abner, was 
formed without the walls, where the 
troops were daily disciplined, and where 
they were prepared for greater exploits 
than a skirmish in a desart. 

Within a month after the surrender of 
Hamadan, the congregation of the people 
assembled in the square of the great 
mosque, now converted into a synagogue. 
The multitude was disposed in ordered 
ranks, and the terrace of every house was 
crowded. In the centre of the square 
was an immense altar of cedar and brass, 
and on each side stood a company of 
priests, guarding the victims, one young 
bullock, and two rams without blemish. 



3S THE WONDROUS TALE 

Amid the flourish of trumpets, the 
gates of the synagogue opened, and dis- 
played to the wondering eyes of the He- 
brews a vast and variegated pavilion, 
planted in the court. The holy remnant, 
no longer forlorn, beheld that tabernacle, 
of which they had so long dreamed, once 
more shining in the Sun, with its purple 
and scarlet hangings, its curtains of rare 
skins, and its furniture of silver and of 
gold. 

A procession of priests advanced, bear- 
ing, with staves of cedar, run through rings 
of gold, a gorgeous ark, the work of the most 
cunning artificers of Persia. Night and 
day had they laboured, under the direc- 
tion of Jabaster, to produce this wondrous 
spectacle. Once more the children of 
Israel beheld the cherubim. They burst 
into a triumphant hymn of thanks- 



OF ALROY. 39 

giving, and many drew their swords, 
and cried aloud to be led against the 
Canaanites. 

From the mysterious curtains of the 
Tabernacle, Alroy came forward, leading 
Jabaster. They approached the altar. 
And Alroy took robes from the sur- 
rounding priests, and put them upon Ja- 
baster, and a girdle, and a breast-plate of 
jewels. And Alroy took a mitre, and 
placed it upon the head of Jabaster, and 
upon the mitre he placed a crown ; and, 
pouring oil upon his head, the pupil 
anointed the master, High Priest of 
Israel. 

The victims were slain, the sin-offer- 
ings burnt. Amid clouds of incense, 
bursts of music, and the shouts of a de- 
voted people ; amid odour, and melody, 
and enthusiasm, Alroy mounted his 



40 THE WONDROUS TALE 

charger, and at the head of twenty thou- 
sand men, departed to conquer Media. 



X. 

The extensive and important Province 
of Aderbijan, of which Hamadan was the 
capital, was formed of the Ancient Media. 
Its fate was decided by one battle. On 
the plain of Nehauend, Alroy met the 
hastily-raised levies of the Atabek of 
Kermanshah, and entirely routed them. 
In the course of a month, every city of 
the province had acknowledged the su- 
premacy of the new Hebrew Monarch, and, 
leaving Abner to complete the conquest 
of Louristan, Alroy entered Persia. 

The incredible and irresistible progress 
of Alroy roused Togrul, the Turkish Sul- 



OF ALROY. 41 

tan of Persia, from the luxurious indo- 
lence of the palaces of Nishabur. He 
summoned his Emirs to meet him at the 
imperial City of Rhey, and crush, by one 
overwhelming effort, the insolent rebel. 

Religion, valour, and genius, alike in- 
spired the arms of Alroy, but he was, 
doubtless, not a little assisted by the 
strong national sympathy of his singular 
and scattered people, which ever ensured 
him prompt information on all the move- 
ments of his enemy. Without any pre- 
paration, he found agents in every court, 
and camp, and cabinet, and by their as- 
sistance he anticipated the designs of his 
adversaries, and turned even their in- 
genuity to their confusion. The imperial 
City of Rhey was surprised in the night, 
sacked, and burnt to the ground. The 
scared and baffled Emirs who escaped. 



42 THE WONDROUS TALE 

fled to the Sultan Togrul, tearing their 
beards, and prophesying the approaching 
termination of the world. The palaces of 
Nishabur resounded with the imprecations 
of their master, who, cursing the Jewish 
dogs, and vowing a pilgrimage to Mecca, 
placed himself at the head of a mot- 
ley multitude of warriors, and rushed 
upon the plains of Irak, to exterminate 
Alroy. 

The Persian force exceeded the Hebrew 
at least five times in number. Besides a 
large division of Seljuks, the Caucasus 
had poured forth its strange inhabitants to 
swell the ranks of the faithful. The wild 
tribes of the Bactiari were even enlisted 
with their fatal bows, and the savage 
Turkmans, tempted by the Sultan s gold, 
for a moment yielded their liberty, and 
shook their tall lances in his ranks. 



OF ALROY. 43 

But what is a wild Bactiari, and what 
is a savage Turkman, and what even a 
disciplined and imperious Seljuk, to the 
warriors of the God of Abraham, of Isaac, 
and of Jacob ? At the first onset, Alroy 
succeeded in dividing* the extended centre 
of Togrul, and separating the greater part 
of the Turks from their less disciplined 
comrades. At the head of his Median 
cavalry the Messiah charged and utterly 
routed the warriors of the Caucasus. The 
wild tribes of the Bactiari shot their 
arrows and fled, and the savage Turk- 
mans plundered the baggage of their own 
commander. 

The Turks themselves fought despe- 
rately ; but deserted by their allies, and 
surrounded by an inspired foe, their ef- 
forts were unavailing, and their slaughter 
terrible. Togrul was slain while heading 



44^ THE WONDROUS TALE 

a desperate and fruitless charge, and after 
his fall, the battle resembled a massacre 
rather than a combat. The plain was 
clotted with Seljukian gore. No quarter 
was given or asked. Twenty thousand 
chosen troops fell on the side of the 
Turks ; the rest dispersed and gained the 
mountains. Leaving Scherirah to restore 
order, Alroy the next morning pushed on to 
Nishabur at the head of three thousand 
horsemen, and summoned the city ere the 
inhabitants were apprised of the defeat 
and death of their Sultan. The capital of 
Persia escaped the fate of Rhey by an 
inglorious treaty, and a lavish tribute. 
The treasures of the Chosroes and the 
Gasnevides were dispatched to Hamadan, 
on which city day dawned, only to bring 
intelUgence of a victory or a conquest. 
While Alroy dictated peace on his own 



OF ALROY. 45 

terms in the palaces of Nishabur, x\bner 
having reduced Louristan, crossed the 
mountains, and entered Persia with the 
reinforcements he had received from Ja- 
baster. Leaving the government and 
garrisoning of his new conquests to this 
valiant captain, Alroy, at the head of the 
conquerors of Persia, in consequence of 
intelligence received from Hamadan, re- 
turned by forced marches to that city. 



XI 



Leaving the army within a day's march 
of the capital, Alroy, accompanied only by 
his staff, entered Hamadan, in the evening, 
and immediately repairing to the ci- 
tadel, summoned Jabaster to counsel. The 
night was passed by the King and the 



46 THE WONDROUS TALE 

High Priest in deep consultation. The 
next morning a decree apprised the 
inhabitants of the return of their mo- 
narch, of the creation of the new " king- 
dom of the Medes and Persians," of which 
Hamadan was appointed the capital, and 
Abner the viceroy, and of the intended 
and immediate invasion of Syria, and 
reconquest of the Land of Promise. 

The plan of this expedition had been 
long matured, and the preparations to 
effect it were considerably advanced. Ja- 
baster had not been idle during the ab- 
sence of his pupil. One hundred thou- 
sand warriors were now assembled^ at the 
capital of the " Kingdom of the Medes 
and Persians ;'* of these the greater part 
were Hebrews, but many Arabs, wearied 
of the Turkish yoke, and many gallant 
adventurers from the Caspian, easily con- 



OF ALROY. 47 

verted from a vague idolatry to a religion 
of conquest, swelled the ranks of the army 
of the ^^ Lord of Hosts." 

The plain of Hamadan was covered 
with tents, the streets were filled with 
passing troops, the bazaars loaded with 
military stores ; long caravans of camels 
laden with supplies every day arrived 
from the neighbouring towns, each in- 
stant some high-capped Tartar"^ with dis- 
patches rushed into the city and galloped 
his steed up the steep of the citadel. The 
clang of arms, the prance of horses, the 
flourish of warlike music, resounded from 
all quarters. The business and the trea- 
sure of the world seemed as it were in an 
instant, to have become concentred in 
Hamadan. Every man had some great 
object ; gold glittered in every hand. All 
great impulses were stirring; all the 



48 THE WONDROUS TALE 

causes of human energy were in lively 
action. Every eye sparkled, every foot 
trod firm and fast. Each man acted as 
if the universal fate depended on his ex- 
ertions ; as if the universal will sympa- 
thized with his particular desire. A vast 
population influenced by a high degree 
of excitement is the most sublime of 
spectacles. 

The Commander of the Faithful raised 
the standard of the Prophet on the banks 
of the Tigris. It was the secret intelli- 
£[ence of this intended event that had 
recalled Alroy so suddenly from Persia. 
The latent enthusiasm of the Moslemin 
was excited by the rare and mystic cere- 
mony, and its effects were anticipated by 
previous and judicious preparations. The 
Seljuks of Bagdad alone amounted to 
fifty thousand men : the Sultan of Syria 



OF ALROY. 49 

contributed the warriors who had con- 
quered the Arabian princes of Damascus 
and Aleppo, while the ancient provinces 
of Asia Minor, which formed the rich and 
powerful kingdom of Seljukian Roum, 
poured forth a myriad of that matchless 
cavalry, which had so often baffled the 
armies of the Caesars. Never had so 
imposing a force been collected on the 
banks of the Tigris since the reign of 
Haroun Alraschid. Each day some war- 
like Atabek^ at the head of his armed 
train poured into the capital of the Ca- 
liphs, or pitched his pavilion on the 
banks of the river ; each day the proud 
Emir of some remote principality asto- 
nished or affrightened the luxurious Ba- 
bylonians by the strange or uncouth 
warriors, that had gathered round his 
standard in the desarts of Arabia, or on 

VOL. II. D 



50 THE WONDROUS TALE 

the shores of the Euxine. For the space 
of twenty miles, the banks of the river 
were, on either side, far as the eye could 
reach, covered with the variegated pavi- 
lions, the glittering standards, the flow- 
ing streamers and twinkling pennons 
of the mighty host, of which Malek, 
the Grand Sultan of the Seljuks, and 
Governor of the Caliph's palace, was chief 
commander. 

Such was the power assembled on the 
plains of Asia to arrest the progress of 
the Hebrew Prince, and to prevent the 
conquest of the memorable land promised 
to the faith of his fathers, and forfeited 
by their infidelity. Before the walls of 
Hamadan, Alroy reviewed the army of 
Israel, sixty thousand heavy armed foot- 
men, thirty thousand archers and light 
troops, and twenty thousand cavalry. 



OF ALROY. 51 

Besides these, a body of ten thousand 
picked horsemen had been formed, all of 
whom had served in the Persian cam- 
paign, styled " the Sacred Guard." In 
their centre, shrouded in a case of wrought 
gold, studded with carbuncles, and car- 
ried on a lusty lance of cedar, a giant — for 
the height of Elnebar exceeded that of 
common men by three feet— bore the scep- 
tre of Solomon. The Sacred Guard was 
commanded by Asriel, the brother of 
Abner. 

The army was formed into three divi- 
sions. All marched in solemn order be- 
fore the throne of Alroy, raised upon the 
ramparts, and drooped their standards 
and lances as they passed their heroic 
leader. Bostenay and Miriam, and the 
whole population of the city witnessed 
the inspiring spectacle from the walls. 

D 2 



LIBRARY 
UNIVERSITvoFiiiiNnift 



52 THE WONDROUS TALE 

That same eve, Scherirah, at the head of 
forty thousand men, pushed on towards 
Bagdad, by Kermanshah ; and Jabaster, 
who commanded in his holy robes, and 
who had vowed not to give up his sword 
until the rebuilding of the temple, con- 
ducted his division over the victorious 
plain of Nehauend. They were to con- 
centrate at the pass of Kerrund, which 
conducted into the province of Bagdad, 
and await the arrival of the king. '"^'"" 

At dawn of day, the royal division and 
the Sacred Guard, the whole under the 
command of Asriel, quitted the capital. 
Alroy still lingered, and for some hours 
the warriors of his staff might have been 
observed lounging about the citadel, or 
practising their skill in throwing the jer- 
reed as they exercised their impatient 
chargers before the gates. The King was 
with the Lady Miriam. 



OF ALROY. 53 

The King- was with the Lady Miriam, 
walking- in the garden of their uncle. 
His arm was wound round her delicate 
waist, and with the other he clasped her 
soft and graceful hand. The heavy tears 
burst from her downcast eyes, and stole 
along- her pale and pensive cheek. They 
walked in silence, the brother and the 
sister, before the purity of whose surpass- 
ing love even ambition vanished. He 
opened the lattice gate. They entered 
into the valley small and green ; before 
them was the marble fountain with its 
columns and cupola, and in the distance, 
the charger of Alroy and his single at- 
tendant. 

They stopped, and Alroy gathered 
flowers, and placed them in the hair of 
Miriam. He would have softened the 
bitterness of parting with a smile. Gently 



54f THE WONDROUS TALE 

he relaxed his embracing arm, almost in- 
sensibly he dropped her quivering hand. 

'^ Sister of my soul/' he whispered, 
" when we last parted here, I was a fugi- 
tive, and now I quit you a conqueror.'* 

She turned, she threw herself upon his 
neck, and buried her face in his breast. 

'' My beautiful, restrain yourself, we 
shall meet at Bagdad." 

He beckoned to her distant maidens; 
they advanced, he delivered Miriam into 
their arms. He seized her hand and 
pressed it to his mouth, and rushing to 
his horse, mounted, and disappeared. 



xn. 

A body of irregular cavalry feebly de- 
fended the pass of Kerrund. It was car- 



OF ALROY. 55 



ried, with slight loss, by the vanguard of 
Scherirah, and the fugitives prepared the 
host of the Caliph for the approach of the 
Hebrew army. 

Upon the plain of the Tigris, the 
enemy formed into battle array. The 
centre was commanded by Malek, tiie 
Grand Sultan of the Seljuks himself, the 
right wing, headed by the Sultan of Syria, 
was protected by the river ; and the left, 
under the Sultan of Roum, was posted 
upon the advantageous position of some 
irregular and rising ground. Thus proud 
in the number, valour, discipline, and 
disposition of his forces, Malek awaited 
the conqueror of Persia. 

The glittering columns of the Hebrews 
might even now be perceived defiling 
from the mountains, and forming at the 
extremity of the plain. Before night-fall 



56 THE WONDROUS TALE 

the camp of the invaders was pitched 
within hearing of that of Malek. The 
moving Hghts in the respective tents 
might plainly be distinguished ; and ever 
and anon the flourish of hostile music fell 
with an omiinous sound upon the ears of 
the opposed foemen. A few miles only 
separated those mighty hosts. Upon to- 
morrow depended, perhaps, the fortunes 
of ages. How awful is the eve of battle ! 
Alroy, attended by a few chieftains, 
personally visited the tents of the sol- 
diery, promising them on the morrow a 
triumph, before which the victories of 
ISehauend and Nishabur would sink into 
insignificance. Their fiery and excited 
visages proved at once their courage, and 
their faith. The sceptre of Solomon was 
paraded throughout the camp in solemn 
procession. On the summit of a huge 



OF ALROY. 57 

tumulus, perhaps the sepulchre of some 
classic hero, Esther, the prophetess, sur- 
rounded by the chief zealots of the host, 
poured forth her inspiring inspiration. 
It was a grand picture, that beautiful 
wild girl, the groups of stern devoted 
warriors, the red flame of the watch-fires 
mixing with the silver shadows of the 
moon as they illumined the variegated 
turbans and gleaming armour of her 
votaries ! 

In the pavilion of Alroy, Jabaster con- 
sulted with his pupil on the conduct of 
the morrow. 

'' This is a dififerent scene from the 
cavern of the Caucasus," said Alroy, as 
the High Priest rose to retire. 

*' It has one great resemblance, sire ; 
the God of our Fathers is with us." 

'^ Ay ! the Lord of Hosts. Moses was 

1^5 



58 THE WONDROUS TALE 

a great man. There is no career except 
conquest/' 

" You muse ?'' 

'' Of the past. The present is pre- 
pared. Too much thought will mar it." 

'' The past is for wisdom, the present 
for action, but for joy the future. The 
feeling that the building of the temple is 
at hand, that the Lord's anointed will 
once again live in the house of David, 
absorbs my spirit ; and when I muse over 
our coming glory, in my fond ecstasy I 
almost lose the gravity that doth beseem 
my sacred office." 

" Jerusalem — I have seen it. How 
many hours to dawn ?" 

" Some three/' 

'' Tis strange I could sleep. I re- 
member, on the eve of battle I was ever 
anxious. How is this, Jabaster ?" 



OF ALROY. 69 

** Your faith, sire, is profound." 

" Yes, I have no fear. My destiny is 
not complete. Good night, Jabaster. See 
Asriel, valiant priest. Pharez !" 

'' My Lord !'* 

" Rouse me at the second watch. Good 
night, boy." 

'' Good night, my Lord." 

'' Pharez !" 

'^ Be sure you rouse me at the second 
watch. Think you it wants three hours 
to dawn ?" 

'* About three hours, my Lord." 

" Well ! at the second watch, remem- 
ber ; good night." 



60 THE WONDROUS TALE 



XIII. 

'^ It is the second watch, my Lord." 

^' So soon ! Have I slept ? I feel 
fresh as an eagle. Call Scherirah, boy. 

'' Tis strange I never dream now. 
Before my flight, my sleep was ever 
troubled. Say what they like, man is v 
made for action. My life is now harmo- 
nious, and sleep has now become what 
nature willed.4t, a solace, not a contest. 
Before, it was a struggle of dark passions 
and bright dreams, in whose creative 
fancy and fair vision my soul sought re- 
fuge from the dreary bale of daily 
reality. 

^' I will withdraw the curtains of my 
tent. Oh ! most majestic vision ! And 



OF ALROY. 61 

have I raised this host ! O'er the wide 
plain, far as my eye can range, their 
snowy tents studding the purple land- 
scape, embattled legions gather round 
their flags to struggle for my fate. It is 
the agony of Asia. 

" A year ago, upon this very spot, I 
laid me down to die, an unknown thing, 
or known and recognized only to be de- 
spised, and now the Sultans of the world 
come forth to meet me. I have no fear. 
My destiny is not complete. And whi- 
ther tends it ? Let that power decide 
that hitherto has fashioned all my 
course. 

" Jerusalem, Jerusalem — ever harping 
on Jerusalem, With all his lore, he is a 
narrow-minded zealot, whose dreaming 
memory would fondly make a future like 
the past. Oh ! Bagdad, Bagdad, within 



62 THE WONDROUS TALE 

thy glittering halls, there is a charm 
worth all his Cabala ! 

^^Hah ! Scherirah ! The dawn is near at 
hand ; the stars still shining. The air is 
very pleasant. To-morrow will be a 
great day, Scherirah, for Israel and for 
you. You lead the attack. A moment 
in my tent, my brave Scherirah !" 



XIV. 

The dawn broke, a strong column of 
the Hebrews, commanded by Scherirah, 
poured down upon the centre of the 
army of the Caliph. Another column, 
commanded by Jabaster, attacked the 
left wing, headed by the Sultan of Roum. 
No sooner had Alroy perceived that the 
onset of Scherirah had succeeded in pene- 



OF ALROY. 63 

trating the centre of the Turks, than he 
placed himself at the head of the Sacred 
Guard, and by an irresistible charge 
completed their disorder and confusion. 
The division of the Sultan of Syria and 
a great part of the centre were entirely 
routed and driven into the river, and the 
remainder of the division of Malek was 
effectuaUy separated from his left wing. 

But while to Alroy the victory seemed 
already decided, a far different fate 
awaited the division of Jabaster. The 
Sultan of Roum, posted in a^i extremely 
advantageous position, and commanding 
troops accustomed to the discipline of 
the Romans of Constantinople, received 
the onset of Jabaster without yielding, 
and not only repelled his attack, but 
finally made a charge which completely 
disordered and dispersed the column of 



Q4f THE WONDROUS TALE 

the Hebrews. In vain Jabaster endea- 
voured to rally his troops, in vain he 
performed prodigies of valour, in vain he 
himself struck down the standard bearer 
of the Sultan, and once even penetrated 
to the pavilion of the monarch. His 
division was fairly routed. The eager- 
ness of the Sultan of Roum to effect the 
annihilation of his antagonists prevented 
him from observing the forlorn condition 
of the Turkish centre. Had he, after 
routing the division of Jabaster, only 
attacked Alroy in the rear, the fortune 
of the day might have been widely dif- 
ferent. As it was, the eagle eye of Alroy 
soon detected his inadvertence, and pro- 
fited by his indiscretion. Leaving Itha- 
mar to keep the centre in check, he 
charged the Sultan of Roum with the 
Sacred Guard, and afforded Jabaster an 



^ 



OF ALROY. " 65 

opportunity of rallying some part of his 
forces. The Sultan of Roum perceiving 
that the day was lost by the ill-conduct 
of his colleagues, withdrew his troops, re- 
treated in haste, but in good order, to 
Bagdad, carried off the Caliph, his Harem, 
and some of his treasure, and effected his 
escape into Syria. In the meantime the 
discomfiture of the remaining Turkish 
army was complete. The Tigris was dyed 
with their blood, and the towns through 
which the river flowed were apprised 
of the triumph of Alroy by the floating 
corpses of his enemies. Thirty thousand 
Turks were slain in battle : among them 
the Sultans of Bagdad and Syria, and a 
vast number of atabeks, emirs, and chief- 
tains. A whole division finding them- 
selves surrounded, surrendered on terms, 
and delivered up their arms. The camps 



66 THE WONDROUS TALE 

and treasure of the three Sultans were 
alike captured, and the troops that es- 
caped so completely dispersed, that they 
did not attempt to rally, but, disbanded 
and desperate, prowled over and plun- 
dered the adjoining provinces. The loss 
of the division of Jabaster was also severe, 
but the rest of the army suffered little. 
Alroy himself was slightly wounded. 
The battle lasted barely three hours. Its 
results were immense. David Alroy was 
now master of the East. 



XV. 

The plain was covered with the corpses 
of men and horses, arms and standards, 
and prostrate tents. Returning from the 
pursuit of the Sultan of Roum, Alroy or- 



OF ALROY. 67 

dered the trumpets to sound to arms, and 
covered with gore and dust, dismounted 
from his charger, and stood before the 
pavilion of Malek, leaning on his bloody 
scimitar, and surrounded by his victorious 
generals. 

" Ah, Jabaster \'' said the conqueror, 
giving his hand to the pontiff, '' 'twas 
well your troops had such a leader. No 
one but you could have rallied them. 
You must drill your lads a little before 
they meet again the Cappadocian cavalry. 
Brave Scherirah, we shall not forget our 
charge. Asriel, tell the guard, from me, 
that the victory of the Tigris was owing 
to their scimitars. Ithamar, what are our 
freshest troops ?" 

'' The legion of Aderbijan, sire." 
'' How strong can they muster }" 
'^ It counts twelve thousand men : we 
might collect two thirds/* 



68 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" Valiant Ithamar, take the Aderbijans, 
and a division of the guard, push on to- 
wards Bagdad, and summon the city. 
If his Sultanship of Roum offer battle, 
take up a position, and he shall quickly 
have his desire. For the present^ after 
these hasty marches and sharp fight- 
ing, the troops must rest. I guess he 
will not tarry. Summon the city, and 
say that if any resistance be offered, I 
will make it as desolate as old Babylon. 
Treat with no armed force. Where is 
the soldier that saved me a cracked skull — 
his name Benaiah ?" 

" I wait your bidding, sire.'' 

" You're a captain. Join the division 
of Ithamar, and win fresh laurels ere we 
meet again. Gentle Asriel, let your bro- 
ther know our fortune." 

'' Sire, several Tartars have already 
been dispatched to Hamadan." 



OF ALROY. 69 

"' 'Tis well. Send another, with these 
tablets to the Lady Miriam. Dispatch 
the pavilion of Malek as a trophy for the 
town. Elnebar, Goliath of the Hebrews, 
you bore our sacred standard like a hero ! 
How fares the prophetess ? I saw her 
charging in our ranks, waving a sabre 
with her snowy arm, her long, dark hair 
streaming like a storm, from whence her 
eyes flashed lightning." 

" The King bleeds," said Jabaster. 

'' Slightly. It will do me service. I 
am somewhat feverish. A kingdom for 
a draught of water ! And now for our 
wounded friends. Asriel, do you marshal 
the camp. It is the Sabbath eve.^ Time 
presses." 



70 THE WONDROUS TALE 



XVI. 

The dead were plundered, and thrown 
into the river, the encampment of the 
Hebrews completed. Alroy, with his 
principal officers, visited the wounded, 
and praised the valiant. The bustle 
which always succeeds a victory was in- 
creased in the present instance by the 
anxiety of the army to observe with 
grateful strictness the impending Sabbath. 

When the Sun set, the Sabbath was to 
commence. The undulating horizon ren- 
dered it difficult to ascertain the precise 
moment of his fall. The crimson orb 
sunk behind the purple mountains, the 
sky was flushed with a rich and rosy 
glow. Then might be perceived the 



OF ALROY. 71 

zealots, proud in their Talmudical lore, 
holding a skein of white silk in their 
hands, and announcing- the approach of 
the Sabbath by their observation of its 
shifting tints. While the skein was yet 
golden, the forge of the armourer still 
sounded, the fire of the cook still blazed, 
still the cavalry led their steeds to the 
river, and still the busy footmen braced 
up their tents, and hammered at their 
palisades. The skein of silk became 
rosy, the armourer worked with renewed 
energy, the cook puffed with increased 
zeal, the horsemen scampered from the 
river, the footmen cast an anxious glance 
at the fading twilight. 

The skein of silk became blue ; a dim, 
dull, sepulchral, leaden tinge fell over its 
purity. The hum of gnats arose, the bat 
flew in circling whirls over the tents, 



7S THE WONDROUS TALE 

horns sounded from all quarters, the Sun 
had set, the Sabbath had commenced. 
The forge was mute, the fire extinguished, 
the prance of horses and the bustle of men 
in a moment ceased. A deep, a sudden, 
and all pervading stillness dropped over 
that mighty host. It was night ; the 
sacred lamp of the Sabbath sparkled in 
every tent of the camp, which vied in 
silence and in brilliancy with the mute 
and glowing heavens. 

Morn came ; the warriors assembled 
around the altar and the sacrifice. The 
High Priest and his attendant Levites 
proclaimed the unity and the omnipo- 
tence of the God of Israel, and the sym- 
pathetic responses of his conquering and 
chosen people re-echoed over the plain. 
They retired again to their tents, to listen 
to the expounding of the law; even the 



OF ALROY. 73 

distance of a Sabbath walk was not to 
exceed that space that lies between Jeru- 
salem and the Mount of Olives. This 
was the distance between the temple and 
the tabernacle ; it had been nicely mea- 
sured, and every Hebrew who ventured 
forth from the camp this day might be 
observed counting the steps of a Sabbath- 
day's journey. At length the Sun again 
set, and on a sudden fires blazed, voices 
sounded, men stirred, in the same en- 
chanted and instantaneous manner that 
had characterized the stillness of the 
preceding eve. Shouts of laughter, bursts 
of music, announced the festivity of the 
coming night; supplies poured in from 
all the neighbouring villages, and soon 
the pious conquerors commemorated their 
late triumph in a round of banquetting. 
On the morrow, a Tatar arrived from 

VOL. II. E 



74 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Ithamar, informing Alroy that the Sultan 
of Roum had retreated into Syria, that 
Bagdad was undefended, but that he had 
acceded to the request of the inhabitants 
that a deputation should wait upon Al- 
roy before the troops entered the city, 
and had accorded a safe conduct for their 
passage. 



XVII. 

On the morrow messengers announced 
the approach of the deputation. All the 
troops were under arms. Alroy directed 
that the suppliants should be conducted 
through the whole camp before they 
arrived at the royal pavilion, on each side 
of which the Sacred Guard was mustered 
in array. The curtains of his tent with- 



OF ALROY. 75 

drawn displayed the conqueror himself 
seated on a sumptuous divan. On his 
right hand stood Jabaster in his priestly 
robes, on his left Scherirah. Behind 
him, the giant Elnebar supported the 
sacred sceptre. A crowd of chieftains 
was ranged on each side of the pavilion. 
Cymbals sounded, muffled kettle- 
drums, and the faint flourish of trum- 
pets ; the commencement of the pro- 
cession might be detected in the long 
perspective of the tented avenue. First 
came a company of beauteous youths, 
walking two by two, and strewing flowers, 
then a band of musicians in flowing 
robes of cloth of gold, plaintively sound- 
ing their silver trumpets. After these 
followed slaves of all climes, bearing a 
tribute of the most rare and costly pro- 
ductions of their countries : Negroes with 

E 2 



76 THE WONDROUS TALE 

tusks and teeth of the elephant, plumes 
of ostrich feathers, and caskets of gold 
dust; Syrians with rich armour ; Persians 
with vases of atar-gul, and Indians with 
panniers of pearls of Ormuz, and soft 
shawls of Kashmere. Encircled by his 
children, each of whom held alternately 
a w^hite or fawn-coloured gazelle, an 
Arab, clothed in his blue bornouz, led by 
a thick cord of crimson silk a tall and 
tawny giraffe. Fifty stout men succeeded 
two by two, carrying in company a silver 
shield laden with gold coin, or chased 
goblets studded with gems. 

The clash of cymbals announced the 
presence of the robes of honor,^ culled 
from the wardrobe of the Commander of 
the Faithful ; the silk of Aleppo and the 
brocade of Damascus, lined with the furs 
of the sable and the ermine, down from 



OF ALROY. 77 

the breast of the swan, and the skins of 
white foxes. 

After these followed two grey dro- 
medaries with furniture of silver, and 
many caparisoned horses, each led by 
a groom in rich attire. The last of these 
was a snow-white steed, upon whose 
front was the likeness of a ruby star, 
a courser of the sacred stud of Solomon, 
and crossed only by the descendants of 
the Prophet. 

The muffled kettle-drums heralded the 
company of black eunuchs with their 
scarlet vests and ivory battle-axes. They 
surrounded, and shrouded from the vulgar 
gaze, fourteen beautiful Circassian girls, 
whose brilliant visages and perfect forms 
were otherwise concealed by their long 
veils and ample drapery. 

The gorgeous procession, as they ap- 



78 THE WONDROUS TALE 

preached the conqueror, bowed humbly 
to Alroy, and formed in order on each 
side of the broad avenue. The deputa- 
tion appeared : twelve of the principal 
citizens of Bagdad, with folded arms, and 
downcast eyes, and disordered raiment. 
Meekly and mutely each touched the 
earth with his hand, and kissed it in 
token of submission, and then moving 
aside, made Avay for the chief envoy and 
orator of the company Honain ! 



XVIII. 

Humbly, but gracefully, the physician 
of the Caliph bowed before the conqueror 
of the East. His appearance and de- 
meanour afforded a contrast to the aspect 
of his brother envoys ; not less calm or 



OF ALROY. 79 

contented his countenance ; not less 
sumptuous or studied his attire; than 
when he first rescued Alroy in the bazaar 
of Bagdad from the gripe of the false 
Abdallah. 

He spoke, and every sound was hushed 
before the music of his voice. 

'' Conqueror of the world, that Destiny 
with which it is in vain to struggle, has 
placed our lives and fortunes in your 
power. Your slaves offer for your appro- 
bation specimens of their riches ; not as 
tribute, for all is your's ; but to show you 
the products of security and peace, and 
to induce you to believe that mercy may 
be a policy as profitable to the conqueror, 
as to the conquered ; that it may be bet- 
ter to preserve than to destroy ; and wiser 
to enjoy than to extirpate. 

" Fate ordained that we should be 



80 THE WONDROUS TALE 

born the slaves of the CaUph : that same 
Fate has delivered his sceptre into your 
hands. We offer you the same devotion 
we yielded to him, and we entreat the 
same protection he accorded to us. 

" Whatever may be your decision, we 
must bow to your decree with the humi- 
lity that recognizes superior force. Yet 
we are not without hope. We cannot 
forget that it is our good fortune not to 
be addressing a barbarous chieftain un- 
able to sympathize with the claims of 
civilization, the creations of art, and the 
finer impulses of humanity. We ac- 
knowledge your irresistible power, but we 
dare to hope everything from a Prince 
whose genius all acknowledge and admire, 
who has spared some portion of his youth 
from the cares of government and the 
pursuits of arms, to the ennobling claims 



OF ALROY 81 

of learning, whose morality has been 
moulded by a pure and sublime faith, and 
who draws his lineage from a sacred and 
celebrated race, whose unrivalled anti- 
quity even the prophet acknowledges." 

He ceased ; a buzz of approbation 
sounded throughout the pavilion, which 
was hushed instantly as the lips of the 
conqueror moved. 

'' Noble Emir," replied Alroy, '' re- 
turn to Bagdad, and tell your fellow- 
subjects that the King of Israel grants 
protection to their persons, and security 
to their property." 

" And for their faith ?" inquired the 
envoy in a lower voice. 

'' Toleration," replied Alroy, turning 
to Jabaster. 

'' Until further regulations," added the 
High Priest. 

E 5 



82 THE WONDROUS TALE 

''Emir/' said Alroy, ''the person of 
the Caliph will be respected/* 

" May it please your Highness/' re- 
plied Honain, " the Sultan of Roum has 
retired with our late ruler/' 

" And his Harem ?" 

" And his Harem/' 

" It was needless. We war not with 
women/' 

" Men, as well as women, must ac- 
knowledge the gracious mercy of your 
Highness/' 

" Benomi/' said Alroy, addressing 
himself to a young officer of the guard, 
" command the guard of honour that 
will attend this noble Emir on his re- 
turn. We soldiers deal only in iron, sir, 
and cannot vie with the magnificence of 
Bagdad, yet wear this dagger for the 
donor's sake /* and Alroy held out to 



OF ALROY. 83 

Honain a poignard flaming with 
gems. 

The Envoy of Bagdad advanced, took 
the dagger, kissed it, and placed it in his 
vest.^ 

'' Scherirah,'' continued Alroy, " this 
noble Emir is your charge. See that a 
choice pavilion of the host be for his use, 
and that his train complain not of the 
rough customs of our camp." 

" May it please your Highness," re- 
plied Honain, '' I have done my duty, 
and with your gracious permission would 
at once return. I have business only less 
urgent than the present, because it con- 
cerns myself." 

'' As you will, noble Emir. Benomi, 
to your post. Farewell, Sir." 

The deputation advanced, bowed, and 
retired. Alroy turned to Jabaster. 



84 THE WONDROUS TALE 

'' No common person that, Jabaster ?" 
" A very gracious Turk, Sire." 
'' Think you he is a Turk ?" 
'' By his dress." 

'' It may be so. Asriel, break up the 
camp. We'll march at once to Bagdad." 



XIX. 

The chiefs dispersed to make the neces- 
sary arrangements for the march. The 
news that the army was immediately 
to advance to Bagdad soon circulated 
throughout the camp, and excited the 
most lively enthusiasm. Every hand was 
at work, striking the tents, preparing the 
arms and horses. Alroy retired to his 
pavilion. The curtains were drawn. He 



OF ALROY. 85 

was alone, and plunged in profound me- 
ditation. 

'' Alroy !" a voice sounded. 

He started and looked up. Before him 
stood Esther the prophetess. 

" Esther! is it thou?" 

" Alroy ! enter not into Babylon." 

'' Indeed." 

" As I live, the Lord hath spoken it. 
Enter not into Babylon." 

'' Not enjoy my fairest conquest, 
maiden ?" 

" Enter not into Babylon.'* 

" What affrights thee ?" 

" Enter not into Babylon." 

'^ I shall surely change the fortunes of 
my life without a cause !" 

'' The Lord hath spoken. Is not that 
a cause V 

" I am the Lord's anointed. His warn- 
ing has not reached me." 



86) 



THE WONDROUS TALE 



'' Now it reaches thee. Doth the King 
despise the prophetess of the Lord ? It 
is the sin of Ahab." 

'' Despise thee ! despise the mouth 
that is the herald of my victories ! 'Twere 
rank blasphemy. Prophecy triumph, 
Esther, and Alroy will never doubt thy 
inspiration." 

'' He doubts it now. I see he doubts 
it now. Oh ! my King, I say again, 
enter not into Babylon." 

'' Beauteous maiden, those eyes flash 

lightning. Who can behold their wild 

and liquid glance, and doubt that Esther 

'is inspired! Be calm, sweet girl, some 

dream disturbs thy fancy." 

" Alroy, Alroy, enter not into Baby- 
lon !" 

" I have no fear — I bear a charmed 
life.'' 



OF ALROY. 1^87 

"Ah me! he will not listen. All isj 
lost !" 

" All is gained, my beautiful/^ 

'^ I would we were upon the Holy| 
Mount, and gazing on the stars of sacred[ 
Sion" 

" Esther," said Alroy, advancing, and| 
gently taking her hand, " the capital ofj 
the East will soon unfold its marvels to| 
thy sight. Prepare thyself for wonders.) 
Girl, we are no longer in the desart.j 
Forget thy fitful fancies. Come, choose] 
a husband from my generals, child, and l| 
will give a kingdom for thy dower. I| 
w^ould gladly see a crown upon that| 
tall imperial brow. It well deserves! 
one." 

The prophetess turned her dark eyesi 
full upon Alroy. What passed in her( 
mind was neither evident nor expressed.! 



88 THE WONDROUS TALE 

She gazed intently upon the calm and 1 
inscrutable countenance of the conqueror, | 
she flung away his hand, and rushed out I 
of the pavilion. I 



OF ALROY. 89 



PART VIII. 



The waving of banners^ the flourish of 
trumpets, the neighing* of steeds, and the 
glitter of spears ! On the distant horizon, 
they gleam like the morning, when the 
gloom of the night, shivers bright into 
day. 

Hark ! the tramp of the foemen, hke 
the tide of the ocean, flows onward and 
onward, and conquers the shore. From 
the brow of the mountain, like the rush 
of a river, the column defiling, melts into 
the plain. 

Warriors of Judah ! holy men that 



90 THE WONDROUS TALE 

battle for the Lord ! The land whereinj 
your fathers wept, and touched their | 
plaintive psaltery ; the haughty city \ 
where your sires bewailed their cold and | 
distant hearth ; your steeds are prancing » 
on its plain, and you shall fill its palaces. ) 
Warriors of Judah ! holy men that battle | 
for the Lord ! 

March, onward march, ye valiant \ 
tribes, the hour has come, the hour has ) 
come ! All the promises of ages, all the ) 
signs of sacred sages, meet in this ravish- j 
ing hour. Where is now the oppressor's j 
chariot, where your tyrant's purple robe ? j 
The horse and the rider are both over- ) 
thrown, the horse and the rider are both ) 
overthrown ! 

Rise, Rachel, from the wilderness,^ 
arise, and weep no more. No more thyi 
lonely palm-tree's shade need shroud thy j 



OF ALROY. 91 

secret sorrowing. The Lord hath heard 
the widow's sigh, the Lord *hath stilled 
the widow's tear. Be comforted, be com- 
forted, thy children live again ! 

Yes ! yes ! upon the bounding plain 

fleet Asriel glances like a star, and stout 

Scherirah shakes his spear by stern Ja- 

basters scimitar. And He is there, the 

chosen one, hymned by prophetic harps, 

whose life is like the morning dew on 

Sion s holy hill : the chor^en one, the 

chosen one, that leads his race to victory, 

warriors of Judah ! holy men that battle 

for the Lord ! 

♦. They come, they come, they come ! 

The ramparts of the city were crowded 

with the inhabitants, the river sparkled 

with ten thousand boats, the bazaars were 

' shut, the streets lined with the populace, 

j and the terrace of every house covered 



92 THE WONDROUS TALE 

with spectators. In the morning, Itha- 
mar had entered with his division and 
garrisoned the city. And now the van- 
guard of the Hebrew army, after having 
been long distinguished in the distance, 
approached the walls. A large body of 
cavalry at full speed dashed forward from 
the main force. Upon a milk white 
charger, and followed by a glittering 
train of warriors, amid the shouts of the 
vast multitude, Alroy galloped up to 
the gates. 

He was received by Ithamar and the 
members of the deputation, but Honain 
was not there. Accompanied by his staff 
and a strong detachment of the Sacred 
Guard, Alroy was conducted through 
the principal thoroughfares of the city, 
until he arrived at the chief entrance of 
the Serail, or palace, of the Caliph. 



OF ALROY. gS 

The vast portal conducted him into a 
large quadrangular court, where he dis- 
mounted, and where he was welcomed by 
the captain of the eunuch guard. Ac- 
companied by his principal generals and 
his immediate attendants, Alroy was then 
ushered through a suite of apartments 
which reminded him of his visit with 
Honain, until he arrived at the grand 
council chamber of the Caliphs. 

The conqueror threw himself upon the 
gorgeous Divan of the commander of the 
faithful. 

'' An easy seat after a long march/* 
said Alroy, as he touched the coffee with 
his lips, which the chief of the eunuchs 
presented to him in a cup of transparent 
pink porcelain, studded with pearls.^ 
'' Ithamar, now for your report. What 
is the temper of the city ? where is his 
Sultanship of Roum ?'* 



94 THE WONDROUS TALE 

** The city, Sire, is calm, and I believe 
content. The Sultan and the Caliph are 
still hovering on the borders of the pro- 
vince." 

'' So I supposed. Scherirah will settle 
that. Let the troops be encamped with- 
out the walls, the garrisoii, ten thousand 
strong, must be changed monthly. Itha- 
mar, you are governor of the city : Asriel 
commands the forces. Worthy Jabaster, 
draw up a report of the civil affairs of the 
capital. Your quarters are the College 
of the Dervishes. Brave Scherirah, I 
cannot afford you a long rest. In three 
days time you must have crossed the river 
with your division. It will be quick 
Work. I foresee they will not fight. 
Meet me all here in council by to-mor- 
row's noon. Farewell/' 

The chieftains retired, the high-priest 
lingered. 



OF ALROY. 95 

" Were it not an intrusion, Sire, I 
would fain entreat a moment's audience." 

'' My own Jabaster, you have but to 
speak." 

*' Sire, I would speak of Abidan, as va- 
liant a warrior as any in the host. It 
grieves me much, by some fatality, his 
services seem ever overpast." 

" Abidan ! I know him well, — a valiant 
man, but a dreamer, a dreamer." 

'' A dreamer, Sire ! Believe me, a 
true son of Israel, and one whose faith is 
deep." 

" Good Jabaster, we are all true sons of 
Israel. Yet let me have men about me, 
who see no visions in a mid-day sun. 
We must beware of dreamers." 

" Dreams are the oracles of God." 

" When God sends them. Very true, 
Jabaster. But this Abidan, and the com- 



96 THE WONDROUS TALE 

pany with whom he consorts, are filled 
with high-flown notions, caught from old 
traditions, which, if acted on, would ren- 
der government impracticable — in a word, 
they are dangerous men." 

" The very flower of Israel ! Some one 
has poisoned your sacred ear against them." 

'' No one, worthy Jabaster. I have no 
councillor except yourself. They may 
be the flower of Israel, but they are not 
the fruit. Good warriors, — bad subjects : 
excellent means, by which we may ac- 
complish greater ends. Ill have no 
dreamers in authority. I must have 
practical men about me — practical men. 
See how Abner, Asriel, Ithamar, Medad, 
— see how these conform to what sur- 
rounds them, yet invincible captains, in- 
vincible captains. But then they are 
practical men, Jabaster ; they have eyes. 



OF ALROY. 97 

and use them. They know the difference 
of times and seasons. But this Abidan, 
he has no other thought but the rebuild- 
ing of the temple : a narrow-souled bigot, 
who would sacrifice the essence to the 
form. The rising temple soon would fall 
again with such constructors. Why, Sir, 
what think you, — this very same Abidan 
preached in the camp against my entry 
into what the quaint fanatic chooses to 
call ^ Babylon,' and bored me with 
some vision !" 

" There was a time your Majesty 
thought not so ill of visions." 

' •' Am I Abidan, Sir ? Are other men 
to mould their conduct or their thoughts 
by me ? In this world I stand alone, a 
being of another order to yourselves, in- 
comprehensible even to you. Let this 
matter cease. Ill hear no more, and have 

VOL. II. F 



98 THE WONDROUS TALE 

heard too much. To-morrow at council, 
to-morrow at council/' 

The High-priest withdrew in silence. 

'^ He is gone — at length 1 am alone. 
I cannot bear the presence of these men, 
except in action. Their words, even their 
looks, disturb the still creation of my 
brooding Thought. I am once more 
alone ; and loneliness hath been the cra- 
dle of my empire. Now I do feel in- 
spired. There needs no mummery now 
to work a marvel. 

'' The sceptre of Solomon ! It may be 
so. What then ? Here's now the scep- 
tre of Alroy. What's that without his 
mind ? The legend said that none should 
free our people, but he who bore the scep- 
tre of great Solomon. The legend knew 
that none could gain that sceptre, but 
with a mind to whose supreme volition 



OF ALROY. 99 

the fortunes of the world would bow like 
fate. I gained it ; I confronted the spec- 
tre monarchs in their sepulchre ; and the 
same hand that grasped their shadowy 
rule, hath seized the diadem of the mighty 
Caliphs by the broad rushing of their im- 
perial river. 

'' The world is mine : and shall I yield 
the prize, the universal and heroic prize, 
to realize the dull tradition of some 
dreaming priest, and consecrate a le- 
gend ? He conquered Asia, and he built 
the temple. Are these my annals ? 
Shall this quick blaze of empire sink to a 
glimmering and a twilight sway over 
some petty province, the decent patriarch 
of a pastoral horde ? Is the Lord of Hosts 
so slight a God, that we must place a bar- 
rier to his sovereignty, and fix the boun- 
daries of Omnipotence between the Jordan 

f2 



100 THE WONDROUS TALE 

and the Lebanon ? It is not thus writ- 
ten ; and were it so, Til pit my inspira- 
tion against the prescience of my ances- 
tors. I also am a prophet, and Bagdad 
shall be my Sion. The daughter of the 
Voice ! Well, I am clearly summoned. 
I am the Lord s servant, not Jabaster's. 
Let me make his worship universal as his 
power ; and where 's the priest shall dare 
impugn my faith because his altars smoke 
on other hills than those of Judah ? 

'' I must see Honain. That man has a 
great mind. He alone can comprehend 
my purpose. Universal empire must not 
be founded on sectarian prejudices and 
exclusive rights. Jabaster would mas- 
sacre the Moslemin like Amalek ; the 
Moslemin, the vast majority, and most 
valuable portion, of my subjects. He 
would depopulate my empire, that it 



OF ALROY. 101 

might not be said that Ishmael shared 
the heritage of Israel. Fanatic ! Til 
send him to conquer Judah. We must 
conciliate. Something must be done 
to bind the conquered to our con- 
quering fortunes. That bold Sultan of 
Roum,— I wish Abner had opposed him. 
To run off with the Harem ! I have half 
a mind to place myself at the head of the 
pursuing force, and Passion and po- 
licy alike combine— and yet— Honain is 
the man — I might send him on a mis- 
sion. Could we make terms ? I detest 
treaties. My fancy flies from all other 
topics. I must see him. Could I but 
tell him all I think ! This door — where 
leads it ? Hah ! methinks I do remem- 
ber yon glittering gallery ! No one in 
attendance. The discipline of our palace 
is somewhat lax. My warriors are no 



102 THE WONDROUS TALE 

courtiers. What an admirable Marshal 
of the Palace Honain would make ! Si- 
lence everywhere. So ! 'tis well. These 
saloons I have clearly past through before. 
Could I but reach the private portal by 
the river side, unseen or undetected ! 
Tis not impossible. Here are many 
dresses. I will disguise myself. Trusty 
scimitar, thou hast done thy duty, rest 
awhile. 'Tis lucky I am beardless. I 
shall make a capital eunuch. So ! a very 
handsome robe. One dagger for a pinch, 
slippers powdered with pearls, a caftan of 
cloth of gold, a Kashmere girdle, and a 
pelisse of sables. One glance at the mir- 
ror. Good ! I begin to look like the 
conqueror of the world !" 



OF ALROY. 103 



11. 



It was twilight : a small and solitary 
boat, with a single rower, glided along 
the Tigris, and stopped at the archway 
of a house that descended into the river. 
It stopped, the boatman withdrew the 
curtains, and his single passenger disem- 
barked, and descended the stairs of the 
archway. 

The stranger reached the landing-place, 
and, unfastening a golden grate, pro- 
ceeded along a gallery, and entered a 
beautiful saloon of white and green mar- 
ble, opening into gardens. No one was 
in the apartment ; the stranger threw 
himself upon a silver couch, placed at the 
side of a fountain that rose from the cen- 



104 THE WONDROUS TALE 

tre of the chamber, and fell into a por- 
phyry basin. A soft whisper roused the 
stranger from his reverie, a soft whisper, 
that faintly uttered the word '' Honain/' 
The stranger looked up, a figure, en- 
veloped in a veil, that touched the ground, 
advanced from the gardens. 

" Honain !" said the advancing figure, 
throwing off the veil, " Honain ! Ah ! 
the beautiful mute returned !" 

A woman more lovely than the rosy 
morn, beheld an unexpected guest. They 
stood, the lady and the stranger gazing 
on each other in silence. A man, with a 
light, entered the extremity of the hall. 
Carefully he closed the portal, slowly he 
advanced, with a subdued step ; he ap- 
proached the lady and the stranger. 

^' Alroy !" said the astonished Honain, 
the light fell from his hand. 



OF ALROY. 105 

" Alroy !'* exclaimed the lady, with a 
bewildered air : she turned pale, and 
leant against a column. 

" Daughter of the Caliph !'' said the 
leader of Israel ; and he advanced, and 
fell upon his knee, and stole her passive 
hand, " I am indeed that Alroy to whom 
Destiny has delivered the empire of thy 
sire ; but the Princess Schirene can have 
nothing to fear from one who values, 
above all his victories, this memorial of 
her good will f and he took from his 
breast a rosary of pearls and emeralds, 
and rising slowly, left it in her trembling 
hand. 

The Princess turned and hid her face 
in her arm, which reclined against the 
column. 

" My kind Honain," said Alroy, ''you 
thought me forgetful of the past, — you 

F 5 



106 THE WONDROUS TALE 

thought me ungrateful. My presence 
here proves that I am not so. I come to 
inquire all your wishes. I come, if in 
my power, to gratify and to fulfil them." 

'' Sire," replied Honain, who had re- 
covered from the emotion in which he 
rarely indulged, and from the surprise 
which seldom entrapped him. '' Sire, 
my wishes are slight. You see before 
you the daughter of my master. An in- 
terview, for which I fear I shall not easily 
gain that lady's pardon, has made you 
somewhat acquainted with her situation 
and her sentiments. The Princess Schi- 
rene seized the opportunity of the late 
convulsions to escape from a mode of 
life long repugnant to all her feelings, 
and from a destiny at which she trembled. 
I was her only councillor, and she may 
feel assured, a faithful, although perhaps 



OF ALROY. 107 

an indiscreet one. The irresistible soli- 
citation of the inhabitants, that I should 
become their deputy to their conqueror, 
prevented us from escaping as we had 
intended. Since then, from the move- 
ment of the troops, I have deemed it more 
prudent that we should remain at present 
here, although I have circulated the intel- 
ligence of my departure. In the kiosk 
of my garden, the Princess is now a will- 
ing prisoner. At twilight she steals forth 
for the poor relaxation of my society, to 
listen to the intelligence which I acquire 
during the day in disguise. The history, 
Sire, is short and simple. We are in 
your power; but instead of deprecating 
your interference, I now solicit your 
protection.'" 

'' Dear Honain, 'tis needless. The 
Princess Schirene has only to express a 



108 THE WONDROUS TALE 

wish that it may be fulfilled. I came to 
speak with you on weighty matters, Ho- 
nain, but I retire, for I am an intruder 
now. To-morrow, if it please you, at 
this hour, and in this disguise, I will 
again repair here. In the meantime, this 
lady may perchance express to you her 
wishes, and you will bear them to me. 
If an escort to any country, if any palace 
or province for her rule and residence — 
but I will not offer to one who should 
command. Lady ! farewell. Pardon the 
past ! To-morrow, good Honain ! pr'y- 
thee let us meet. Good even V* 



III. 

'' The royal brow was clouded," said 
Ithamar to Asriel, as departing from the 



OF ALROY. 109 

council they entered their magnificent 
barque. 

'' With thought ; he has so much upon 
his mind, 'tis wondrous how he bears 
himself." 

'' I have seen him gay on the eve of 
battle, and lively though calm, with 
weightier matters than now oppress him. 
His brow was clouded, but not, methinks, 
with thought ; one might rather say with 
temper. Mark you, how he rated Jabas- 
ter ?" 

" Roundly ! The stern Priest writhed 
under it ; and as he signed the ordinance, 
shivered his reed in rage. I never saw a 
man more pale." 

'' Or more silent. He looked like an 
embodied storm. I tell you what, Asriel, 
that stern Priest loves not us." 

*' Have you just discovered that secret, 



110 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Ithamar ? We are not of his school. Nor, 
in good faith, is our ruler. I am glad to 
see the King is so staunch about Abidan. 
Were he in council, he would support 
Jabaster.'* 

" Oh ! his mere tool. What think 
you of Scherirah ?'* 

" I would not trust him. As long as 
there is fighting, he will meddle with 
nothing else ; but, mark my words, Itha- 
mar : in quiet times he will support the 
Priest." 

'' Medad will have a place in council. 
He is with us." 

^' Heart and soul. I would your bro- 
ther were here, Asriel : he alone could 
balance Jabaster. Alroy loves your bro- 
ther like himself. Is it true he marries 
the Lady Miriam ?" 



OF ALROY. Ill 

'^ So the King wishes. Twill be a fine 
match for Abner." 

" The world is all before us. I won- 
der who will be Viceroy of Syria ?" 

" When we conquer it. Not Sche- 
rirah. Mark my words, Ithamar : he 
never will have a government. You or I 
perchance. For my own part, I would 
sooner remain as I am." 

'' Yours is a good post ; the best." 

" With the command of the city. It 
should go with the guard." 

'' Well, then, help me in getting 
Syria, and you can ask for my command/* 

" Agreed. Jabaster will have that in 
a Hebrew monarchy, the Chief Priest is 
in fact the Grand Vizier." 

" Alroy will be his own minister."' 

" I am not so sure of that. He may 
choose to command the Syrian expedition 



112 THE WONDROUS TALE 

in person ; he must leave some head at 
Bagdad. Jabaster is no general." 

" Oh ! none at all. Alroy will be 
glad to leave him at home. The Sultan 
of Roum may not be always so merciful." 

" Hah ! hah ! that was an escape !" 

'' By heavens ! I thought it was all 
over. You made a fine charge." 

'' 1 shall never forget it. I nearly ran 
over Jabaster." 

'' Would that you had !" 



IV. 



It is the tender twilight hour, when 
maidens in their lonely bower, sigh softer 
than the Eve ! The languid rose her head 
upraises, and listens to the nightingale, 
while his wild and thrilling praises, from 



OF ALROY. 113 

his trembling bosom gush : the languid 
rose her head upraises, and listens with a 
blush. 

In the clear and rosy air, sparkling 
with a single star, the sharp and spiry 
cypress tree, rises like a gloomy thought, 
amid the flow of revelry. A singing 
bird, a single star, a solemn tree, an 
odorous flower, are dangerous in the ten- 
der hour, when maidens in their twilight 
bower, sigh softer than the Eve ! 

The daughter of the Caliph comes 
forth to breathe the air : her lute her 
only company. She sits her down by a 
fountain's side, and gazes on the water- 
fall. Her cheek reclines upon her arm, 
like fruit upon a graceful bough. Very 
pensive is the face of that bright and 
beauteous lady. She starts ; a warm 
voluptuous lip presses her soft and idle 



114 THE WONDROUS TALE 

hand. It is her own gazelle. With his 
large and lustrous eyes, more eloquent 
than many a tongue, the fond attendant 
mutely asks the cause of all her thought- 
fulness. 

" Ah ! bright gazelle ! ah ! bright 
gazelle !" the Princess cried, the Princess 
cried; ''thy lips are softer than the 
swan, thy lips are softer than the swan ; 
but his breathed passion, when they 
pressed, my bright gazelle ! my bright 
gazelle !" 

" Ah ! bright gazelle ! ah ! bright 
gazelle I" the Princess cried, the Princess 
cried; '' thine eyes are like the stars of 
night, thine eyes are like the stars of 
night ; but his glanced passion when they 
gazed, my bright gazelle! my bright 
gazelle !" 

She seized her lute, she wildly threw 



OF ALROY. 115 

her fingers o'er its thrilling chords, and, 
gazing on the rosy sky, to borrow all its 
poetry, thus, thus she sang ; thus, thus 
she sang. 



1. 



He rose in beauty, like the morn. 
That brightens in our Syrian skies ; 
Dark Passion glittered in his eye. 
And Empire sparkled in his form ! 



My Soul ! thou art the dusky earth, 
On which his sunlight fell ; 
The dusky earth that, dim no longer. 
Now breathes with light, now beams with 
love ! 



116 THE WONDROUS TALE 

3. 

He rose in beauty, like the morn. 
That brightens in our Syrian skies ; 
Dark Passion glittered in his eye. 
And Empire sparkled in his form ! 

'' Once more, once more ! Ah ! sing 
that strain once more !" 

The Princess started and looked around. 
Before her stood Alroy. She rose, she 
would have retired ; but advancing, the 
conqueror stole her hand. 

*' Fair Princess," said Alroy, " let it 
not be said my presence at once banished 
beauty and music/' 

" Sire, I doubt not, Honain awaits you. 
Let me summon him." 

" Lady, it is not with Honain, that I 
would speak." 



OF ALROY. 117 

He seated himself by her side. His 
countenance was pale, his heart trembled. 

" This garden/' at length he observed 
in a low voice; '' this garden — a brief, 
brief space has glided away since first I 
wandered within its beauteous limits, and 
yet those days seem like the distant 
memory of another life.'' 

" It is another life,'' said the Princess. 
" Ourselves, the world, all forms and 
usages, all feelings and all habits, verily, 
they have changed as if we had breathed 
within another sphere." 

" 'Tis a great change.'* 

'' Since first you visited my bright 
kiosk. Pretty bauble ! I pray it may 
be spared.'' 

" It is sacred, like yourself." 

'' You are a courteous conqueror." 

" I am no conqueror, fair Schirene, but 



118 THE WONDROUS TALE 

a slave more lowly than when 1 first 
bowed humbly in your presence." 

*' And bore away a token not for- 
gotten. Your rosary is here/' 

'' Let me claim it. It has been my 
consolation in much peril, beauteous 
lady. On the eve of battle I wound it 
round my heart.'' 

She held forth the rosary, and turned 
away her head. Her hand remained in 
his ; he pressed it to his lips. His right 
arm retained her hand, he wound the 
other round her waist, as he fell upon his 
knee. 

*' Oh beautiful, oh ! more than beau- 
tiful ! for thou to me art like a dream un- 
broken," exclaimed the young leader of 
Israel, '' let me, let me breathe my 
adoration. I offer thee not empire; I 
offer thee not wealth ; I offer thee not all 



OFALROY. 119 

the boundless gratification of magnificent 
fancy -these may be thine, but all these 
thou hast proved ; but if the passionate 
aiFections of a spirit, which ne'er has 
yielded to the power of woman, or the 
might of man — if the deep devotion of 
the soul of Alroy be deemed an offering 
meet for the shrine of thy surpassing 
loveliness, I worship thee, Schirene, I 
worship thee, I worship thee ! 

" Since I first gazed upon thee, since 
thy beauty first rose upon my presence 
like a star bright with my destiny, in the 
still sanctuary of my secret love, thy idol 
has ever rested. Then, then, I was a 
thing whose very touch thy creed might 
count a contumely. I have avenged the 
insults of long centuries in the best blood 
of Asia ; I have returned, in glory and in 
pride, to claim my ancient sceptre ; but 



120 THE WONDROUS TALE 

sweeter far than vengeance, sweeter far 
than the quick gathering of my sacred 
tribes, the rush of triumph and the blaze 
of empire, is this brief moment of adoring 
love, wherein I pour the passion of my 
life ! 

'' Oh ! my soul, my life, my very 
being ! thou art silent, but thy silence is 
sweeter than others' speech. Yield, yield 
thee, dear Schirene, yield to thy sup- 
pliant ! Thy faith, thy father's faith, 
thy native customs, these, these shall be 
respected, beauteous lady ! Pharaoh's 
daughter yielded her dusky beauty to 
my great ancestor. Thy face is like the 
bright inspiring day ! Let it not be said 
the daughter of the Nile shared Israel's 
crown — the daughter of the Tigris 
spurned our sceptre. I am not Solomon, 
but I am one that, were Schirene the 



OF ALROY 1^1 

partner of my throne, would make his 
glowing annals read like a wearisome and 
misty tale to our surpassing lustre !" 

He ceased, the Princess turned her 
hitherto hidden countenance, and bowed 
it on his heart. '' Oh ! Alroy/' she ex- 
claimed, ^^ I have no creed, no country, 
no life, but thee ! 



V. 



" The King is late to-day." 

*' Is it true, Asriel, there is an express 
from Hamadan ?" 

" Of no moment, Ithamar. I had 
private letters from Abner. All is quiet." 

" 'Tis much past the hour. When do 
you depart, Scherirah ?" 

" The troops are ready. I wait orders. 

VOL. II. G 



12i2 THE WONDROUS TALE 

This morning's council will perchance 
decide." 

'' This morning's council is devoted to 
the settlement of the civil affairs of the 
capital/' remarked Jabaster. 

" Indeed !" said Asriel. '' Is your re- 
port prepared, Jabaster ?" 

'' 'Tis here/' replied the High Priest. 
*' The Hebrew legislator requires but little 
musing to shape his order. He has a 
model which time cannot destroy, nor 
thought improve." 

Ithamar and Asriel exchanged signifi- 
cant glances. Scherirah looked solemn. 
There was a pause, which was broken by 
Asriel. 

'' 'Tis a noble city, this Bagdad. I 
have not yet visited your quarters, Jabas- 
ter. You are well placed." 

'' As it may be. I hope we shall not 



OF ALROY. 123 

tarry here long. The great point is still 
not achieved." 

'' How far is it to the holy city ?" in- 
quired Scherirah. 

'' A month's march/' replied Jabas- 
ter. 

'' And when you get there ?" inquired 
Ithamar. 

'' You may fight with the Franks," re- 
plied Asriel. 

" Jabaster, how large is Jerusalem ?" 
inquired Ithamar. "Is it true, as I have 
sometime heard, that it is not bigger than 
the Serail here, gardens and all ?'' 

" Its glory hath departed," replied the 
High Priest ; '' the bricks have fallen, 
but we will rebuild with marble ; and 
Sion, that is now without the Christian 
walls, shall yet sparkle, as in the olden 
time, with palaces and pavilions." 

g2 



124 THE WONDROUS TALE 

A flourish of trumpets, the portals 
flew open, and Alroy entered, leaning on 
the arm of the Envoy of Bagdad. 

'' Valiant leaders," said Alroy to the 
astonished chieftains. '' In this noble 
stranger, you see one like yourselves en- 
trusted with my unbounded confidence. 
Jabaster, behold thy brother !" 

" Honain ! Art thou Honain V' ex- 
claimed the Pontiff", starting from his 
seat. '^ I have a thousand messengers 
after thee." With a countenance alter- 
nately pallid with surprise and burning 
with affection, Jabaster embraced his bro- 
ther, and, overpowered with emotion, hid 
his face on his shoulder. 

" Sire," at length exclaimed the High 
Priest in a low and tremulous voice, '' I 
must pray your pardon that for an in- 
stant in this character I have indulged in 



OF ALROY. 125 

any other thoughts but those that may 
concern your welfare. 'Tis past ; and 
you, who know all, will forgive me." 

'' All that respects Jabaster must con- 
cern my welfare. He is the pillar of my 
empire ;" and holding forth his hand, 
Alroy placed the High Priest on his 
right. " Scherirah, you depart this eve." 

The rough captain bowed in silence. 

'' What is this ?" continued Alroy, as 
Jabaster offered him a scroll. '' Ah ! your 
report. ' Order of the Tribes' — ' Service 
of the Levites' — ' Princes of the People' — 
' Elders of Israel!' The day may come 
when this may be effected. At present, 
Jabaster, we must be moderate, and con- 
tent ourselves with arrangements that 
may ensure that order shall be main- 
tained, property respected, and justice 
administered. Is it true, a gang has rifled 
a mosque V 



126 THE WONDROUS TALE 

''Sire! of that I would speak. They 
are no plunderers, but men, perhaps too 
zealous, who have read and who have 
remembered that ' ye shall utterly de- 
stroy all the places, wherein the nations 
which ye shall possess, served their gods 
upon the high mountains, and upon the 
hill, and under every green tree. And 
ye shall overthrow their altars, and' " 

" Jabaster, is this a synagogue ? Come 
I to a council of valiant statesmen or 
dreaming Rabbis ? For a thousand cen- 
turies we have been quoting the laws we 
dared not practice. Is it with such aid 
we captured Nishabur, and crossed the 
Tigris ? Valiant, wise Jabaster, thou art 
worthy of better things, and capable of 
all. I entreat thee urge such matters for 
the last time. Are these fellows in 
custody ?" 



OF ALROY. 127 

" They were in custody. I have freed 
them/^ 

'' Freed them ! Hang them ! Hang 
them on the most public grove. Is this 
the way to make the Moslemin a duteous 
subject ? Jabaster, Israel honours thee ; 
and I, its chief, know that one more true, 
more valiant, or more learned, crowds 
not around our standard ; but I see, the 
caverns of the Caucasus are not a school 
for empire." 

'' Sire, I had humbly deemed the school 
for empire was the law of Moses." 
'' Ay ! adapted to these times." 
'' Can aught divine be changed ?" 
'' Am I as tall as Adam ? If man, the 
crown, the rose of all this fair creation, 
the most divine of all divine inventions, 
if time have altered even this choicest of 
all godlike works, why shall it spare a 



128 THE WONDROUS TALE 

law made but to rule his conduct ? Good 
Jabaster, we must establish the throne of 
Israel — that is my mission, and for the 
means no matter how — or where. Asriel, 
what news of Medad ?" 

'' All is quiet between the Tigris and 
Euphrates. It would be better to recall 
his division, which has been much ha- 
rassed. I thought of relieving him by 
Abidan." 

'' I think so, too. We may as well 
keep Abidan out of the city. If the 
truth were known, I'll wager some of his 
company plundered the mosque. We 
must issue a proclamation on that sub- 
ject. My good Jabaster, we'll talk over 
these matters alone. At present I will 
leave you with your brother. Scherirah, 
sup with me to-night, before you quit 
us. Asriel, come with me to my cabinet." 



OF ALROY. 129 



VI. 



" I must see the King !** 

'' Holy Priest, his Highness has re- 
tired. It is impossible." 

'' I must see the King. Worthy Pha- 
rez, I take all peril on myself." 

'' Indeed his Highness's orders are im- 
perative. You cannot see him." 

'' Knowest thou who I am ?'* 

" One whom all pious Hebrews reve- 



rence." 



'' I say I must see the King." 

" Indeed, indeed, holy Jabaster, it can- 
not be." 

" Shall Israel perish for a menial's 
place ? Go to ; I'll see him." 

'' Nay ! if you will. I'll struggle for 
my duty." 

G 5 



ISO THE WONDROUS TALE 

'* Touch not the Lord's anointed. Dog, 
you shall suffer for this !" 

So saying, Jabaster threw aside Pharez, 
and, with the attendant clinging to his 
robes, rushed into the royal chamber. 

'' What is all this ?" exclaimed Alroy, 
starting from the Divan. '' Jabaster ! 
Pharez, withdraw ! How now, is Bag- 
dad in insurrection ?" 

'' Worse, much worse, Israel soon will 
be." 

-Ay!- 

'' My fatal brother has told me all, nor 
would T sleep, until I lifted up my voice 
to save thee." 

'' Am I in danger ?'' 

'' In the wilderness, when the broad 
desart quivered beneath thy trembling 
feet, and the dark heavens poured down 
their burning torrents, thou wert less so. 



OF ALROY. 181 

In that hour of death, one guarded thee, 
who ne'er forgets his fond and faithful 
offspring, and now, when he has brought 
thee out of the house of bondage ; now, 
when thy fortunes, like a noble cedar, 
swell in the air, and shadow all the land, 
thou, the very leader of his people, his 
chosen one, for whom he hath worked 
such marvels — thy heart is turned from 
thy father's God, and hankers after strange 
abominations/' 

Through the broad arch that led into 
the gardens of the Serail, the moonlight 
fell upon the tall figure, and the upraised 
arm of the Priest ; Alroy stood with 
folded arms at some distance, watching 
Jabaster as he spoke, with a calm, but 
searching glance. Suddenly he advanced 
with a quick step, and, placing his hand 
upon Jabaster's arm, said in a low, in- 



132 THE WONDROUS TALE 

quiring* tone, '' You are speaking of this 
marriage ?" 

'' Of that which ruined Solomon." 
" Listen to me, Jabaster," said Alroy, 
interrupting him, in a calm, but pe- 
remptory, tone. " I cannot forget that 
I am speaking to my master, as well as 
to my friend. The Lord, who knoweth 
all things, hath deemed me worthy of 
his mission. My fitness for this high 
and holy office, was not admitted without 
proof. A lineage, which none else could 
offer, mystic studies, shared by few, a 
mind that dared encounter all things, 
and a frame that could endure most, — 
these were my claims ; — but no more of 
this. I have passed the great ordeal, 
the Lord of Hosts hath found me not un- 
worthy of his charge, I have established 
his ancient people, his altars blaze with 



OF ALROY. 133 

sacrifices, his priests are honoured — bear 
witness thou, Jabaster — his omnipotent 
unity is declared. What wouldst thou 
more ?" 

" All !" 

'' Then Moses knew ye well. It is a 
stiff-necked people.'' 

''Sire, bear with me. If I speak in 
heat, I speak in zeal. You ask me what 
I wish : my answer is, a national exis- 
tence, which we have not. You ask me 
what I wish : my answer is, the Land of 
Promise. You ask me what I wish : my 
answer is, Jerusalem. You ask me what 
I wish : my answer is, the Temple — all 
we have forfeited, all we have yearned 
after, all for which we have fought — our 
beauteous country, our holy creed, our 
simple manners, and our ancient cus- 
toms/' 



134 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" Manners change with time and cir- 
cumstances ; customs may be observed 
every where. The ephod on thy breast 
proves our faith ; and for a country, is 
the Tigris less than Siloah, or the Eu- 
phrates inferior to the Jordan ?" 

" Alas ! alas ! there was a glorious 
prime when Israel stood aloof from other 
nations, a fair and holy thing that God 
had hallowed. We were then a chosen 
family, a most peculiar people, set apart 
for God's entire enjoyment. All about 
us was solemn, deep, and holy. We 
shunned the stranger as an unclean thing 
that must defile our solitary sanctity, and 
keeping to ourselves, and to our God, 
our lives flowed on in one great solemn 
tide of deep religion, making the meanest 
of our multitude feel greater than the 
Kings of other lands. It was a glorious 



OF ALROY. 135 

time: I thought it had returned— but I 
awake from this, as other dreams." 

'' We must leave off dreaming-, good 
Jabaster, — we must act. Were I, by any 
chance, to fall into one of those reveries, 
with which I have often lost the golden 
hours at Hamadan, or in our old cave, I 
should hear, some fine morning, his Sul- 
tanship of Roum rattling at my gates." 
Alroy smiled as he spoke ; he would wil- 
lingly have introduced a lighter tone 
into the dialogue, but the solemn counte- 
nance of the Priest was not sympathetic 
with his levity. 

'' My heart is full, and yet I cannot 
speak: the memory of the past over- 
powers my thought. I had vainly deemed 
my voice, inspired by the soul of truth, 
might yet preserve him ; and now I stand 
here in his presence, silent and trembling, 



136 THE WONDROUS TALE ' 



like a guilty thing. Oh, my Prince ! my 
pupil !" said the Priest, advancing, fall- 
ing on his knee, and seizing the robe of 
Alroy, " by thy sacred lineage, by the 
sweet memory of thy ardent youth, and 
our united studies — by all thy zealous 
thoughts, and solemn musings, and glo- 
rious aspirations after fame — by all thy 
sufferings, and by all thy triumph, and 
chiefly by the name of that great God, 
who hath elected thee his favoured child 
— by all the marvels of thy mighty mis- 
sion, — I do adjure thee ! Arise, Alroy, 
arise and rouse thyself. The lure that 
snared thy fathers may trap thee — this 
Dalilah may shear thy mystic lock. Spi- 
rits like thee act not by halves. Once 
fall out from the straight course before 
tliee, and though thou deemest 'tis but to 
saunter mid the summer trees, soon thou 



OF ALROY. 137 

wilt find thyself in the dark depths of 
some infernal forest, where none may res- 
cue thee !'* 

" What if I do inherit the eager blood 
of my great ancestor, at least I hold his 
sceptre. Shall aught of earthly power 
prevail against the supernatural sway of 
Heaven and Hades ?" 

'' Sire, Sire, the legend that came from 
Sinai is full of high instruction. But 
shape thy conduct by its oracles, and all 
were well. It says our people only can 
be established by him who rules them 
with the virge of Solomon. Sire, when 
the Lord offered his pleasure to that 
mighty king, thou knowest his deep dis- 
cretion. Riches, and length of days, 
empire, and vengeance — these were not 
the choice of one to whom all accidents 
were proffered. The legend bears an in- 



138 THE WONDROUS TALE 

ward spirit, as well as outward meaning. 
The capture of the prize was a wise test 
of thy imperial fitness. Thou hast 
his sceptre, but without his wisdom — 'tis 
but a staff of cedar." 

'' Hah ! Art thou there ? I am glad 
to see Jabaster politic. Hear me, my 
friend. What my feelings be unto this 
royal lady, but little matters. Let them 
pass, and let us view this question by the 
light wherein you have placed it, the 
flame of policy and not of passion. I 
am no traitor to the God of Israel, in 
whose name I have conquered, and in 
whose name I shall rule ; but thou art a 
learned Doctor, thou canst inform us. 
I have heard no mandate to yield my 
glorious empire for my meanest province. 
I am Lord of Asia, so would I have my 
long posterity. Our people are but a 



OF ALROY. 139 

remnant, a feeble fraction of the teeming 
millions that own my sway. What I 
hold I can defend ; but my children may 
not inherit the spirit of their sire. The 
Moslemin will recognize their rule with 
readier hearts, when they remember a 
daughter of their Caliphs gave them life. 
You see I too am politic, my good Jabas- 
ter ?" 

'^The policy of the son of Kareah- 
'twas fatal. He preferred Egypt to Ju- 
dah, and he suffered. Sire, the Lord 
hath blessed Judah: it is his land. He 
would have it filled by his peculiar peo- 
ple, so that his worship might ever flou- 
rish. For this he has, by many curious 
rites and customs, marked us out from 
all other nations, so that we cannot, at 
the same time, mingle with them and yet 
be true to him. We must exist alone. 



140 THE WONDROUS TALE 

To preserve that loneliness, is the great 
end and essence of our law. What have 
we to do with Bagdad, or its people, 
where every instant we must witness 
some violation of our statutes ? Can we 
pray with them ? Can we eat with them ? 
In the highest duties, and the lowest oc- 
cupations of existence, alike we cannot 
mingle. From the altar of our God, to 
our own domestic boards, we are alike 
separated from them. Sire, you may be 
King of Bagdad, but you cannot, at the 
same time, be a Jew." 

" I am what I am. I worship the Lord 
of Hosts. Perhaps, in his mercy, he will 
accept the days of Nishabur and the 
Tigris, as a compensation for some slight 
relaxation in the ritual of the baker and 
the bath." 

'' And mark my words : it was by the 



OF ALROY. 141 

ritual of the baker and the bath, that 
Alroy rose, and without it he will fall. 
The genius of the people raised him, 
which he shared, and that genius has been 
formed by the law of Moses. Based on 
that law, he might indeed have handed 
down an empire to his long posterity ; 
and now, though the tree of his fortunes 
seems springing up by the water side, 
fed by a thousand springs, and its 
branches covered with dew, there is a 
gangrene in the sap, and to-morrow he 
may sink like a shrivelled gourd. Alas ! 
alas ! for Israel ! We have long fed on 
mallows ; but to lose the vintage in the 
very day of fruition, 'tis very bitter. 
Ah ! when I raised thy exhausted form 
in the cavern of Genthesma, and the star 
of David beamed brightly in the glowing 
heavens upon thy high fulfilment, who 



142 THE WONDROUS TALE 

could have dreamed of a night like this ? 
Farewell, Sire/' 

'' Stop, Jabaster ! earliest, dearest friend, 
pr'ythee, pr'ythee stop !" 

The Priest slowly turned, the Prince 
hesitated. 

'' Part not in anger, good Jabas- 
ter." 

'' In sorrow. Sire, only in sorrow ; but 
deep and terrible." 

''Israel is Lord of Asia, my Jabaster. 
Why should we fear?'" 

''Solomon built Tadmor in the wil- 
derness, and his fleet brought gold from 
Ophir ; and yet Alroy was born a slave." 

*' But did not die one. The Sultans 
of the world have fallen before me. I 
have no fear. Nay, do not go. At least 
you'll place some credence in the stars, 
my learned Cabalist. See, my planet 



OF ALROY. 143 

shines as brightly as my fortunes/' Al- 
roy withdrew the curtain, himself and 
Jabaster stepped on to the terrace. A 
beautiful star glittered on high. As 
they gazed, its colour changed, and a 
blood-red meteor burst from its circle, 
and fell into space. The Conqueror and 
the Priest looked at each other at the 
same time. Their countenances were 
pale, inquiring, and agitated. 

" Sire," said Jabaster, ''march to Ju- 
dah." 

'' It portends war," replied Alroy, en- 
deavouring to recover himself. ''Per- 
chance some troubles in Persia.'* 

" Troubles at home, no other. The 
danger is nigh. Look to thyself." 

A wild scream was heard in the gar- 
dens. It sounded thrice. 

" What is all this ?" exclaimed Alroy, 



144 THE WONDROUS TALE 

really agitated. '^ Rouse the guard, Ja- 
baster, search the gardens." 

'' Tis useless, and may do harm. It 
was a spirit that shrieked." 

'' What said it ?" 

'* Mene, Mene, Tekel, Upharsin !" 



VII. 

" The old story, the Priest against the 
King," said Honain to Alroy, when, at 
his morrow's interview, he had listened 
to the events of the preceding night. 
'' My pious brother wishes to lead you 
back to the Theocracy, and is fearful that 
if he pray at Bagdad, instead of Sion, he 
may chance to become only the head of 
an inferior sect, instead of revelling in 
the universal tithes of a whole nation. 



OF ALROY. 145 

As for the meteor, Scherirah must have 
crossed the river about the same time, 
and the Sultan of Roum may explain the 
bloody portent. For the shriek, as I 
really have no acquaintance with spirits, 
I must leave the miraculous communica- 
tion to the favoured ears and initiated 
intelligences of your Highness and my 
brother. It seems it differed from ' the 
Daughter of the Voice ' in more respects 
than one, since it was not only extremely 
noisy, buty as it would appear, quite un- 
intelligible except to the individual who 
had an interest in the interpretation — an 
ingenious one, I confess. When I enter 
upon my functions as your Highnesses 
Chamberlain, I will at least guarantee 
that your slumbers shall not be disturbed 
either by spirits or more unwelcome 
visitors." 

VOL. II. H 



146 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" Enter upon them at once, good Ho- 
nain. How fares my Persian rose to 
clay, my sweet Schirene ?" 

'' Feeding on your image in your ab- 
sence. She spares no word to me, I do 
assure your Highness." 

" Nay, nay, we know you are a ge- 
neral favourite with the sex, Honain. 
riaith I'm jealous." 

" I would your Highness had cause," 
said Honain, very demurely. 



vm. 

The approaching marriage between the 
King of the Hebrews and the Princess 
of Bagdad was published throughout 
Asia. Preparations were made on the 
plain of the Tigris for the great rejoicing. 



OF ALROY. 147 

Whole forests were felled to provide 
materials for the buildings and fuel for 
the banquetting-. All the governors of 
provinces and cities, all the chief officers 
and nobility of both nations, were spe- 
cially invited, and daily arrived in state 
at Bagdad. Among them the Viceroy 
of the Medes and Persians, and his recent 
bride, the Princess Miriam, were con- 
spicuous, followed by a train of nearly 
ten thousand persons. 

A throne, ascended by one hundred 
steps covered with crimson cloth, and 
crowned by a golden canopy, was raised 
in the middle of the plain : on each side 
two thrones less elevated, but equally 
gorgeous. In the front of these thrones 
an immense circus was described, formed 
by one hundred chartaks or amphithea- 
tres, ample room for the admittance 

H 2 



148 THE WONDROUS TALE 

of the multitude being left between the 
buildings. These chartaks were covered 
with bright brocades and showy carpets, 
on each was hoisted a bright and brilliant 
banner. In some of them were bands of 
choice musicians, in others companies of 
jugglers, buffoons, and storiers. Five 
chartaks on each side of the thrones were 
allotted for the convenience of the court, 
the rest were filled by the different trades 
of the city. In one the fruiterers had 
formed a beautiful garden, glowing with 
pomegranates, and gourds, and water- 
melons, oranges, almonds and pistachio 
nuts ; — in another the butchers exhibited 
their meats carved in the most fanciful 
shapes, and the skins of animals dressed 
up in very ludicrous figures. Here as- 
sembled the furriers, all dressed in mas- 
querade, like leopards, lions, tigers, and 



OF ALROY. 149 

foxes, and in another booth mustered the 
upholsterers, proud of a camel made of 
wood, and reeds, and cord, and painted 
linen, a camel which walked about as if 
alive, though ever and anon the interior 
man drawing aside a curtain, discovered 
to the marvelling multitude the work- 
man in his own piece. Further on 
might be perceived the cotton manufac- 
turers, whose chartak was full of birds of 
all shapes and plumage, yet nevertheless 
formed of their curious plant, and of the 
same material, with the help of reeds, 
although every one imagined it to be 
built with bricks and mortar, rose in 
the centre a lofty minaret. It was 
covered with embroidered work, and on 
the top was placed a stork so cunningly 
devised, that the children pelted it with 
pistachio nuts. The saddlers showed 



150 THE WONDROUS TALE 

their skill in two litters, open at top, 
each carried on a dromedary, and in each 
a beautiful woman, who diverted the 
spectators with light balls of gilt leather, 
throwing them up both with their hands 
and feet. Nor were the mat-makers 
backward in the proof of their dexterity, 
since instead of a common banner, they 
exhibited a large standard of reeds work- 
ed with two lines of writing in Kufic, 
proclaiming the happy names of Alroy 
and Schirene. But indeed in every 
chartak might be witnessed some won- 
drous specimens of the wealth of Bagdad, 
and of the ingenuity of its unrivalled 
artisans. 

Around this mighty circus, on every 
side, for the space of many miles, the 
plain was studded with innumerable pa- 
vilions. At measured intervals were 



OF ALROY. 1,51 

tables furnished with every species of 
provision, and attended by appointed 
servants, flagons of wine and jars of 
sherbets mingled with infinite baskets of 
delicious fruits and trays of refreshing 
confectionary. Although open to all 
comers, so great and rapid was the sup- 
ply, that these banquetting tables seemed 
ever laden, and that the joys of the peo- 
ple might be complete, they were allowed 
to pursue whatever pleasures they thought 
fit without any restraint, by proclama- 
tion, in these terms. 

" This is the time of feasting, 

PLEASURE, AND REJOICING. LeT NO 
PERSON REPRIMAND OR COMPLAIN OF 
ANOTHER: LET NOT THE RICH INSULT 
THE POOR, OR THE STRONG THE WEAK : 
LET NO ONE ASK ANOTHER, ' WhY HAVE 
YOU DONE THIS ?* " 



152 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Millions of people were collected in 
this Paradise. They rejoiced, they feast- 
ed, they frolicked, they danced, they 
sang. They listened to the tales of the 
Arabian storier, at once enchanted and 
enchanting, or melted to the strain of the 
Persian poet, as he painted the moon-lit 
forehead of his heroine, and the wasting 
and shadowy form of his love sick hero : 
they beheld with amazement the feats of 
the juggler of the Ganges, or giggled at 
the practised wit and the practical buf- 
foonery of the Syrian mime. And the 
most delighted could still spare a fasci- 
nated glance to the inviting gestures and 
the voluptuous grace of the dancing girls 
of Egypt. Every where were melody 
and merriment, rarity and beauty. For 
once mankind forgot their cares, and de- 
livered themselves up to infinite enjoy- 
ment. 



OF ALROY. 153 

'* I grow courteous," said Kisloch the 
Kourd, assisting a party into one of the 
shows. 

'' And I humane," said Calidas the In- 
dian. '' Fellow, how dare you violate 
the proclamation, by thrashing that 
child ?" He turned to one of the stew- 
ards of the tables who was belabouring' 
the unfortunate driver of a camel which 
had stumbled, and in its fall, had shiver- 
ed its burthen, two panniers of porcelain. 

" Mind your own business, fellow," 
replied the steward, " and be thankful 
that for once in your life you can dine." 

'' Is this the way to speak to an offi- 
cer," said Calidas the Indian ; '' I have 
half a mind to cut your tongue out." 

'' Never mind, little fellow," said the 
Guebre, '' here is adirhem for you. Run 
away and be merry." 

H 5 



154t THE WONDROUS TALE 

''A miracle," grinned the Negro, "he 
giveth alms/' 

'' And you are witty,'* rejoined the 
Guebre. -^ Tis a wondrous day." 

" What shall we do," said Kisloch. 

'' Let us dine,'* proposed the Negro. 

'' Ay ! under this plane-tree," said Ca- 
lidas, '' 'Tis pleasant to be alone. I hate 
everybody but ourselves." 

*' Here stop, you rascal," said the 
Guebre. '^ What's your name ?" 

'^ I am a Hadgee," said our old friend 
Abdallah, the servant of the charitable 
merchant Ali, and who was this day one 
of the officiating stewards. 

'' Are you a Jew, you scoundrel }" said 
the Guebre, '' that is the only thing 
worth being. Bring some wine, you ac- 
cursed Giaour !*' 

'' Instantly," said Kisloch, '' and a 
pilau.'' 



OF ALROY. 155 

'^ And a gazelle stuffed with almonds/' 
said Calidas. 

" And some sugar-plums," said the 
Negro. 

''Quick, you infernal Gentile, or Til 
send this javelin in your back/' halloed 
the Guebre. 

The servile Abdallah hastened away, 
and soon bustled back, carrying two fla- 
gons of wine, and followed by four ser- 
vants, each with a tray covered with 
dainties. 

'* Where are you going, you accursed 
scoundrels," grumbled Kisloch, " wait 
upon the true believers." 

" We shall be more free alone," whis- 
pered Calidas. 
• '' Away, then, dogs," growled Kisloch. 

Abdallah and his attendants hurried 
off, but were soon summoned back. 



1 



156 THE WONDROUS TALE 

'' Why did not you bring Schiraz 
wine ?'' asked Calidas, with an eye of 
fire. 

" The pilau is overdone," thundered 
Kisloch. 

" You have brought a lamb stuffed 
with pistachio nuts, instead of a gazelle 
with almonds," said the Guebre. 

^' Not half sugar-plums enough," said 
the Negro. 

''Every thing is wrong," said Kisloch. 
" Go, and get us a kabob."'" 

In time, however, even this unmanage- 
able crew were satisfied, and seated under 
their plane-tree, and stuffing themselves 
with all the dainties of the East, they 
became more amiable as their appetites 
decreased. 

" A bumper, Calidas, and a song/' said 
Kisloch. 



OF ALROY. 157 

'' Tis rare stuff," said the Guebre, 
" come, Cally, it should inspire you/' 
'' Here goes, then ; mind the chorus." 

THE SONG OF CALIDAS. 

Drink, drink, deeply drink, 

Never feel, and never think. 
What's love ? vs^hat's fame ? a sigh, a 
smile. 
Friendship, but a hollovs^ w^ile. 
If you've any thought or woe, 
Drown them in the goblet's flow. 
Yes ! dash them ia this brimming cup, 
Dash them in, and drink them up. 
Drink, drink, deeply drink. 
Never feel, and never think. 

'' Hark, the trumpets ! The King and 



158 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Queen ! The procession is coming. Let's 
away." 

'' Again ! they must be near. Hurry, 
hurry, for good places." 

'' Break all the cups and dishes. Come 
along !" 

The multitude from all quarters hurried 
to the great circus amid the clash of ten 
thousand cymbals, and the blast of innu- 
merable trumpets. In the distance, issu- 
ing from the gates of Bagdad might be 
detected a brilliant crowd, the advance 
company of the bridal procession. 

There came five hundred maidens 
crowned with flowers, and beauteous as 
the buds that girt their hair. Their flow- 
ing robes were whiter than the swan, and 
each within her hand a palm branch 
held. 

Followed these a band of bright mu- 



OF ALROY. 159 

sicians, clothed in golden robes, and 
sounding silver trumpets. 

Then five hundred youths, brilliant as 
stars, clad in jackets of white fox-skin, 
and alternately bearing baskets of fruit 
or flowers. 

Followed these a band of bright musi- 
ciaas, clothed in silver robes, and sound- 
ing golden trumpets. 

Six choice steeds, sumptuously capari- 
soned, each led by an Arab groom/^ 

The household of Medad, in robes of 
crimson, lined with sable. 

The standard of Medad. 

Medad, on a coal-black Arab, followed 
by three hundred officers of his division, 
all mounted on steeds of a pure race. 

Slaves, bearing the bridal present of 
Medad, six Damascus sabres of unrivalled 
temper. ^^ 



160 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Twelve choice steeds, sumptuously ca- 
parisoned, each led by an Anatolian 
groom. 

The household of Ithamar, in robes of 
violet, lined with ermine. 

The standard of Ithamar. 

Ithamar, on a snow-white Anatolian 
charger ,^^ followed by six hundred officers 
of his division, all mounted on steeds of a 
pure race. 

Slaves bearing the marriage present of 
Ithamar. A golden vase of rubies, borne 
on a violet throne. 

One hundred Negroes, their noses 
bored, and hung with rings of brilliants, 
playing upon wind instruments and ket- 
tle drums. 

The standard of tlie City of Bagdad. 

The deputation from the citizens of 
Bagdad. 



OF ALROY. 161 

Two hundred mules, with caparisons 
of satin, embroidered with gold, and 
adorned with small golden bells. These 
bore the sumptuous wardrobe, presented 
by the city, to their Princess. Each 
mule was attended by a girl, dressed like 
a Peri, with starry wings, and a man, 
masqued as a hideous Dive. 

The standard of Egypt. 

The deputation from the Hebrews of 
Egypt, mounted on dromedaries, with 
silver furniture. 

Fifty slaves, bearing their present to 
the Princess, with golden cords, a mighty 
bath of Jasper, beautifully carved, the 
sarcophagus of some ancient temple, and 
purchased for an immense sum. 

The standard of Syria. 

The deputation from the Hebrews of 
the Holy Land, headed by Rabbi Zimri 
himself, each carrying in his hand his of- 



162 THE WONDROUS TALE | 

fering to the nuptial pair, a precious vase, 
containing earth from the Mount of Sion. 

The standard of Hamadan. 

The deputation from the citizens of Ha- 
madan, headed by the venerable Bostenay 
himself, whose sumptuous charger was led 
by Caleb. 

The present of the city of Hamadan, to 
David Alroy , offered, at his own suggestion , 
the cup in which the Prince of the Captivity 
carried his tribute, now borne full of sand. 

Fifty choice steeds, sumptuously capa- 
risoned, each led by a Median, or Persian 
groom. 

The household of Abner and Miriam, 
in number twelve hundred, clad in chain 
armour of ivory and gold. 

The standard of the Medes and Per- 
sians. 

Two white elephants, with golden lit- 
ters, bearing the Viceroy and his Princess. 



OF ALROY. 163 

The offering of Abner to Alroy, twelve 
elephants of state, with furniture em- 
broidered with jewels, each tended by an 
Indian clad in chain armour of ivory and 
gold. 

The offering of Miriam to Schirene. 
Fifty plants of roses from Rocnabad,^"* a 
white shawl of Kashmere fifty feet in 
length, which folded into the handle of a 
fan ; fifty screens each made of a feather 
of the roc ;'^ and fifty vases of chrystal 
full of exquisite perfumes, and each sealed 
with a tahsman of precious stones. 

After these followed the Eunuch guard. 

Then came the band of the Serail, con- 
sisting of three hundred dwarfs, hideous 
indeed to behold, but the most complete 
musicians in the world. 

The steeds of Solomon, in number one 
hundred, each with a natural star upon 



164 THE WONDROUS TALE 

its front, uncaparisoned, and led only by 
a bridle of diamonds. 

The household of Alroy and Schirene. 
Foremost, the Lord Honain riding upon 
a chesnut charger shod with silver ; the 
dress of the rider pink with silver stars. 
From his rosy turban depended a tremu- 
lous aigrette of brilliants,^^ blazing with a 
thousand shifting tints. 

Two hundred pages followed him ; and 
then servants of both sexes, gorgeously 
habited, amounting to nearly two thou- 
sand, carrying rich vases, magnificent 
caskets, and costly robes. The Treasurer 
and two hundred of his underlings, came 
after, showering golden dirhems on all 
sides. 

The sceptre of Solomon borne by As- 
riel himself. 

A magnificent and lofty car, formed of 



OF ALROY. 165 

blue enamel with golden wheels, and axle- 
trees of turquoises and brilliants, and 
drawn by twelve snow-white and sacred 
horses, four abreast ; in the car, Alroy 
and Schirene. 

Five thousand of the sacred guard closed 
the procession. 

Amid the exclamations of the people, 
this gorgeous procession crossed the plain, 
and moved around the mighty circus. 
The conqueror and his bride ascended 
their throne ; its steps were covered by 
the youths and maidens. On the throne, 
upon their right, sat the venerable Boste- 
nay ; on the left, the gallant Viceroy and 
his Princess. The chartaks on each side 
were crowded with the court. 

The deputations made their offerings, 
the chiefs and captains paid their ho- 
mage, the trades of the city moved before 



166 THE WONDROUS TALE 

the throne in order, and exhibited their 
various ingenuity. Thrice was the pro- 
clamation made- amid the sound of trum- 
pets, and then began the games. 

A thousand horsemen dashed into the 
arena and threw the jerreed. They gal- 
loped at full speed, they arrested their 
fiery chargers in mid course, and flung 
their long javelins at the minute but 
sparkling target, the imitative form of a 
rare and brilliant bird. The conquerors 
received their prizes from the hand of the 
princess herself, bright shawls, and jew- 
elled daggers, and rosaries of gems. 
Sometimes the trumpets announced a 
prize from the Vice-queen, sometimes 
from the venerable Bostenay, sometimes 
from the victorious generals, or the loyal 
deputations, sometimes from the united 
trades, sometimes from the city of Bag- 



OF ALROY. 167 

dad, sometimes from the city of Hama- 
dan. The hours flew away in gorgeous 
and ceaseless variety. 

*' I would we were alone, my own 
Schirene," said Alroy to his bride. 

'' I. would so too ; and yet 1 love to 
see all Asia prostrate at the feet of Alroy." 

" Will the sun ne'er set ! Give me 
thy hand to play with." 

" Hush ! See Miriam smiles." 

" Lovest thou my sister, my own Schi- 
rene ?" 

'' None dearer but thyself." 

" Talk not of my sister, but ourselves. 
Thinkest thou the Sun is nearer setting, 
love ?" 

'' I cannot see ; thine eyes they dazzle 
me — they are so brilliant, sweet !" 

" Oh ! my soul, I could pour out my 
passion on thy breast." 



168 THE WONDROUS TALE 



( 



'' Thou art very serious/' 

'' Love is ever so." 

'' Nay, sweet ! It makes me wild and 
fanciful. Now I could do such things, 
but what I know not. I would we had 
wings, and then we would fly away." 

*' See, I must salute this victor in the 
games. Must I unloose thy hand ! Dear 
hand, farewell ! Think of me while I 
speak, my precious life. 'Tis done. Give 
back thy hand, or else methinks Til die. 
What's this!" 

A horseman in no holiday dress, but 
covered with dust, rushed into the circus, 
bearing in his hand a tall lance, on which 
was fixed a scroll. The Marshals of the 
Games endeavoured to prevent his ad- 
vance, but he would not be stayed. His 
message was to the King alone. A ru- 
mour of news from the army circulated 



OF ALROY. 169 

throughout the crowd. And news from 
the army it was. Another victory ! 
Scherirah had defeated the Sultan of 
Koum, who was now a suppliant for 
peace and alliance. Sooth to say, the 
intelligence had arrived at dawn of day, 
but the courtly Honain had contrived 
that it should be communicated at a later 
and a more effective moment. 

There scarcely needed this additional 
excitement to this glorious day. But 
the people cheered, the golden dirhems 
were scattered with renewed profusion, 
and the intelligence was received by all 
parties as a solemn ratification by Jeho- 
vah, or by Allah, of the morning cere- 
mony. 

The Sun set, the Court arose, and re- 
turned in the same pomp to the Serail. 
The twilight died away, a beacon fired 

VOL. II. I 



170 THE WONDROUS TALE 

on a distant eminence announced the en- 
trance of Alroy and Schirene into the 
nuptial chamber, and suddenly, as by 
magic, the mighty city, every mosque, 
and minaret, and tower, and terrace, and 
the universal plain, and the numberless 
pavilions, and the immense circus, and 
the vast and winding river, blazed with 
light. From every spot a lamp, a torch, 
a lanthorn, tinted with every hue, burst 
forth, enormous cressets of silver radiancy 
beamed on the top of each chartak, and 
huge bonfires of ruddy flame started up 
along the whole horizon. 

For seven days, and seven nights, this 
unparalleled scene of rejoicing, though 
ever various, never ceased. Long, long 
was remembered the bridal feast of the 
Hebrew Prince and the Caliph's daughter; 
long, long did the peasantry on the plains 



OF ALROY. 



171 



of Tigris sit down by the side of that 
starry river, and tell the wondrous tale 
to their marvelling posterity? 

Now what a glorious man was David 
Alroy, lord of the mightiest empire in the 
world, and wedded to the most beautiful 
Princess, surrounded by a prosperous and 
obedient people, guarded by invincible 
armies, one on whom Earth showered all 
its fortune, and Heaven all its favour — 
I and all by the power of his own genius ! 



I 2 



172 THE WONDROUS TALE 



PART IX. 

I. 

'TwAS midnight, and the storm still 
raged : mid the roar of the thunder and the 
shrieks of the wind, the floods of forky 
lightning each instant revealed the broad 
and billowy breast of the troubled Tigris. 

Jabaster stood gazing upon the wild 
scene from the gallery of his palace. Hisj 
countenance was solemn, but disquieted. 

'' I would that he were here V* ex- 
claimed the High Priest. "Yet why 
should I desire his presence, who heralds 



OF ALROY. 



173 



only gloom } Yet in his absence am I 
gay ? I am nothing. This Bagdad 
weighs upon me like a cloak of lead : 
my spirit is dull and broken. 

'' They say Alroy gives a grand ban- 
quet in the Serail to-night, and toasts his 
harlot mid the thunderbolts. Is there 
no hand to write upon the wall ? He is 
found wanting, he is weighed, and is in- 
deed found wanting. The parting of his 

kingdom soon will come, and then 

I could weep, oh ! I could weep, and 
down these stern and seldom yielding 
cheeks, pour the wild anguish of my 
desperate woe. So young, so great, so 
favoured ! But one more step a God, 
and now a foul Belshazzar ! 

'' Was it for this his gentle youth was 
past in musing solitude and mystic stu- 
dies ? Was it for this the holy messenger 



174 THE WONDROUS TALE 

summoned his most religious spirit ? 
Was it for this he crossed the fiery de- 
sart, and communed with his fathers in 
their tombs ? Is this the end of all his 
victories, and all his vast achievement ? 
To banquet with a wanton ! 

*^ A year ago, this very night, it was 
the eve of battle, I stood within his tent 
to wait his final word. He mused awhile, 
and then he said, ' Good night, Jabaster '/ 
I believed myself the nearest to his heart, 
as he has ever been nearest to mine, but 
that's all over. He never says, ' Good 
night, Jabaster,' now. Why, what's all 
this ? Methinks I am a child. 

'* The Lord's anointed is a prisoner 
now in the light grating of a bright 
kiosk, and never gazes on the world 
he conquered. Egypt and Syria, even 
farthest Ind, send forth their messengers 



OF ALROY. 175 

to greet Alroy, the great, the proud, the 
invincible. And where is he ? In a soft 
Paradise of girls and eunuchs, crowned 
with flowers, listening to melting lays, 
and the wild trilling of the amorous lute. 
He spares no hours to council, all is left 
to his prime favourites, of whom the 
leader is that juggling fiend I sometime 
called my brother. 

'' Why rest I here ? Where should I 
fly ? Methinks my presence is still a 
link to decency. Should I tear off the 
ephod, I scarcely fancy 'twould blaze 
upon another's breast. He goes not to 
the sacrifice ; they say he keeps no fast, 
observes no ritual, and that their festive 
fantasies will not be baulked, even by the 
Sabbath. I have not seen him thrice 
since the marriage. Honain has told her 
I did oppose it, and she bears to me a 



176 THE WONDROUS TALE 

hatred that only women feel. Our strong 
passions break into a thousand purposes : 
women have one. Their love is dan- 
gerous, but their hate is fatal. 

" See ! a boat bounding on the waters. 
On such a night,— but one would dare to 
venture." 

Now visible, now in darkness, a single 
lanthorn at the prow, Jabaster watched 
with some anxiety the slight barque buf- 
fetting the waves. A tremendous flash 
of lightning illumined the whole river, 
and tipped with a spectral light even the 
distant piles of building. The boat, and 
the toiling figure of the single rower, 
were distinctly perceptible. Now all 
again was darkness, the wind suddenly 
subsided, in a few minutes the plash of 
the oars was audible, and the boat appa- 
rently stopped beneath the palace. 



OF ALROY. 177 

There was a knocking at the private 
portal. 

'' Who knocks ?" enquired Jabaster. 

'' A friend to Israel." 

" Abidan, by his voice. Art thou 
alone ?" 

'* The prophetess is with me ; only she." 

'' A moment. Til open the gate. Draw 
the boat within the arch." 

Jabaster descended from the gallery, 
and in a few moments returned with two 
visitors : the youthful prophetess Esther, 
and her companion, a man short in sta- 
ture, but with a very powerful and well- 
knit frame. His countenance was very 
melancholy, and with much harshness in 
the lower part, not without a degree of 
pensive beauty in the broad clear brow, 
and sunken eyes, unusual in Oriental 
visages. 

I 5 



178 THE WONDROUS TALE 

'^ A rough night," said Jabaster. 

" To those who fear it," replied Abi- 
dan. " The Sua has brought so little 
joy to me, I care not for the storm." 

" What news ?" 

" Woe ! woe ! woe !" 

'' Thy usual note, my sister. Will 
the day ne'er come when we may change 
it?" 

'' Woe ! woe ! woe ! unutterable woe !" 

'' Abidan, how fares it ? 

" Very well." 

" Indeed !*' 

'' As it may turn out." 

" You are brief." 

'^ Bitter." 

" Have you been to court, that you 
have learnt to be so wary in your words, 
my friend ?" 

" I know not what may happen. In 



OF ALROY. 179 

time we may become all courtiers, though 
I fear, Jabaster, we have done too much 
to be rewarded. I gave him my blood, 
and you something more, and now we are 
at Bagdad. 'Tis a fine city. I wish to 
heaven the shower of Sodom would rain 
upon its terraces." 

•' I know thou hast something terrible 
to tell. I know it by that gloomy brow 
of thine, that lowers like the tempest. 
Speak out, man. I can bear the worst, 
for which I am prepared." 

'' Take it, then. Alroy has proclaimed 
himself Caliph. Abner is made Sultan 
of Persia. Asriel, Ithamar, Medad, and 
the chief captains. Viziers ; Honain, their 
chief. Four Moslemin nobles are sworn 
into the council. The Princess goes to 
mosque in state next Friday ; 'tis said 
thy pupil doth accompany her." 



180 THE WONDROUS TALE 

'' 111 not believe it ! By the God of 
Sinai, I'll not believe it ! Were my own 
eye the accursed witness of the dead, Td 
not believe it. Go to mosque ! They 
play with thee, my good Abidan, they 
play with thee." 

'' As it may be. 'Tis a rumour, but 
rumours herald deeds. The rest of my 
intelligence is true. I had it from my 
kinsman, stdut Zalmunna, He left the 
banquet." 

" Shall I go to him ? Methinks one 
single word — To mosque ! only a rumour 
and a false one. I'll never believe it ; no, 
no, no, never, never ! Is he not the 
Lord's anointed ? The ineffable curse 
upon this daughter of the Moabite ! No 
marvel that it thunders ! By heavens, 
I'll go and beard him in his orgies !" 

" You know your power better than 



OF ALROY. 181 

Abidan. You bearded him before his 
marriage, yet " 

'' He married. 'Tis true. Honain, 
their chief. And I kept his ring ! Ho- 
nain is my brother. Have I ne'er a 
dagger to cut the bond of brother- 
hood ?^^ 

" We have all daggers, Jabaster, if we 
knew but how to use them." 

" Tis strange — we met after twenty 
years of severance. You were not in the 
chamber, Abidan. 'Twas at council. We 
met after twenty years of severance. He 
is my brother. 'Tis strange, I say ; I felt 
that man shrink from my embrace." 

''Honain is a philosopher, and believes 
in sympathy. 'Twould appear there was 
none between you. His system, then, 
absolves you from all ties." 

''You are sure the rest of the intelli- 



182 THE WONDROUS TALE 

gence is true ? I'll not believe the 
mosque — the rest is bad enough/' 

'' Zalmunna left the banquet. Hassan 
Subah's brother, sat above him." 

" Subah's brother ! Tis all over, then. 
Is he of the council ?" 

''Ay, and others." 

'' Where now is Israel ?" 

" She should be in her tents.'' 

"Woe ! woe ! woe ! unutterable woe !" 
exclaimed the prophetess, who, standing 
motionless in the back of the chamber, 
seemed inattentive to their conversation. 

Jabaster paced the gallery with agi- 
tated steps. Suddenly he stopped, and, 
walking up to Abidan, seized his arm, 
and looked him sternly in the face. " I 
know thy thought, Abidan," exclaimed 
the Priest ; " but it cannot be. I have 
dismissed, —henceforth and for ever I 



OF ALROY. 183 

have dismissed all feeling from my mind ; 
now I have no brother, no friend, no 
pupil, and, I fear, no Saviour. Israel is 
all and all to me. I have no other life — 
'tis not compunction, then, that stays my 
arm. My heart 's as hard as thine.'* 

" Why stays it, then ?" 

'' Because with him we fall. He is the 
last of all his sacred line. There is no 
other hand to grasp our sceptre." 

" Our sceptre ! — what sceptre ?" 

" The sceptre of our Kings." 

'' Kings !" 

'' Ay, why dost thou look so dark T' 

" How looked the prophet when the 
stiff-necked populace forsooth must have 
a King ? Did he smile ? Did he shout, 
and clap his hands, and cry, God save his 
Majesty ! Oh, Jabaster ! honoured, rare 
Jabaster ! thou second Samuel of our 



841 THE WONDROUS TALE 

light-headed people ! there was a time 
when Israel had no King except their 
God. Were we viler then ? Did Kings 
conquer Canaan ? Who was Moses, who 
was Aaron, who was mighty Joshua ? Was 
the sword of Gideon a kingly sword ? 
Did the locks of Sampson shade royal 
temples ? Would a King have kept his 
awful covenant like solemn Jephtha ? 
Royal words are light as air, when, to 
maintain them, you injure any other than 
a subject ! 

" Kings ! why what s a King ? Why 
should one man break the equal sanctity 
of our chosen race ? Is their blood purer 
than our own ? We are all the seed of 
Abraham. Who was Saul, and who was 
David ? I never heard they were a dif- 
ferent breed unto our fathers. Grant 
them devout, which they were not ; and 



OF ALROY. 185 

brave and wise, which other men were ; 
have their posterity a patent for all vir- 
tues ? No, Jabaster ! thou ne'er didst 
err, but when thou placed a crown upon 
this haughty stripling. What he did, a 
thousand might have done. Twas thy 
mind inspired the deed. And now he 
is a King ; and now, Jabaster, the very 
soul of Israel, who should be our Judge 
and leader — Jabaster trembles in disgrace, 
while our unhallowed Sanhedrim is filled 
with Ammonites !" 

'' Oh, Abidan ! thou hast touched me 
to the quick; thou hast stirred up thoughts 
that ever and anon, like strong and fatal 
vapours, have risen from the dark abyss 
of thought, and I have quelled them." 

" Let them rise, I say — let them drown 
the beams of that all-scorching Sun we 
suffer under, that drinks all vegetation 



186 THE WONDROUS TALE 

up, and makes us languish with a dull 
exhaustion/' 

''Joy ! joy ! unutterable joy !" 

'' Hark ! the prophetess has changed 
her note ; and yet she hears us not. The 
spirit of the Lord is truly with her. Come, 
Jabaster, I see thy heart is opening to thy 
people's sufferings : thy people, my Ja- 
baster, for art not thou our Judge ? at 
least, thou shalt be." 

'' Can we call back the Theocracy ? — 
Is 't possible?" 

''But say the word, and it is done, 
Jabaster. Nay, stare not. Dost thou 
think there are no true ears in Israel ? 
Dost thou suppose thy children have be- 
held, without a thought, the foul insults 
poured on thee — thee, their Priest, their 
adored High Priest, one who recalls the 
best days of the past — the days of their 



OF ALROY. 187 

great Judges. But one word, one single 

movement of that mitred head, and 

But I speak unto a mind that feels more 
than I can express. Be silent, tongue, 
thou art a babbling counsellor. Jabas- 
ter's patriot soul needs not the idle 
schooling of a child. If he be silent, 
*tis that his wisdom deems the hour 's not 
ripe ; but when her leader speaks, Israel 
will not be slack/' 

" The Moslemin in council ! We know 
what must come next. Our national ex- 
istence is in its last agony. Methinks 
the time is very ripe, Abidan/' 

«« Why so we think, great Sir ; and 
say the word, and twenty thousand spears 
will guard the Ark. 1 11 answer for my 
men. Stout Scherirah looks grimly on 
the Moabites. A word from thee, and 
the whole Syrian army will join our ban- 



188 THE WONDROUS TALE 

ner— the lion of Judah, that shall be our 
flag. The tyrant and his satraps let 
them die, and then the rest must join us. 
We 11 proclaim the covenant, and, leav- 
ing Babylon to a bloody fate, march on 
toSionr 

'' Sion, his youthful dream, Sion !" 

'' You muse ?*' 

^' King or no King, he is the Lord's 
anointed. Shall this hand that poured 
the oil on his hallowed head, wash out 
the balmy signet with his blood ! Must I 
slay him ? Shall this kid be seethed 
even in its mother^'s milk ?" 

" His voice is low, and yet his face is 
troubled. How now. Sir ?" 

'' What art thou ? Ah ! Abidan, trusty, 
staunch Abidan ! You see, Abidan, I 
was thinking, my good Abidan, all this 
may be the frenzy of a revel. To-mor- 



OF ALROY. 189 

row's dawn may summon cooler councils. 
The tattle of the table, it is sacred. Let 
us forget^ it; let us pass it over. The 
Lord may turn his heart. Who knows, 
who knows, Abidan ?" 

'^ Noble Sir, a moment since your mind 
was like your faith, firm and resolved, 
and now '' 

^' School me not, school me not, good 
Abidan. There is that within my mind 
you cannot fathom ; some secret sorrows 
which are all my own. Leave me, good 
friend, leave me awhile. When Israel 
calls me I shall not be wanting. Be sure 
of that, Abidan, be sure of that. Nay, 
do not go ; the night is very rough, and 
the fair prophetess should not stem again 
the swelling river. Til to my closet, and 
will soon return." 

Jabaster quitted the gallery, and en- 



190 THE WONDROUS TALE 

tered a small apartment. Several large 
volumes, unclasped and open, were lying 
on various parts of the divan. Before 
them stood his brazen cabalistic table. 
He closed the chamber with a cautious 
air. He advanced into the centre of the 
apartment. He lifted up his hands to 
Heaven, and clasped them with an expres- 
sion almost of agony. 

'' Is it come to this ?'" he muttered in 
a tone of deep oppression. " Is it come 
to this ? What is't I have heard ? what 
done ? Down, tempting devil, down ! 
Oh ! life, oh ! glory, oh ! my country, 
my chosen people, and my sacred creed ! — 
why do we live, why act, why have we 
feeling for aught that's famous, or for 
aught that's holy ? Let me die, let — let 
me die. The torture of existence is too 
great." 



OF ALROY. 191 

He flung himself upon the couch, he 
buried his awful countenance in his robes. 
His mighty heart was convulsed with 
passion. There did he lie, that great and 
solemn man, prostrate and woe-begone. 



n. 



'^ The noisy banquet lingers in my ear ; 
I love to be alone."' 

" With me ?" 

" Thou art myself; I have no other 
life." 

" Sweet bird ! It is now a Caliph." 

" I am what thou wiliest, soul of my 
sweet existence ! Pomp and dominion, 
fame and victory, seem now but flawed 
and dimly-shaded gems compared with 
thy bright smile !*' 



192 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" My plaintive nightingale, shall we 
hunt to-day ?" 

'' Alas ! my rose, I'd sooner lie upon 
this lazy couch, and gaze upon thy 
beauty !" 

^' Or sail upon the cool and azure lake, 
in some bright barque, like to a sea- 
nymph's shell, and followed by the 
swans ?" 

" There is no lake so blue as thy deep 
eye ; there is no swan so white as thy 
round arm !" 

'' Or shall we lance our falcons in the 
air, and bring the golden pheasant to our 
feet ?^' 

'' I am the golden pheasant at thy feet, 
why wouldest thou richer prey ?" 

'' Eememberest thou thy earliest visit 
to this dear kiosk, my gentle mute ? 
There thou stoodest with folded arms, and 



OF ALROY. 193 

looks demure as day, and ever and anon 
with those dark eyes, stealing a glance 
which made my cheek quite pale. Me- 
thinks I see thee even yet, shy bird. 
Dost know, I was so foolish when it 
quitted me, dost know I cried ?" 
'' Ah, no ! thou didst not cry ?" 
'' Indeed, I think I did.'' 
'' Tell me again, my own Schirene, in- 
deed didst cry ?" 

'' Indeed I did, my soul !" 
'' I would those tears were in some 
crystal vase, I'd give a province for the 
costly urn." 

She threw her arms around his neck 
and covered his face with kisses. 

Sunset sounded from the minarets. 
They arose and wandered together in the 
surrounding Paradise. The sky was tint- 
ed with a pale violet flush, a single star 

VOL. II. K 



\ 



194 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Heating by the side of the white moon, 
that beamed with a dim lustre, soft and 
shapely as a pearl. 

'' Beautiful !" exclaimed the pensive 
Schirene, as she gazed upon the star. 
'* Oh ! my Alroy, why cannot we ever 
live alone, and ever in a Paradise !" 

'' I am wearied of empire," replied 
Alroy with a smile, '' let us fly !" 

" Is there no island with all that can 
make life charming, and yet impervious 
to man ? How little do we require ! Ah ! 
if these gardens, instead of being sur- 
rounded by hateful Bagdad, were only 
encompassed by some beautiful ocean !" 

'' My heart, we live in a Paradise, and 
are seldom disturbed, thanks to Ho- 
nain !*' 

'' But the very consciousness that there 
are any other persons existing but our- 



1 



OF ALROY. 195 

selves is to me painful. Every one who 
even thinks of you seems to rob me of a 
part of your being. Besides, I am weary 
of pomp and palaces. I should like to 
hve in a sparry grot, and sleep upon a 
couch of sweet leaves !" 

This interesting discussion w^as dis- 
turbed by a dwarf who, in addition to 
being very small and very ugly, was 
dumb. He bowed before the Princess, 
and then had recourse to a great deal of 
pantomimic action, by which she, at 
length, discovered that it was dinner- 
time. No other person could have ven- 
tured to disturb the royal pair, but this 
little being was a privileged favourite. 

So Alroy and Schirene entered the 
Serail. An immense cresset-lamp, fed 
with perfumed oil, threw a soft light 
round the sumptuous chamber. At the 

k2 



196 THE WONDROUS TALE 

end stood a row of eunuchs in scarlet 
dresses, and each holding a tall silver 
staff. The Caliph and the Sultana threw 
themselves upon a couch covered with a 
hundred cushions ; on one side stood a 
group consisting of the captain of the 
guard and other officers of the household, 
on the other, of beautiful female slaves 
magnificently attired. 

The line of domestics at the end of the 
apartment opened, and a body of slaves 
advanced, carrying trays of ivory and 
gold, and ebony and silver, covered with 
the choicest dainties, most curiously pre- 
pared. These were in turn offered to 
the Caliph and the Sultana by their sur- 
rounding attendants. The Princess ac- 
cepted a spoon made of a single pearl, 
the long, thin golden handle of which 
was studded with rubies, and condescended 



OF ALROY. 197 

to partake of some saffron soup, of which 
she was very fond. Afterwards she re- 
galed herself with the breast of a cygnet 
stuffed with almonds, and stewed with 
violets and cream. Having now a little 
satisfied her appetite, and wishing to show 
a mark of her favour to a particular in- 
dividual, she ordered the captain of the 
guard instantly to send him the whole of 
the next course ^'^ with her compliments. 
Her attention was then engaged with a 
dish of those delicate ortolans that feed 
upon the vine-leaves of Schiraz, and with 
which the Governor of Nishabur took es- 
pecial care that she should be well pro- 
vided. Tearing their delicate forms to 
pieces with her still more delicate fingers, 
she insisted upon feeding Alroy, who of 
course yielded to her solicitations. In 
the meantime, they refreshed themselves 



198 THE WONDROUS TALE 

with their favourite sherbet of pomegra- 
nates, and the golden wine of Mount Le- 
banon.^® The Caliph, who could eat no 
more ortolans, although fed by such deli- 
cate fingers, was at length obliged to call 
for '^ rice,'' which was synonymous to 
commanding the banquet to disappear. 
The attendants now brought, to each, 
basins of gold, and ewers of rock 
crystal filled with rose-water, with 
towels of that rare Egyptian linen, which 
can only be made of the cotton that grows 
upon the banks of the Nile. While they 
amused themselves with eating sugar- 
plums, and drinking coffee flavoured with 
cinnamon, the female slaves danced be- 
fore them in the most graceful attitudes 
to the melody of invisible musicians. 

'' My enchanting Schirene/* said the 
Caliph, . " I have dined, thanks to your 



OF ALROY. 199 

attention, very well. These slaves of 
yours dance admirably, and are exceed- 
ingly beautiful. Your music, too, is be- 
yond all praise ; but, for my own part, 
I would sooner be quite alone, and lis- 
tening to one of your songs." 

" I have written a new one to-day. 
You shall hear it." So saying, she clap- 
ped her little white hands, and the whole 
of the retinue immediately withdrew. 



Ill 



''The stars are stealing forth, and so 
will I. Sorry sight ! to view Jabaster, 
with a stealthy step, skulk like a thing 
dishonoured ! Oh ! may the purpose 
consecrate the deed — the die is cast.'^ 



200 THE WONDROUS TALE 

So saying, the High Priest, muffled 
up in his robe, emerged from his palace 
into the busy streets. It is at night that 
the vitaUty of Oriental life is most im- 
pressive. The narrow winding streets, 
crowded with population breathing the 
now sufferable air, the illuminated coffee- 
houses, the groups of gay, yet sober re- 
vellers, the music, and the dancing, and 
the animated recitals of the poet and the 
storier, all combine to invest the starry 
hours with a beguiling, and even fasci- 
nating, character of enjoyment and ad- 
venture. 

It was the night after the visit of Abi- 
dan and the prophetess. Jabaster had 
agreed to meet Abidan in the square of 
the great mosque two hours after sunset, 
and thither he now repaired. 

" I am somewhat before my time," he 



OF ALROY. 201 

said, as he entered the great square, over 
which the rising moon threw a full flood 
of light. A few dark shadows of human 
beings alone moved in the distance. The 
world was in the streets and coffee-houses. 
'' I am somewhat before my time/' said 
Jabaster. ''Conspirators are watchful. I 
am anxious for the meeting, and yet I 
dread it. Since he broke this business, I 
have never slept. My mind is a chaos. 
Ill not think. If 'tis to be done, let it 
be done at once. I am more tempted to 
sheathe this dagger in Jabaster's breast 
than in Alroy's. If life or empire were 
the paltry stake, Td end a life that now 
can bring no joy, and yield authority 
that hath no charm ; but Israel, Israel, 
thou for whom I have endured so 
much — let me forget Jabaster had a mo- 
ther. 

K 5 



20^ THE WONDROUS TALE 

*' But for this thought that links me 
with my God, and leads my temper to a 
higher state, how vain and sad, how 
wearisome and void, were this said world 
they think of ! But for this thought I 
could sit down and die. Yea ! my great 
heart could crack, worn out, worn out : 
my mighty passions, with their fierce 
but flickering flame, sink down and die, 
and the strong brain that e'er hath urged 
my course, and pricked me onward with 
perpetual thought, desert the rudder it so 
long hath held, like some baffled pilot in 
blank discomfiture, in the far centre of 
an unknown sea. 

'' Study and toil, anxiety and sorrow, 
mighty action, perchance Time, and dis- 
appointment, which is woi-se than all, 
have done their work, and not in vain. 
I am no longer the same Jabaster that 



OF ALROY. 208 

gazed upon the stars of Caucasus. Me- 
thinks even they look dimmer than of 
yore. The glory of my life is fading*. 
My leaves are sear, tinged, but not 
tainted. I am still the same in one re- 
spect — I have not left my God, in deed 
or thought. Ah ! who art thou ?" 

'' A friend to Israel." 

" I am glad that Israel hath a friend. 
Noble Abidan, I have well considered all 
that hath passed between us. Sooth to 
say, you touched upon a string I've 
played before, but kept it for my loneli- 
ness ; a jarring tune, indeed a jarring 
tune, but so it is, and being so, let me at 
once unto your friends, Abidan.'' 

'' Noble Jabaster, thou art what I 
deemed thee." 

" Abidan, they say the consciousness 
of doing justly is the best basis of a happy 
mind." 



204 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" Even so/' 

" And thou believest it Y' 
" Without doubt." 
'^ We are doing very justly ?" 
'' Tis a weak word for such a holy 
purpose." 

'' I am most wretched !" 



IV. 



The High Priest and his companion 
entered the house of Abidan. Jabaster 
addressed the already assembled guests. 

'' Brave Scherirah, it joys me to find 
thee here. In Israel's cause when was 
Scherirah wanting ? Stout Zalmunna, 
we have not seen enough of each other : 
the blame is mine. Gentle prophetess, 
thy blessing ! 



41 

OF ALROY. 205 

'' Good friends, why we meet here is 
known to all. Little did we dream of 
such a meeting when we crossed the 
Tigris. But that is nothing. We come 
to act, and not to argue. Our great 
minds, they are resolved : our solemn 
purpose requires no demonstration. If 
there be one among us who would have 
Israel a slave to Ishmael, who would lose 
all we have prayed for, all we have 
fought for, all which we have won, and 
all for which we are prepared to die — if 
there be one among us who would have 
the ark polluted, and Jehovah's altar 
stained with a Gentile sacrifice — if there 
be one among us who does not sigh for 
Sion, who would not yield his breath to 
build the Temple and gain the heritage 
his fathers lost, why let him go ! There 
is none such among us : then stay and 
free your country 1" 



206 THE WONDROUS TALE 

'^ We are prepared, great Jabaster; 
we are prepared, all, all !" 

" I know it; you are like myself. 
Necessity hath taught decision. Now 
for our plans. Speak, Zalmunna." 

" Noble Jabaster, I see much diffi- 
culty . Alroy no longer quits his palace. 
Our entrance un watched is, you well 
know, impossible. What say you, 
Scherirah ?" 

" I doubt not of my men, but war 
against Alroy is, to say nought of danger, 
a doubtful issue.'* 

" I am prepared to die, but not to fail," 
said Abidan. '' We must be certain. 
Open war 1 fear. The mass of the army 
will side with their leaders, and they are 
with the tyrant. Let us do the deed, and 
they must join us." 

'' Is it impossible to gain his presence 



OF ALROY. g07 

to some sacrifice in honour of some by- 
gone victory — what think ye ?" 

" I doubt much, Jabaster. At this 
moment he httle wishes to sanction our 
national ceremonies with his royal per- 
son. The woman assuredly will stay 
him. And even if he come, success is 
difficult, and therefore doubtful." 

" Noble warriors, list to a woman's 
voice," exclaimed the Prophetess, coming 
forward. '' 'Tis weak, but with such in- 
struments, even the aspirations of a child, 
the Lord will commune with his chosen 
people. There is a secret way by which 
I can gain the gardens of the palace. 
To-morrow night, just as the moon is in 
her midnight bower, behold the accursed 
pile shall blaze. Let Abidan s troop be 
all prepared, and at the moment the 
flames first mount, march to the Seraglio 



208 THE WONDROUS TALE 

gate as if with aid. The afFrightened 
guard will offer no opposition. While 
the troops secure the portals, you your- 
selves, Zalmunna, Abidan, and Jabaster, 
rush to the royal chamber and do the 
deed. In the meantime, let brave Sche- 
rirah, with his whole division, surround 
the palace, as if unconscious of the mighty 
work. Then come you forward, show, if 
it need, with tears, the fated body to 
the soldiery, and announce the The- 
ocracy.'' 

" It is the Lord who speaks," said 
Abidan, who was doubtless prepared for 
the proposition ; " He has delivered them 
into our hands." 

" A bold plan," said Jabaster, musing, 
" and yet I like it. Tis quick, and that 
is something. 1 think 'tis sure." 

" It cannot fail," exclaimed Zalmunna, 



OF ALROY. 209 

*' for if the flame ascend not, still we are 
but where we were." 

'' I am for it," said Scherirah. 

'' Well then," said Jabaster, " so let it 
be. To-morrow's eve will see us here 
again, prepared. Good night." 

'' Good night, holy Priest. How seem 
the stars, Jabaster ?" 

'' Very troubled ; so have they been 
some days. What they portend I know 
not." 

" Health to Israel." 

'^ Let us hope so. Good night, sweet 
friends." 

" Good night, holy Jabaster. Thou 
art our corner-stone." 

" Israel hath no other hope but in Ja- 
baster." 

" My Lord," said Abidan, '' remain, I 
pray, one moment." 



eiO THE WONDROUS TALE 

" What is't ? I fain would go." 

" Alroy must die, my Lord, but dost 
thou think a single death will seal the 
covenant V 

'' The woman ?" 

'' Ay ! the woman ! I was not think- 
ing of the woman. Asriel, Ithamar, 
Medad ?" 

" Valiant soldiers ! doubt not we shall 
find them useful instruments. I do not 
fear such loose companions. They follow 
their leaders, like other things born to 
obey. Having no head themselves, they 
must follow us who have." 

" I think so too. There is no other 
man who might be dangerous ?" 

Zalmunna and Scherirah cast their 
eyes upon the ground. There was a 
dead silence broken by the Pro- 
phetess. 



. -4 

OF ALROY, 211 

'' A judgment hath gone forth against 
Honain !" 

" Nay ! he is Lord Jabaster's brother/' 
said Abidan. " It is enough to save a 
more inveterate foe to Israel, if such 
there be." 

" I have no brother, Sir. The man 
you speak of I will not slay, since there 
are others who may do that deed. And 
so again, good night." 



It was the dead of night, a single lamp 
burned in the chamber, which opened 
into an arched gallery, that descended 
by a flight of steps into the gardens of 
the Serail. 

A female figure ascended the flight 



SI 2 THE WONDROUS TALE 

with slow and cautious steps. She 
paused on thegallery, she looked around, 
one foot was in the chamber. 

She entered. She entered a chamber 
of small dimensions, but richly adorned. 
In the farthest corner was a couch of 
ivory, hung with a gauzy curtain of 
silver tissue, which, without impeding 
respiration, protected the slumberer from 
the fell insects of an Oriental night. Lean- 
ing against an ottoman was a large brazen 
shield of ancient fashion, and near it some 
helmets and curious weapons. 

'' An irresistible impulse hath carried 
me into this chamber !" exclaimed the 
prophetess. '' The light haunted me like 
a spectre ; and wheresoever I moved, it 
seemed to summon me. 

" A couch and a slumberer !'* 

She approached the object, she softly 



OF ALROY. 213 

withdrew the curtain. Pale and panting, 
she rushed back, yet with a light step. 
She beheld Alroy ! 

For a moment she leant against the 
wall, overpowered by her emotions. 
Again she advanced, and gazed on her 
unconscious victim. 

'' Can the guilty sleep like the inno- 
cent ? Who would deem this gentle 
slumberer had betrayed the highest trust 
that ever Heaven vouchsafed to favoured 
man ? He looks not like a tyrant and a 
traitor : calm his brow, and mild his 
placid breath ! His long dark hair, dark 
as the raven's wing, hath broken from its 
fillet, and courses, like a wild and stormy 
night, over his pale and moon-lit brow. 
His cheek is delicate, and yet repose hath 
brought a flush ; and on his lip there 
seems some word of love, that will not 



214 THE WONDROUS TALE 

quit it. It is the same Alroy that blessed 
our vision when, like the fresh and glit- 
tering star of morn, he rose up in the 
desart, and, bringing joy to others, 
brought to me only 

" Oh ! hush my heart, and let thy 
secret lie hid in the charnel-house of 
crushed affections. Hard is the lot of 
woman : to love and to conceal is our 
sharp doom ! Oh bitter life ! oh most 
unnatural lot I Man made society, and 
made us slaves. And so we droop and 
die, or else take refuge in idle fanta- 
sies, to which we bring the fervor that 
is meant for nobler ends. 

" Beauteous hero ! whether I bear thee 
most hatred or most love, I cannot tell. 
Die thou must ; yet I feel I should die 
with thee. Oh ! that to-night could lead 
at the same time unto our marriage bed 



OF ALROY. 215 

and funeral pyre. Must that white bo- 
soni bleed ? and must those delicate limbs 
be hacked and handled by these bloody 
butchers ? Is that justice ? They lie, the 
traitors, when they call thee false to our 
God. Thou art thyself a God, and I 
could worship thee ! See those beau- 
teous lips — they move. Hark to the 
music !" 

'' Schirene, Schirene !" 

'' There wanted but that word to sum- 
mon back my senses. Oh ! fool, fool ! 
where is thy fancy wandering ? Ill not 
wait for tardy justice. PU do the deed 
myself. Shall I not kill my Sisera?" 
She seized a dagger from the ottoman, a 
rare and highly-tempered blade. Up she 
raised it in the air, and dashed it to his 
heart, with superhuman force. It struck 
against the talisman which Jabaster had 



^16 THE WONDROUS TALE 

given Alroy, and which, from a lingering 
superstition he still wore ; it struck, and 
shivered into a thousand pieces. The 
Caliph sprang from his couch, his eyes 
met the Prophetess, standing over him in 
blank despair, with the hilt of the dagger 
in her hand. 

" What is all this! Schirene! Who 
art thou ? Esther !" He jumped from 
the couch, called to Pharez, and seized 
her by both hands. '' Speak !" he con- 
tinued. '' Art thou Esther ? What dost 
thou here ?" 

She broke into a wild laugh ; she 
wrestled with his grasp, and pulled him 
towards the gallery. He beheld the chief 
tower of the Serail in flames. Joining 
her hands together, grasping them both 
in one of his, and dragging her towards 
the ottoman, he seized a helmet, and 



OF ALROY. 2|y 

flung it upon the mighty shield. It 
sounded like a gong. Pharez started 
from his slumbers, and rushed into the 
chamber. 

'' Pharez ! Treason ! treason ! Send 
instant orders that the palace gates are 
open on no pretence whatever. Go, fly ! 
See the captain himself. Summon the 
household. Order all to arms. Speed 
for our lives !" 

The whole palace was now roused. 
Alroy delivered Esther, exhausted, and 
apparently senseless, to a guard of 
eunuchs. Slaves and attendants poured 
in from all directions. Soon arrived 
Schirene, with dishevelled hair and hur- 
ried robes, attended by a hundred mai- 
dens, each bearing a torch. 

'' My soul, what ails thee?" 

" Nothing, sweetest; all will soon be 

VOL. II. L 



218 THE WONDROUS TALE 

well/' replied Alroy, picking up, and ex- 
amining the fragments of the shivered 
dagger, which he had just discovered. 

'' My life has been attempted ; the 
palace is in flames ; I suspect the city is 
in insurrection. Look to your mistress, 
maidens !" Schirene fell into their arms. 
" 111 soon be back.'* So saying, he 
rushed to the grand court. 

Several thousand persons, for the po- 
pulation of the Serail and its liberties was 
very considerable, were assembled in the 
grand court ; eunuchs, women, pages, 
slaves, and servants, and a few soldiers. 
All in confusion and alarm, fire raging 
within, and mysterious and terrible out- 
cries without. A cry of '' the Caliph ! 
the Caliph !" announced the arrival of 
Alroy, and produced a degree of compa- 
rative silence. 



OF ALROY. 219 

" Where's the captain of the guard ?" 
he exclaimed. " That's well. Open the 
gates to none. Who will leap the wall, 
and bear a message to Asriel ? You ? 
That's well too. To-morrow, you shall 
yourself command. Where s Mesrour ? 
Take the eunuch guard and the company 
of gardeners,^^ and suppress the flames 
at all cost. Pull down the intervening 
buildings. Abidan's troop arrived with 
succour, eh ! I doubt it not. I expected 
them. Open to none. They force an 
entrance — eh ? I thought so. So that 
javelin has killed a traitor. Feed me 
with arms. Ill keep the gate. Send 
again to Asriel. Where's Pharez ?" 

'' By your side, my Lord." 

'^ Run to the Queen, my faithful Pha- 
rez, and tell her that all's well. I wish 
it were ! Didst ever hear a din so 

l2 



220 THE WONDROUS TALE 

awful ? Methinks all the tambours and 
the cymbals of the city are in full chorus. 
Foul play, I gTiess. Oh ! for Asriel ! 
Has Pharez returned ?" 

'' I am by your side, my Lord/' 

'' How's the Queen ?" 

" She would gladly join your side/' 

" No, no ! Keep the gates there. Who 

says they are making fires before them? 

Tis true. We must sally, if the worst 

come to the worst, and die at least like 

soldiers. Oh Asriel ! Asriel !" 

'' May it please your Highness, the 
troops are pouring in from all quar- 
ters/' 

" ^Tis Asriel." 

" No ! your Highness, 'tis not the 
guard. Methinks they are Scherirah's 



men." 



Hum I What it all is, I know not ; 



j^ OF ALROY. 021 

but very foul play, I do not doubt. 

Where's Honain ?" 

" With the Queen, Sire." 

" Tis well. What is that shout ?" 

'^ Here's the messenger from Asriel. 

Make way ! way !" 

'^ Well ! how is't, Sir ?" 

'' Please your Highness, I could not 

reach the guard." 

" Could not reach the guard ! God of 

my fathers ! who should lett thee ?" 
" Sire, I was taken prisoner." 
" Prisoner ! By the thunder of Sinai, 

are we at war? Who made thee pri- 
soner ?" 

'' Sire, they have proclaimed thy 

death." 

'' Who r 

" The Council of the Elders. So I 
heard. Abidan, Zalmunna " 



222 THE WONDROUS TALE 

'' Rebels and dogs ! Who else ?" 

" The High Priest." 

'' Hah ! Is it there ? Pharez, fetch 
me some drink. Is it true Scherirah has 
joined them ?" 

'' His force surrounds the Serail. No 
aid can reach us without cutting through 
his ranks." 

'' Oh ! that I were there with my good 
guard! Are we to die here like rats, 
fairly murdered ? Cowardly knaves ! 
Hold out, hold out, my men ! Tis sharp 
work, but some of us will smile at this 
hereafter. Who stands by Alroy to-night 
bravely and truly, shall have his heart's 
content to-morrow. Fear not, fear not : 
I was not born to die in a civic broil. I 
bear a charmed life. So to it." 



OF ALROY. 223 



VI. 



'* Go to the Caliph, good Honain, I 
pray thee go. I can support myself, he 
needs thy council. Bid him not expose 
his precious life. The wicked men ! As- 
riel must soon be here. What sayest 
thou r 

'' There is no fear. Their plans are ill- 
devised. I have long expected this 
stormy night, and feel even now more 
anxious than alarmed." 

'' 'Tis I they aim at — it is I they hate. 
The High Priest, too ! A.j, ay ! Thy 
proud brother, good Honain, I have ever 
felt he would not rest until he drove me 
from this throne, my right ; or washed 
my hated name from out our annals in 
my life's blood. Wicked, wicked Jabas- 



224 THE WONDROUS TALE 

ter ! He frowned upon me from the 
first, Honain. Is he indeed thy bro- 
ther ?" 

^' I care not to remember. He aims at 
something further than thy life ; but Time 
will teach us more than all our thoughts." 



VH. 

The fortifications of the Serail resisted 
all the efforts of the rebels. Scherirah 
remained in his quarters with his troops 
under arms, and recalled the small force 
that he had originally sent out as much 
to watch the course of events as to assist 
Abidan. Asriel and Ithamar poured 
down their columns in the rear of that 
chieftain, and by dawn a division of the 
guard had crossed the river, the care of 



^ 



OF ALROY. 225 

which had been entrusted to Scherirah, 
and had thrown themselves into the 
palace. Alroy sallied forth at the head 
of these fresh troops. His presence de- 
cided a result which was perhaps never 
doubtful. The division of Abidan fought 
with the desperation that became their 
fortunes. The carnage was dreadful, but 
their discomfiture complete. They no 
longer acted in masses, or with any gene- 
ral system. They thought only of self- 
preservation, or of selling their lives at 
the dearest cost. Some dispersed, some 
escaped. Others entrenched themselves 
in houses, others fortified the bazaar. All 
the horrors of war in the streets were now 
experienced. The houses were in flames, 
the thoroughfares flowed with blood. 

At the head of a band of faithful fol- 
lowers Abidan proved himself by his 

L 5 



226 THE WONDROUS TALE 

courage and resources worthy of success. 
At length, he was alone, or only sur- 
rounded by his enemies. With his back 
against a building in a narrow street, 
where the number of his opponents only 
embarrassed them, the three foremost of 
his foes fell before his irresistible scimitar. 
The barricadoed door yielded to the pres- 
sure of the multitude. Abidan rushed 
up the narrow stairs, and gaining a land- 
ing-place, turned suddenly round, and 
cleaved the skull of his nearest pursuer. 
He hurled the mighty body at his fol- 
lowers, and retarding their advance, him- 
self dashed onward, and gained the terrace 
of the mansion. Three soldiers of the 
guard followed him as he bounded from 
terrace to terrace. One armed with a 
dart, hurled the javelin at the chieftain. 
The weapon slightly wounded Abidan, 



OF ALROY. 227 

who, drawing it from his arm, sent it 
back to the heart of its owner The two 
other soldiers, armed only with swords, 
gained upon him. He arrived at the last 
terrace in the cluster of buildings. He 
stood at bay on the brink of the preci- 
pice. He regained his breath. They ap- 
proached him. He dodged them in their 
course. Suddenly, with admirable skill, 
he flung his scimitar edgewise at the legs 
of his farthest foe, who stopped short, 
roaring with pain. The chieftain sprang 
at the foremost, and hurled him down 
into the street below, where he was dashed 
into atoms. A trap-door offered itself to 
the despairing eye of the rebel. He de- 
scended and found himself in a room 
filled with women. They screamed, he 
rushed through them, and descending a 
staircase, entered a chamber tenanted by 



228 THE WONDROUS TALE 

a bed-ridden old man. The ancient in- 
valid inquired the cause of the uproar, 
and died of fright before he could re- 
ceive an answer, at the sight of the awful 
being before him, covered with streaming 
blood. Abidan secured the door, washed 
his blood-stained face, and disguising 
himself in the dusty robes of the deceased 
Armenian, sallied forth to watch the fray. 
The obscure street was silent. The chief- 
tain proceeded unmolested. At the cor- 
ner he found a soldier holding a charger 
for his captain. Abidan unarmed, seized 
a poignard from the soldier's belt, and 
stabbed him to the heart, and vaulting 
on the steed, galloped towards the river. 
No boat was to be found ; he breasted the 
stream upon the stout courser. He reach- 
ed the opposite bank. A company of 
camels were reposing by the side of a 



OF ALROY. 229 

fountain. Alarm had dispersed their 
drivers. He mounted the fleetest in ap- 
pearance ; he dashed to the nearest gate 
of the city. The guard at the gate re- 
fused him a passage. He concealed his 
agitation. A marriage procession arrived 
returning from the country. He rushed 
into their centre, and overset the bride in 
her gilded waggon. In the midst of the 
confusion, the shrieks, the oaths, and the 
scuffle, he forced his way through the 
gate, scoured over the country, and never 
stopped until he had gained the desart. 



vni. 

The uproar died away. The shouts of 
warriors, the shrieks of women, the wild 



230 THE WONDROUS TALE 

clang of warfare, all were silent. The 
flames were extinguished, the carnage 
ceased. The insurrection was suppressed, 
and order restored. The city, all the 
houses of which were closed, was patrolled 
by the conquering troops, and by sunset 
the conqueror himself, in his hall of state, 
received the reports and the congratula- 
tions of his chieftains. The escape of 
Abidan seemed counterbalanced by the 
capture of Jabaster. After performing 
prodigies of valour, the High Priest had 
been overpowered, and was now a pri- 
soner in the Serail. The conduct of 
Scherirah was not too curiouslv criti- 
cized ; a commission was appointed to 
inquire into the mysterious affair, and 
Alroy retired to the Bath^*^ to refresh him- 
self after the fatigues of the first victory 
which he could not consider a triumph. 



OF ALROY. 231 

As he reposed upon his couch, melan- 
choly and exhausted, Schirene was an- 
nounced. The Princess threw herself 
upon his neck, and covered him with 
embraces. His heart yielded to her fond- 
ness, his spirit became lighter, his de- 
pression melted away. 

" My ruby !" said Schirene, and she 
spoke in a low smothered voice, her face 
hidden and nestled in his breasts '' My 
ruby ! dost thou love me ?" 

He smiled in fondness as he pressed her 
to his heart. 

" My ruby, thy pearl is so frightened, 
it dare not look upon thee. Wicked 
men ! 'tis I they hate, 'tis I they would 
destroy." 

'' There is no danger, sweet. Tis 
over now. Speak not — nay, do not think 
of it." 



232 THE WONDROUS TALE 

'^ Ah ! wicked men ! There is no joy 
on earth while such things live. Slay 
Alroy, their mighty master, who from 
vile slaves, hath made them princes ! 
Ungrateful churls ! I am so alarmed — I 
ne'er shall sleep again. What ! slay my 
innocent bird, my pretty bird, my very 
heart ! FU not believe it. It is I they 
hate. 1 am sure they'll kill me. You 
shall never leave me, no, no, no, no ! You 
shall not leave me, love, never, never ! 
Didst hear a noise ? Methinks they are 
ever here, ready to plunge their daggers 
in our hearts — our soft, soft hearts ! 1 
think you love me, child ; indeed, I 
think you do !" 

'' Take courage, heart ! There is no 
fear, my soul ; I cannot love thee more, 
or else I would." 

" All joy is gone ! I ne'er shall sleep 



OF ALROY. 233 

again. Oh my soul ! art thou indeed 
alive? Do I indeed embrace my own 
Alroy, or is it all a wild and troubled 
dream, and are my arms clasped round 
a shadowy ghost, myself a spectre in 
a sepulchre ? Wicked, wicked men ! 
Can it indeed be true? What, slay 
Alroy ! my joy, my only life 1 Ah ! 
woe is me ; our bright felicity hath fled 
for ever !" 

"^ Not so, sweet child; we are but as 
we were. A few quick hours, and all 
will be as bright, as if no storm had 
crossed our sunny days." 

'' Hast seen Asriel ? He says such 
fearful things \" 

'' How now ?" 

'' Ah me ! I am desolate. I have no 
friend.^^ 

*' Schirene !" 



234 THE WONDROUS TALE 

'' They'll have my blood; I know 
they'll have my blood." 

" Indeed, an idle fancy." .f 

" Idle ! Ask Asriel, question Ithamar. 
Idle ! 'tis written in their tablets, their 
bloody scroll of rapine and of murder. 
Thy death led only to mine, and had they 
hoped my bird would but have yielded 
his gentle mate, they would have spared 
him. Ay ! ay ! 'tis I they hate, 'tis I 
they would destroy. This form, I fear it 
has lost its lustre, but still 'tis thine, and 
once thou saidst thou loved it ; this form 
was to have been hacked and mangled, 
this ivory bosom was to have been ripped 
up and tortured, and this warm blood, 
that flows alone for thee, that fell Ja- 
baster was to pour its tide upon the altar 
of his ancient vengeance. He ever hated 
me !" 



OF ALROY. 235 

'' Jabaster ! Schirene ! Where are we, 
and what are we? Life, life, they lie, 
that call thee Nature! Nature never 
sent these gusts of agony. Oh ! my heart 
will break. I drove him from my 
thought, and now she calls him up, 
and now must I remember he is my — 
prisoner ! God of Heaven, God of my 
fathers, is it come to this ? Why did he 
not escape ? why must Abidan, a com- 
mon cut-throat, save his graceless life, 
and this great soul, this stern and mighty 
being — Ah me ! 1 have lived long enough . 
Would they had not failed, would — '' 

'' Stop, stop, Alroy 1 I pray thee, love, 
be calm. I came to soothe thee, not 
to raise thy passions. I did not say Ja- 
baster willed thy death, though Asriel says 
so ; 'tis I he wars against ; and if indeed 
Jabaster be a man so near thy heart — if 



236 THE WONDROUS TALE 

he indeed be one so necessary to thy 
prosperity, and cannot live in decent 
order with thy slave that's here, I know 
my duty. Sir. I would not have thy for- 
tunes marred to save my single heart, 
although I think 'twill break. I'll go, 
I'll die, and deem the hardest accident 
of life but sheer prosperity if it profit 
thee. " 

'' Oh Schirene ! what wouldst thou ? 
This — this is torture." 

" To see thee safe and happy ; nothing 
more." 

'•' I am both, if thou art.'' 

'' Care not for me, I am nothing." 

'' Thou art all — to me." 

''Calm thyself, my soul. It grieves 
me much that when I came to soothe I 
have only galled thee. All's well, all's 
well. Say that Jabaster lives. What 



OF ALROY. 237 

then ? He lives, and may he prove more 
duteous than before ; that's all." 

" He lives, he is my prisoner, he 
awaits his doom. It must be given." 

" Yes, yes \" 

'' Shall we pardon ?'' 

'• My Lord will do that which it pleases 
him." 

" Nay, nay, Schirene, I pray thee be 
more kind. I am most wretched. Speak, 
what wouldst thou ?" 

'' If I must speak, I say at once — his 
life.'' 

"Ah me!" 

'' If our past loves have any charm, if 
the hope of future joy, not less supreme, 
be that which binds thee to this sha- 
dowy world, as it does me, and does 
alone, I say his life, his very carnal life. 
He stands between us and our loves. 



238 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Alroy, and ever has. There is no happi- 
ness if Jabaster breathe ; nor can I be 
the same Schirene to thee as I have been, 
if this proud rebel Uve to spy my con- 
duct." 

" Banish him, banish him !" 

'' To herd with rebels. Is this thy 
policy .>'' 

'' Oh Schirene! I love not this man, 
although methinks I should ; yet didst 
thou know but all ?" 

'' I know too much, Alroy. From the 
first he has been to me a hateful thought. 
Come, come, sweet bird, a boon, a boon 
unto thy own Schirene, who was so 
frightened by these wicked men ! I fear 
it has done more mischief than thou 
deemest. Ay ! robbed us of our hopes. 
It may be so. A boon, a boon ! it is not 
much I ask — a traitor's head. Come, 



OF ALROY. 239 

give me thy signet ring. It will not ; 
nay, then, Til take it. What, resist ! 1 
know a kiss thou hast often told me. Sir, 
could vanquish all denial. There it is. 
Is't sweet ? Shalt have another, and 
another too. I've got the ring ! Farewell, 
my lovely bird, I'll soon return to pillow 
in thy nest " 

IX. 

'' She has got the ring ! What's this ? 
what's this ? Schirene ! art gone ? Nay, 
surely not. She jests. Jabasterl A trai- 
tor's head! What ho! there. Pharez, 
Pharez !' 

'' My Lord." 

'' Passed the Queen that way ?" 

'' She did, my Lord." 

'' In tears ?" 



240 THE WONDROUS TALE 

"Nay! very joyful/' 

'' Call Honain — quick as my thought, 
HonainI Honain! He waits without. 
1 have seen the best of life, that's very 
sure. My heart is cracking. She surely 
jests. Hah ! Honain. Pardon these 
distracted looks. Fly to the armoury ! 

fly, fly !" 

" For what, my Lord ?" 

'^ Ay ! for what — for what ! My brain 
it wanders. Thy brother — thy great 
brother — the Queen — the Queen has 
stolen my signet ring, that is, I gave it 
her. Fly, fly ! or in a word, Jabaster is 
no more. He is gone. Pharez! your 
arm — I swoon !" 



OF ALROY. 241 



IX, 



'' His Highness is sorely indisposed 
to-day." 

'' They say he swooned this morn/' 

" Ay, in the bath/' 

*' No, not in the bath. 'Twas when he 
heard Jabaster's death.'" 

'' How died he, Sir ?" 

" Self-strangled. His mighty heart 
could not endure disgrace, and thus he 
ended all his glorious deeds. "" 

'' A great man !*' 

" We shall not soon see his match. 
The Queen had gained his pardon, and 
herself flew to the armoury to bear the 
news — alas 1 too late/' 

" These are strange times. Jabaster 
dead I" 

VOL. II. M 



242 THE WONDROUS TALE 



'' A very great event/' 

'^Who will be High Priest?" 

''I doubt the appointment will be filled 



up." 

" Sup you with the Lord Ithamar to- 
night?" 

- 1 do." 

'' I also. Well go together. The 
Queen had gained his pardon. Hum ! 
'tis strange." 

'' Passing so. They say Abidan has 
escaped. '' 

" I hear it. Shall we meet Medad to- 
night ?" 

'' Tis likely." i 



OF ALROY. 243 



PART X. 



" She comes not yet! her cheerful form, 
not yet it sparkles in our mournful sky. 
She comes not yet! the shadowy stars 
seem sad and lustreless without their 
Queen. She comes not yet !" 

" We are the watchers of the 
Moon, and live in loneliness to 
herald lights 
'' She comes not yet ! her sacred form, 
not yet it summons to our holy feast. 
She comes not yet ! our brethren far wait 

M 2 



244 THE WONDROUS TALE 

mute and motionless the saintly beam. 
She comes not yet !" 

" We are the watchers of the 
Moon, and live in loneliness to 
herald light!' 
'' She comes, she comes ! her beauteous 
form sails with soft splendour in the glit- 
tering air. She comes, she comes ! The 
beacons fire, and tell the nation that the 
month begins ! She comes, she comes !" 
'^ We are the watchers of the 
Moon,^^ to tell the nation that the 
month begins" 
Instantly the holy watchers fired the 
beacons on the mountain top, and anon J 
a thousand flames blaze round the land. ^ 
From Caucasus to Lebanon, on every 
peak a crown of light 1 



OF ALROY. 245 



II 



'' Sire ! a Tatar has arrived from 
Hamadan, who will see none but thyself. 
I have told him your Highness was en- 
gaged, and sent him to the Lord Honain ; 
but all denial is lost upon him. And, 
as I thought perhaps the Lady Miriam — " 

" From Hamadan ? You did well, 
Pharez. Admit him." 

The Tatar entered. 

'' Well, Sir ; good news I hope !" 

'' Sire, pardon me, the worst. I come 
from the Lord Abner, with orders to see 
the Caliph, and none else." 

" Well, Sir, you see the Caliph. Your 
mission ? What of the Viceroy ?" 

'' Sire, he bid me tell thee, that the 



246 THE WONDROUS TALE 

moment the beacon that announced the 
Feast of the New Moon was fired on Cau- 
casus, the dreaded monarch of Karasme, 
the great Alp Arslan, entered thy king- 
dom, and now overruns all Persia." 

" Hah ! and Abner ?" 

'' Is in the field, and prays for aid." 

" He shall have it. This is indeed 
great news ! When left you Hamadan ?" 

" Night and day I have journeyed 
upon the swiftest dromedary. The third 
morn sees me at Bagdad.'* 

'' You have done your duty. See this 
faithful courier be well tended, Pharez. 
Summon the Lord Honain." 

''Alp Arslanl Hah! a very famous 
warrior. The moment the beacon was 
fired. No sudden impulse then, but long 
matured. I like it not." 

''Sire/' said Pharez, re-entering, "a 



OF ALROY. 247 

Tatar has arrived from the frontiers 
of the province, who will see none but 
thyself. I have told him your Highness 
was deeply busied, and as methinks he 
brings but the same news, I — " 

'' 'Tis very likely; yet never think, 
good Pharez. I'll see the man/' 

The Tatar entered. 

" Well, Sir, how now ! — from whom ?" 

'' From Mozul. The Governor bid 
me see the Caliph and none else, and tell 
your Highness, that the moment the 
beacon that announced the Feast of the 
New Moon was fired on the mountains, 
the fell rebel Abidan raised the standard 
of Judah in the province, and proclaimed 
war against your Majesty." 

" In any force ?" 

'' The royal power keeps within their 
walls." 



248 THE WONDROUS TALE 

*^ Sufficient answer. Part of the same 
movement. We shall have some trouble. 
Hast summoned Honain ?" 

" I have. Sir/' 

^'Go, see this messenger be duly served, 

and, Pharez come hither : let none 

converse with them. You understand ?" 

" Your Highness may assure yourself." 

*^ Abidan come to life ! He shall not 
escape so well this time. 1 must see 

Scherirah. I much suspect whats 

this ? More news !" 

A third Tatar entered. 

" May it please your Highness, this 
Tatar has arrived from the Syrian fron- 
tier." 

'' Mischief in the wind, I doubt not. 
Speak out, knave." 

'' Sire ! pardon me, I bear but sad in- 
telligence." 



OF ALROY. 249 

'' Out with the worst !" 
'' I come from the Lord Medad.*' 
'' Well ! has he rebelled ? It seems 
a catching fever." 

'' Ah ! no, dread Sire, Lord Medad has 
no thought but for thy glory. Alas ! 
alas ! he has now to guard it 'gainst fear- 
ful odds. Lord Medad bid me see the 
Caliph and none else, and tell your 
Highness, that the moment the beacon 
that announced the Feast of the New 
Moon was fired on Lebanon, the Sultan 
of Roum and the old Arabian Caliph un- 
furled the standard of their Prophet in 
great array, and are now marching to- 
wards Bagdad.'' 

'' A clear conspiracy ! Has Honain 
arrived ? Summon a Council of the 
Viziers instantly. The world is up 

]>! 5 



250 THE WONDROUS TALE 

against me. Well ! rm sick of Peace. 
They shall not find me napping !" 



III. 



'' You see, my Lords," said Alroy, ere 
the council broke up, '^we must attack 
them singly. There can be no doubt of 
that. If they join, we must combat at 
great odds. 'Tis in detail that we must 
rout them. I will myself to Persia. 
Ithamar must throw himself between the 
Sultan and Abidan : Medad fall back on 
Ithamar. Scherirah must guard the ca- 
pital. Honain, you are Regent. And 
so farewell. I shall set off to-night. 
Courage, brave companions. 'Tis a storm, 
but many a cedar survives the thunder- 
bolt.'' 



OF ALROY. 251 

The council broke up. 

" My own Scherirah !" said the Ca- 
liph, as they retired, '' stay awhile. I 
would speak with you alone. Honain/' 
continued Alroy, following the Grand 
Vizier out of the chamber, and leaving 
Scherirah alone ; '' Honain, I have not 
yet interchanged a word with you in pri- 
vate. What think you of all this ?" 

'' Sire, I am prepared for the worst, 
but hope the best.'' 

'' Tis wise. If Abner could only keep 
that Karasmian in check ! I am about 
to speak with Scherirah alone. I do 
suspect him much." 

'' ril answer for- — his treason." 

" Hah ! I do suspect him. Therefore 
I give him no command. I would not 
have him too near his old companion, 
eh ? We '11 garrison the city with his 
rebels.'" 



252 THE WONDROUS TALE 

'' Sire, these are not moments to be 
nice. Scherirah is a valiant captain, a 

very valiant captain, but lend me thy 

signet ring, I pray thee. Sire." 

Alroy turned pale. '' No, Sir, it has left 
me once, and never shall again. You 
have touched upon a string that makes 
me sad. There is a burthen on my con- 
science—why, or what, I know not. I 
am innocent, you know I am innocent, 
Honain ?" 

'' I'll answer for your Highness. He 
who has enough of the milk of human 
kindness to spare a thing like Scherirah 
when he stands in his way, may well be 
credited for the nobler mercy that spared 
his better." 

" Ah me ! there's madness in the 
thought. Why is he not here ? Had I 
but followed — tush ! tush ! Go see the 



OF ALROY. 253 

Queen, and tell her all that has happened, 
ril to Scherirah." 

The Caliph returned. 

" Thy pardon, brave Scherirah ; in 
these moments my friends will pardon 
courtesy." 

'' Your Highness is too considerate." 

'' You see, Scherirah, how the wind 
blows, brave heart. There's much to do, 
no doubt. I am in sad want of some 
right trusty friend, on whose devoted 
bosom I can pillow all my necessities. I 
was thinking of sending you against this 
Arslan, but perhaps 'tis better that I 
should go myself. These are moments 
one should not seem to shrink, and yet 
we know not how affairs may run — no, 
we know not. The capital, the sur- 
rounding province —one disaster and these 
false Moslemin may rise against us. I 



254 THE WONDROUS TALE 

should stay here, but if I leave Scherirah, 
I leave myself. I feel that deeply — 'tis 
a consolation. It may be that I must 
fall back upon the city. Be prepared, 
Scherirah. Let me fall back upon sup- 
porting friends. You have a great trust. 
Oh ! use it wisely ! Worthily I am sure 
you must do." 

" Your Highness may rest assured I 
have no other thought but for your weal 
and glory. Doubl not my devotion. 
Sire. I am not one of those mealy- 
mouthed youths, full of their own deeds 
and lip-worship. Sire, but I have a life 
devoted to your service, and ready at all 
times to peril all things." 

'' I know that, Scherirah, I know it, I 
feel it deeply. What think you of these 
movements ?" 

" They are not ill combined, and yet 



OF ALROY. Q55 

I doubt not your Majesty will prove your 
fortunes most triumphant." 

" Think you the soldiery are in good 
cue ?" 

" I'll answer for my own. They are 
rough fellows, like myself, a little too 
blunt, perhaps, your Highness. We are 
not holiday guards, but we know our 
duty, and we will do it." 

" That's well, that's all I want. I 
shall review the troops before I go. Let 
a donative be distributed among them ; 
and, by-the-bye, I have always forgotten 
it, your legion should be called the Le- 
gion of Syria. We owe our fairest pro- 
vince to their arms." 

'' I shall convey to them your High- 
ness's wish. Were it possible, 'twould 
add to their devotion." 

'' I do not wish it. They are my very 



^56 THE WONDROUS TALE 

children. Sup at the Serail to-night, 
Scherirah. We shall be very private. 
Yet let us drink together ere we part. 
We are old friends, you know. Hast not 
forgotten our ruined city ?'' 



IV. 



Alroy entered the apartment of Schi- 
rene. '' My soul ! thou knowest all ?" 

She sprang forward and threw her 
arms around his neck. 

'' Fear not, my life, we'll not disgrace 
our Queen. Twill be quick work. Two- 
thirds of them have been beaten before, 
and for the new champion, our laurels 
must not fade, and his blood shall nourish 
fresh ones.'' 

'' Dearest, dearest Alroy, go not thy- 



OF ALROY. 257 

self, I pray thee. May not Asriel con- 
quer ?*' 

" I hope so in my company. For 

a time we part — a short one. 'Tis our 
first parting : may it be our last !" 

" Oh ! no, no, no : oh ! say not we 
must part." 

" The troops are under arms ; to-mor- 
row's dawn will hear my trumpet." 

'' I will not quit thee, no ! I will not 
quit thee. What business has Schirene 
without Alroy ? Hast thou not often 
told me I am thy inspiration ? In the 
hour of danger shall I be wanting ? 
Never ! I will not quit thee ; no, I will 
not quit thee." 

*' Thou art ever present in my thoughts, 
my soul. In the battle I shall think of 
her for whom alone I conquer." 

'' Nay, nay, TU go, indeed I must. 



258 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Alroy. I'll be no hindrance, trust me, 
sweet boy, I will not. Til have no train, 
no, not a single maid. Credit me, I 
know how a true soldier's wife should 
bear herself. Ill watch thee sleeping, 
and I'll tend thee wounded, and when 
thou goest forth to combat I'll gird thy 
sabre round thy martial side, and whisper 
triumph with victorious kisses. "" 

^^ My own Schirene, there's victory in 
thine eyes. We'll beat them, girl." 

" Abidan, doubly false Abidan ! would 
he were doubly hanged ! Ere she died, 
the fatal Prophetess foretold this time, 
and gloated on his future treachery." 

'' Think not of him." 

'' And the Karasmian think you he 

is very strong ?" 

" Enough, love, for our glory. He is 
a potent warrior : I trust that Abner will 
not rob us of our intended victory." 



OF ALROY. 259 

" So you triumph, I care not by whose 
sword. Dost go indeed to-morrow ?" 

'* At the break of dawn. I pray thee 
stay, my sweet I" 

" Never !— I will not quit thee. I am 
quite prepared. At the break of dawn ? 
'Tis near on midnight now. I'll lay me 
down upon this couch awhile, and travel 
in my litter. Art sure Alp Arslan is 
himself in the field ?" 

'^ Quite sure, my sweet.'* 

" Confusion on his crown ! We'll con- 
quer. Goes Asriel with us ?" 

'' Ay !" 

'^ That's well ; at break of dawn. I'm 
somewhat drowsy. Methinks I'll sleep 
awhile." 

'' Do, my best heart ; I'll to my cabi- 
net, and at break of dawn 111 wake thee 
with a kiss.'' 



260 THE WONDROUS TALE 



V. 



The Caliph repaired to his cabinet, 
where his secretaries were occupied in 
writing. As he paced the chamber, he 
dictated to them the necessary instruc- 
tions. 

'' Who is the officer on guard }" 

'^ Benaiah, Sire." 

^' I remember him. He saved me a 
broken skull upon the Tigris. This is 
for him. The Queen accompanies us. 
She is his charge. These papers for the 
Vizier. Let the troops be under arms by 
day-break. This order of the day for the 
Lord Asriel. Send this instantly to Ha- 
madan. Is the Tatar despatched to Me- 
dad ? Tis well. You have done your 
duty. Now to rest. Pharez !" 



OF ALROY. 261 

^^ My Lord!" 

'' I shall not sleep to-night. Give me 
my drink. Go rest, good boy. I have 
no wants. Good night." 

'' Good night, my gracious Lord V* 

'' Let me ponder ! I am alone. I am 
calm, and yet my spirit is not quick. I 
am not what I was. Four-and- twenty 
hours ago who would have dreamed of 
this ? All at stake again ! Once more 
in the field, and struggling at once for 
empire and existence ! I do lack the 
mighty spirit of my former days. I am 
not what I was. I have little faith. All 
about me seems changed and dull and 
grown mechanical. Where are those 
flashing eyes and conquering visages that 
clustered round me on the battle eve, 
round me, the Lord's anointed! I 
see none such. They are changed, as 



262 THE WONDROUS TALE 

I am. Why ! this Abidan was a host, 
and now he fights against me. She spoke 
of the Prophetess ; I remember that wo- 
man was the stirring trumpet of our 
ranks, and now where is she ? The vic- 
tim of my justice ! And where is he the 
mightier far, the friend, the counsellor, 
the constant guide, the master of my 
boyhood ; the firm, the fond, the faithful 
guardian of all my bright career, whose 
days and nights were one unbroken study 
to make me glorious ! Alas ! I feel more 
like a doomed and desperate renegade 
than a young hero on the eve of battle, 
flushed with the memory of unbroken 
triumphs ! 

'' Hah ! what awful form art thou that 
rises from the dusky earth before me ? 
Thou shouldst be one I dare not name, 
yet will — the likeness of Jabaster. Away ! 



OF ALROY. 263 

why frownest thou upon me ? I did not 
slay thee. Do I live, or dream, or what ? 
I see him, ay ! I see thee. I fear thee 
not, I fear nothing. I am Alroy. 

" Speak, oh ! speak ! I do conjure 
thee, mighty spectre, speak. By all the 
memory of the past, although 'tis mad- 
ness, I do conjure thee, let me hear again 
the accents of my boyhood.'' 

"Alroy, Alroy, Alroy f' 

'^ I listen, as to the last trump." 

'^ Meet me on the plain of Nehauend" 

'^ Tis gone! As it spoke, it vanished. 

It was Jabaster ! God of my fathers, it 

was Jabaster! Life is growing too wild. 

My courage is broken ! I could lie down 

and die. It was Jabaster ! The voice 

sounds in my ear like distant thunder : 

' Meet me on the plain ofNehauend* Til 

not fail thee, noble ghost, although I meet 



246 THE WONDROUS TALE 

my doom. Jabaster! Have I seen Ja- 
baster I Indeed, indeed ! Methinks I'm 
mad. Hah! what's that?" 

An awful clap of thunder broke over 
the palace, followed by a strange clashing 
sound that seemed to come from one of 
the chambers. The walls of the Serail 
rocked. 

'' An earthquake!" exclaimed Alroy. 
'* Would the earth would open and swal- 
low all. Hah ! Pharez, has it roused thee, 
too ! Pharez ! Pharez ! we live in strange 
times." 

" Your highness is very pale/' 

" And so art thou, lad ! Wouldst have 
me merry ? Pale I we may well be pale, 
didst thou know all. Hah I that awful 
sound again ! I cannot bear it, Pharez, 
I cannot bear it. I have borne many 
things, but this I cannot." 



OF ALROY. 265 

" My Lord, 'tis in the Armory/' 

'' Run, see No, 111 not be alone, Til 
not be alone. Where's Benaiah ? Let 
him go. Stay with me, Pharez, stay with 
me. I pray thee stay, my child." 

Pharez led the Caliph to a couch, on 
which Alroy lay pale and trembling*. In 
a few minutes he inquired whether Be- 
naiah had returned. 

" Even now he comes, Sir." 

'' Well, how is it ?" 

^' Sire ! a most awful incident. As the 
thunder broke over the palace, the sacred 
standard fell from its resting-place, and 
has shivered into a thousand pieces. 
Strange to say, the sceptre of Solomon 
can neither be found nor traced." 

''Say nothing of the past as ye love 
me, lads. Let none enter the Armory. 
Leave me, Benaiah, leave me, Pharez." 

VOL. II. N 



266 THE WONDROUS TALE 

They retired. Alroy watched their 
departure with a glance of inexpressible 
anguish. The moment that they had 
disappeared, he flew to the couch, and 
throwing himself upon his knees, and 
covering his face with his hands, burst 
into passionate tears, and exclaimed : — 
'* Oh ! my God, I have deserted thee, 
and now thou hast deserted me !" 



VI. 



Exhausted and desperate, sleep crept 
over the senses of the Caliph. He threw 
himself upon the divan, and was soon 
buried in profound repose. He might 
have slept an hour ; he awoke suddenly. 
From the cabinet in which he slept, you 
entered through a lofty and spacious 



OF ALROY. 267 

arcli, generally covered with drapery, 
which was now withdrawn, into an im- 
mense hall. To the astonishment of Al- 
roy, this presence-chamber apparently at 
this moment blazed with light. He rose 
suddenly from his couch, he advanced — 
he perceived, with feelings of curiosity 
and fear, that the hall was filled with 
beings, terrible indeed to behold, but to 
his sight more terrible than strange. In 
the colossal and mysterious forms that 
lined the walls of the mighty chamber, 
and each of which held in its extended 
arm a streaming torch, he I'ecognized the 
awful Afrits. At the end of the hall, 
upon a sumptuous throne, surrounded by 
priests and courtiers, there was seated a 
monarch, on whom Alroy had before 
gazed, Solomon the Great ! Alroy beheld 
him in state and semblance, the same 

N 2 



268 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Solomon, whose sceptre the Prince of 
the Captivity had seized in the royal 
tombs of Judah. 

The strange assembly seemed perfectly 
unconscious of the presence of the child 
of Earth, who, with a desperate courage, 
leant against a column of the arch, and 
watched, with wonder, their mute and 
motionless society. Nothing was said, 
nothing done. No one moved, no one, 
even by gesture, seemed sensible of tlie 
presence of any other apparition save 
himself 

Suddenly there advanced from the bot- 
tom of the hall, near unto Alroy, a pro- 
cession. Pages and dancing girls, with 
eyes of fire, and voluptuous gestures, 
warriors with mighty arms, and vene- 
rable forms, with ample robes and flowing 
beards. And as they passed, even with 



OF ALROY. 269 

all the activity of their gestures, they 
made no sound ; neither did the musi- 
cians, whereof there was a great band 
playing upon harps and psalteries, and 
timbrels and cornets, break, in the slight- 
est degree, the almighty silence. 

This great crowd poured on in beau- 
tiful order, the procession never termi- 
nating, yet passing thrice round the hall, 
bowing to him that was upon the throne, 
and ranging themselves in ranks before 
the Afrits. 

And there came in twelve forms, bear- 
ing a great seal. The stone green, and 
the engraven characters of living flame, 
and the characters were those on the 
talisman of Jabaster, which Alroy still 
wore next to his heart. And the twelve 
forms placed the great seal before Solo- 
mon, and humbled themselves, and the 



270 THE WONDROUS TALE 

King bowed. At the same moment, Al- 
roy was sensible of a pang next to his 
heart. He instantly put his hand to the 
suffering spot, and lo ! the talisman 
crumbled into dust. 

The procession ceased, a single form 
advanced. Recent experience alone pre- 
vented Alroy from sinking before the 
spectre of Jabaster. Such was the single 
form. It advanced, bearing the sceptre. 
It advanced, it knelt before the throne, 
it offered the sceptre to the crowned and 
solemn vision. And the form of Solomon 
extended its arm, and took the sceptre, 
and instantly the mighty assembly va- 
nished ! 

Alroy advanced immediately into the 
chamber, but all was dark and silent. 
A trumpet sounded. He recognized the 
note of his own soldiery. He groped his 



OF ALROY. 271 

way to a curtain, and, pulling it aside, 
beheld the first streak of dawn. 



VIL 

Once more upon his charger, once 
more surrounded by his legions, once 
more his senses dazzled and inflamed by 
the waving banners and the inspiring 
trumpets, once more conscious of the 
power still at his command, and the 
mighty stake for which he was about to 
play, Alroy in a great degree recovered 
his usual spirit and self-possession. His 
energy returned with his excited pulse, 
and the vastness of the impending danger 
seemed only to stimulate the fertility of 
his genius. 

He pushed on with forced marches to- 



272 THE WONDROUS TALE 

wards Media, at the head of fifty thousand 
men. At the end of the second day's 
march, fresh couriers arrived from Abner, 
informing him that, unable to resist the 
valiant and almost innumerable host of 
the King of Karasme, he had entirly eva- 
cuated Persia, and had concentrated his 
forces in Louristan. Alroy, in conse- 
quence of this information, dispatched 
orders to Scherirah, to join him with his 
division instantly, and leave the capital 
to its fate. 

They passed again the mountains of 
Kerrund, and joined Abner and the army 
of Media thirty thousand strong, on the 
river Abzah. Here Alroy rested one 
night, to refresh his men, and on the en- 
suing morn pushed on to the Persian 
frontier, unexpectedly attacked the ad- 
vanced posts of Alp Arslan, and beat them 



OF ALROY. 273 

back, with great loss into the Province. 
But the force of the King* of Karasme 
was so considerable, that the Caliph did 
not venture on a general engagement, and 
therefore he fell back, and formed in bat- 
tle array upon the neighbouring plain of 
Nehauend, the theatre of one of his ear- 
liest and most brilliant victories, where 
he awaited the hourly expected arrival of 
Scherirah. 

The King of Karasme, who was desirous 
of bringing affairs to an issue, and felt 
confident in his superior force, instantly 
advanced. In two or three days at far- 
thest, it was evident that a battle must be 
fought that would decide the fate of the 
East. 

On the morn ensuing their arrival at 
Nehauend, while the Caliph was out 
hunting, attended only by a few officers, 

N 5 



^74 THE WONDROUS TALE 

he was suddenly attacked by an am- 
bushed band of Karasmians. Alroy and 
his companions defended themselves with 
such desperation that they at length suc- 
ceeded in beating off their assailants, al- 
though triple their amount in number. 
The leader of the Karasmians, as he re- 
treated, hurled a dart at the Caliph, which 
must have been fatal, had not a young 
officer of the guard interposed his own 
breast, and received the deadly wound. 
The party, in confusion, returned with all 
speed to the camp, Alroy himself bearing 
the expiring victim of desperate loyalty 
and military enthusiasm. 

The bleeding officer was borne to the 
royal pavilion, and placed upon the im-. 
perial couch. The most skilful leech was 
summoned ; but he examined the wound, 
and shook his head. The dying warrior 



OF ALROY. 275 

was himself sensible of his desperate con- 
dition. His agony could only be allevi- 
ated by withdrawing the javelin, which 
would occasion his immediate decease. 
He desired to be left alone with his 
Sovereign. 

'' Sire !'* said the officer, " I must die ; 
and I die without a pang. To die in 
your service, I have ever considered the 
most glorious end. Destiny has awarded 
it to me ; and if I have not met my fate 
upon the field of battle, it is some conso- 
lation that my death has preserved the 
most valuable of lives. Sire ! I have a 
sister." 

'' Waste not thy strength, dear friend, 
in naming her. Rest assured I shall ever 
deem thy relatives my own." 

'' I doubt it not. Would I had a 
thousand lives for such a master ! I have 



276 THE WONDROUS TALE 

a burthen on my conscience. Sire, nor 
can I die in peace unless I name it." 

'' Speak, speak freely. If thou hast 
injured any one, and the power or wealth 
of Alroy can redeem thy oppressed spirit, 
he'll not spare — he'll not spare, be assured 
of that." 

'' Noble, noble master, I must be 
brief; for although while this javelin 
rests within my body, I yet may live, 
the agony is great. Sire, the deed of 
which I speak doth concern thee.*' 

'' Ay !" 

'' I was on guard the day Jabaster died." 

''Powers of heaven! I am all ears. 
Speak on, speak on !" 

" He died self-strangled, so they say ?" 

" So they ever told me.'' 

" Thou art innocent, thou art innocent. 
1 thank my God, my King is innocent." 



OF ALROY. 277 

" Rest assured of that, as there^ is 
hope in Israel. I pray thee tell me 
all/' 

" The Queen came with the signet ring. 
To such authority I yielded way. She 
entered, and after her, the Lord Honain. I 
heard high words, IheardJabaster's voice. 
He struggled, yes ! he struggled ; but 
his mighty form, wounded and fettered, 
could not long resist. Foul play, foul 
play. Sire! What could I do against 
such adversaries ? They left the chamber 
with a stealthy step. Her eyes met 
mine. I never could forget that fell and 
glittering visage." 

" Thou ne'er hast spoken of this awful 
end ?" 

" To none but thee. And why I speak 
it now I cannot tell, save that it seems 
some inspiration urges me ; and methinks 



278 THE WONDROUS TALE 

they, who did this, may do even feller 
works, if such there be." 

'' Thou hast robbed me of all peace and 
hope of peace — — and yet I thank thee. 
Now I know the worth of life. I have 
never loved to think of that sad day, and 
yet, though I have sometimes dreamed of 
villainous work, the worst were innocence 
to thy dread tale." 

" 'Tis told ; and now I pray thee secure 
thy secret, by drawing from my agonized 
frame this javelin." 

'' Trusty heart, 'tis a sad office.'^ 

" I shall die with joy if thou performest 
it.'' 

" 'Tis done.'' 

*' God save Alroy !" 



OF ALROY. 279 



VIII. 

While Alroy , plunged in thought, stood 
over the body of the officer, there arose a 
flourish of triumphant music, and an eu- 
nuch, entering the pavilion, announced 
the arrival of Schirene from Kerrund. 
Almost immediately afterwards the Prin- 
cess, descending from her litter, entered 
the tent ; Alroy tore off his robe, and 
threw it over the corpse. 

" My own," exclaimed the Princess, as 
she ran up to the Caliph, *' I have heard 
all. Be not alarmed for me. I dare look 
upon a corpse. You know I am a soldier's 
bride. I am used to blood.'' 

*' Alas ! Alas !" 

" Why art thou so pale ? Thou dost 



280 THE WONDROUS TALE 

not kiss me ! Has this unhinged thee so ? 
'Tis a sad deed ; and yet to-morrow's 
dawn may light up thousands to as grim 
a fate. Why ! thou tremblest ! Alas ! 
kind soul! The single death of this 
fond, faithful heart hath quite upset my 
love. Yet art thou used to battle. Why ! 
this is foolishness. Art not glad to see 
me ? What, not one smile ! And I 
have come to fight for thee ! I will be 
kissed !" 

She flung herself upon his neck. Al- 
roy faintly returned her embrace, and 
bore her to a couch. He clapped his 
hands, and two soldiers entered and bore 
away the corpse. 

" The pavilion, Schirene, is now fitter 
for thy presence. Rest thyself; I shall 
soon return." Thus speaking, he quitted 
her. 



OF ALROY. 281 

He quitted her ; but her humbled look 
of sorrowful mortification pierced to his 
heart. He thought of all her love, and 
all her loveliness, he called to mind all 
the marvellous story of their united for- 
tunes. He felt that for her, and her 
alone he cared to live, that without her 
quick sympathy, even success seemed 
unendurable. His judgment fluctuated 
in an eddy of passion and reason. Pas- 
sion conquered. He dismissed from his 
intelligence all cognizance of good and 
evil ; he determined, under all circum- 
stances, to cling ever to her ; he tore from 
his mind all memory of the late dis- 
closure. He returned to the pavilion 
with a countenance beaming with affec- 
tion; he found her weeping, he folded 
her in his arms, he kissed her with a 
thousand kisses, and whispered between 
each kiss, his ardent love. 



282 THE WONDROUS TALE 



IX. 



'Twas midnight. Schirene reposed in 
the arms of Alroy. The Caliph, who 
was restless and anxious for the arrival of 
Scherirah, was scarcely slumbering, when 
the sound of a voice perfectly aroused 
him. He looked around ; he beheld the 
spectre of Jabaster. His hair stood on 
end, his limbs seemed to loosen, a cold 
dew crept over his frame, as he gazed 
upon the awful form within a yard of his 
couch. Unconsciously he disembarrassed 
his arms of their fair burthen, and rising 
on the couch, leant forward. 

'' Alroy, Alroy, Alroy !^ 

" I am here." 

" To-morrow Israel is avenged /** 



OF ALROY. 283 

" Who is that ?" exclaimed the Prin- 
cess, wakening. 

In a frenzy of fear, Alroy quite for- 
getting the spectre, turned and pressed 
his hand to her sight. When he again 
looked round the apparition was invisible. 

'' What wouldst thou, Alroy ?'' 

" Nothing, sweet ! A soldier's wife 
must bear strange sights, yet I would 
save you some. One of my men, forget- 
ful you were here, burst into my tent in 
such a guise, as scarce would suit a 
female eye. I must away, my child. 1*11 
call thy slaves. One kiss ! Farewell ! but 
for a time." 



284 THE WONDROUS TALE 



X 



" To-morrow Israel will be avenged. 
What, in Karasmian blood ! I have no 
faith. No matter. x\ll is now beyond 
my influence. A rushing destiny carries 
me onward. I cannot stem the course, 
nor guide the vessel. How now ! Who 
is the officer on guard ?" 

'^ Benomi, Sire, thy servant." 

'' Send to the Viceroy. Bid him meet 
me here. Who is this ?" 

'' A courier from the Lord Scherirah, 
Sire, but just arrived. He passed last 
night the Kerrund mountains. Sire, and 
will be with you by the break of day.*' 

'' Good news, good news. Go fetch 
Abner. Haste ! He'll find me here anon. 



OF ALROY. 285 

rU visit the camp awhile. Well, my 
brave fellows, you have hither come to 
conquer again with Alroy. You have 
fought before, I warrant, on the plain of 
Nehauend. 'Tis a rich soil, and shall be 
richer with Karasmian gore/' 

'' God save your Majesty ! Our lives 
are thine." 

*^ Please you, my little ruler,'' said a 
single soldier, addressing iVlroy ; ^' pardon 
my bluntness, but I knew you before 
you were a Caliph.'' 

'' Stout heart, I like thy freedom. 
Pr'ythee say on." 

'^ I was a saying, I hope you'll lead us 
in the charge to-morrow. Some say you 
will not." 

'' They say falsely.** 

" I thought so. ril ever answer for 
my little ruler— but then the Queen V' 



286 THE WONDROUS TALE 

''Is a true soldiers wife, and lives in 
the camp/' 

'' That's brave ! There, I told you so, 
comrades ; you would not believe me, 
but I knew our little i-uler before you 
did. I lived near the gate at Hamadan, 
please your Highness — old Shelomi's 
son ." 

'' Give me thy hand — ^a real friend. 
\Vhat is't ye eat here, boys ? Let me 
taste your mess. I' faith I would my 
cook could dress me such a pilau ! 'Tis 
admirable !" 

The soldiers gathered round their 
chieftain with eyes beaming with adora- 
tion. Twas a fine picture — the hero in 
the centre, the various groups around, 
some convemng with him, some cooking, 
some making coffee, all offering him by 
word or deed some testimonial of their 



OF ALROY. 287 

devotion, and blending with that devo- 
tion the most perfect frankness. 

" We shall beat them, lads !" 

'' There is no fear with you, you al- 
ways beat." 

'' I do my best, and so do you. A 
good general without good troops is little 
worth." 

"1' faith that's true. One must have 
good troops. What think you of Alp 
Arslan ?" 

^' I think he may give us as much 
trouble as all our other enemies together, 
and that's not much." 

" Brave, brave ! God save Alroy !" 

Benomi approached, and announced 
that the Viceroy was in attendance. 

" I must quit you, my children," said 
Alroy. '' We'll sup once more together 
when we have conquered." 



g88 THE WONDROUS TALE 

^' God save you, Sire ; and we will 
confound your enemies." 

'' Good night, my lads. Ere the dawn 
break we may have hot work." 

" We are ready, we are ready. God 
save Alroy !" 

'' They are in good cue, and yet 'twas 
a different spirit that inspired our early 
days. That I strongly feel. These are 
men true to a leader, who has never failed 
them, and confident in a cause that leads 
to — plunder. They are but splendid 
mercenaries. No more. Oh ! where are 
now the fighting men of Judah ! Where 
are the men who, when they drew their 
scimitars, joined in a conquering psalm 
of holy triumph ! Last eve of battle you 
would have thought the field a mighty 
synagogue. Priests and altars, flaming 
sacrifices, and smoking censers, groups of 



OF ALROY. 289 

fiery zealots hanging with frenzy on pro- 
phetic lips, and sealing with their blood 
and holiest vows, a solemn covenant to 
conquer Canaan. All is changed, as I 
am. How now, Abner ? You are well 
muffled !" 

" Is it true Scherirah is at hand ? 

'' I doubt not all is right. Would that 
the dawn would break !" 

" The enemy is advancing. Some of 
their columns are in sight. My scouts 
have dodged them. They intend doubt- 
less to form upon the plain." 

'' They are in sight, eh ! Then we 
will attack them at once, ere they are 
formed. Rare, rare! We'll beat them 
yet. Courage, dear brother. Scherirah 
will be here at dawn in good time, very 
good time — very, very good time." 

VOL. II. o 



290 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" I like the thought." 

'^ The men are in good heart. At 
break of dawn charge with thirty thou- 
sand cavalry upon their forming ranks. 
I'll take the right, Asriel the left. It 
shall be a family affair, dear Abner. 
How is Miriam ?'* 

'' I heard this morn, quite well. She 
sends you her love and prayers. The 
Queen is here ?'' 

^' She came this eve. Quite well." 

'' She must excuse all courtesy." 

" Say nothing. She is a soldier's wife. 
She loves thee well, dear Abner." 

'^ I know that. I hope my sword may 
guard her children's throne." 

" Well, give thy orders. Instant bat- 
tle, eh ?" 

'' Indeed, I think so." 

'^ ril send couriers to hurry Sche- 





OF ALROY. 




291 


rirah. All 


looks 


well. 


Reserve the 


guard." 










" Ay, ay ! 


Farewell, dear Sire. 


When 


we meet again, I 


trust 


your 


enemies 


rriRy be your 


slaves 


r* 







NOTES. 



o 3 



NOTES 
PART X.— (continued.) 



VOL. III. B 



THE WONDROUS 



TALE OF ALROY. 



PART X.— (CONTINUED.) 

XL 

At the first streak of dawn the He- 
brew cavalry, with the exception of the 
guard, charged the advancing columns of 
the Karasmians with irresistible force, 
and cut them to pieces. Alp Arslan ral- 
lied his troops, and at length succeeded 
in forming his main body in good order. 

B 2 



THE WONDROUS TALE 



Alroy and Asriel led on their divisions, 
and the battle now became general. It 
raged for several hours, and was on both 
sides well maintained. The slaughter of 
the Karasmians was great, but their stern 
character and superior numbers counter- 
balanced for a time all the impetuosity 
of the Hebrews, and all the energy of 
their leaders. This day Alroy threw 
into shade all his former exploits. Twelve 
times he charged at the head of the Sa- 
cred Guard, and more than once pene- 
trated to the very pavilion of Alp Arslan. 
In vain he endeavoured singly, and 
hand to hand, to meet that famous chief- 
tain. Both monarchs fought in the 
ranks, and yet fate decided that their 
scimitars should never cross. Four hours 
before noon it was evident to Alroy, that 
unless Scherirah arrived, he could not 



OF ALROY. .5 

prevail against the vast superiority of 
numbers. He was obliged early to call 
his reserve into the field, and although 
the number of the slain on the side of 
Arslan exceeded any in the former vic- 
tories of the Hebrews, still the Karas- 
mians maintained an immense front, 
which was constantly supplied by fresh 
troops. Confident in his numbers, and 
aware of the weakness of his antagonists, 
Arslan contented himself with acting on 
the defensive, and wearying his assailants 
by resisting their terrible and repeated 
charge. 

For a moment, Alroy at the head of 
the Sacred Guard had withdrawn from 
the combat. Abner and Asriel still 
maintained the fight, and the Caliph was 
at the same time preparing for new 
efforts, and watching with anxiety the 



6 THE WONDROUS TALE 

arrival of Scherirah. In the fifth hour, 
from an eminence he marked with exul- 
tation the advancing banners of his ex- 
pected succours. Confident now that the 
day was won, he announced the exhila- 
rating intelligence to his soldiers ; and 
while they were excited by the animating 
intelligence, led them once more to the 
charge. It was irresistible ; Scherirah 
seemed to have arrived only for the pur- 
suit, only in time to complete the victory. 
What then was the horror, the conster- 
nation of Alroy, when Benaiah dashing 
up to him, informed him that the long- 
expected succours consisted of the united 
forces of Scherirah and Abidan, and had 
attacked him in the rear. Human genius 
could afford no resource. The exhausted 
Hebrews, whose energies had been racked 
to the utmost, were surrounded. The 



OF ALROY. 7 

Karasmians made a general and simul- 
taneous advance. In a few minutes the 
Hebrew army was disorganized. The 
stoutest warriors threw away their swords 
in despair. Every one thought only of 
self-preservation. Even Abner fled to- 
wards Hamadan. Asriel was slain. Al- 
roy, finding that it was all over, rushed 
to his pavilion at the head of about three 
hundred of the guards, seized the fainting 
Schirene, and threw her before him on his 
saddle, and cutting his way through all 
obstacles, dashed into the desart. 

For eight-and-forty hours they never 
stopped. Their band was soon reduced 
one-third. On the morning of the third 
day they dismounted and refreshed them- 
selves at a well. Half only regained their 
saddles. Schirene never spoke. On they 
rushed again, each hour losing some ex- 



8 THE WONDROUS TALE 

hausted co-mate. At length, on the fifth 
day, about eighty strong, they arrived at 
a grove of palm-trees. Here they dis- 
mounted. And Alroy took Schirene in 
his arms, and the shade seemed to revive 
her. She opened her eyes, and pressed 
his hand and smiled. He gathered her 
some dates, and she drank some water. 

"Our toils will soon be over, sweetest," 
he whispered to her ; " I have lost every 
thing but thee.'* 

Again they mounted, and proceeding 
at a less rapid pace, they arrived towards 
evening at the ruined city, whither Alroy 
all this time had been directing his course. 
Dashing down the great street, they 'at 
length entered the old amphitheatre. 
They dismounted. Alroy made a couch 
with their united cloaks for Schirene. 
Some collected fuel, great stores of which 



OF ALROY. 9 

was found, and lit large fires. Others, 
while it was yet light, chased the gazelles, 
and were sufficiently fortunate to provide 
their banquet, or fetched water from the 
well known to their leader. In an hour's 
time, clustering round their fires in 
groups, and sharing their rude fare, you 
might have deemed them, instead of the 
discomfited and luxurious guards of a 
mighty monarch, the accustomed tenants 
of this wild abode. 

'' Come, my lads," said Alroy, as he 
rubbed his hands over the ascending 
flame, " at any rate this is better than 
the desart !" 



B 5 



10 THE WONDROUS TALE 



XII. 

After all his exertions, Alroy fell into 
profound and dreamless sleep. When he 
awoke, the Sun had been long up, Schi- 
rene was still slumbering. He kissed 
her, and she opened her eyes and smiled. 

" You are now a bandit's bride," he 
said with a smile. " How like you our 
new life ?" 

" Well ! with thee." 

" Rest here, my sweetest; I must rouse 
our men, and see how fortune speeds.*' 
So saying, and tripping lightly over 
many a sleeping form, he touched 
Benaiah. 

'^ So ! my brave captain of the guard, 
still napping! Come! stir, stir." 



OF ALROY. 1 1 

Benaiah jumped up with a cheerful 
face. '' I am ever ready, Sire." 

" I know it ; but remember I am no 
more a king", only a co-mate. Away with 
me, and let us form some order." 

The companions quitted the amphi- 
theatre and reconnoitred the adjoining 
buildings. They found many stores, the 
remains of old days, mats, tents, and 
fuel, drinking-bowls, and other homely 
furniture. They fixed upon a building 
for their stable, and others for the ac- 
commodation of their band. They sum- 
moned their companions to the open place, 
the scene of Hassan Subah's fate, where 
Alroy addressed them and developed to 
them his plans. They were divided into 
companies ; each man had his allotted 
duty. Some were placed on guard at 
different parts ; some were sent out to 



12 THE WONDROUS TALE 

the chase, or to collect dates from the 
Oasis ; others led the horses to the con- 
tiguous pasture, or remained to complete 
their interior arrangements. The am- 
phitheatre was cleared out. A rude but 
convenient pavilion was formed for Schi- 
rene. They covered its ground with 
mats, and each emulated the other in his 
endeavours to study her accommodation. 
Her kind words and inspiring smiles ani- 
mated at the same time their zeal and 
their invention. 

They soon became accustomed to their 
rough but adventurous life. Its novelty 
pleased them, and the perpetual excite- 
ment of urgent necessity left them' no 
time to moura over their terrible vicissi- 
tudes. While Alroy lived, hope indeed 
never deserted their sanguine bosoms. 
And such was the influence of his genius. 



OF ALROY. 13 

that the most desponding felt that to be 
discomfited with him was preferable to 
conquest with another. They were a 
faithful and devoted band, and merry 
faces were not wanting when at night 
they assembled in the amphitheatre for 
their common meal. 

No sooner had Alroy completed his 
arrangements than he sent forth spies in 
all directions to procure intelligence, and 
especially to communicate, if possible, 
with Ithamar and Medad, provided they 
still survived and maintained themselves 
in any force. 

A fortnight passed away without the 
approach of any stranger ; at the end of 
which, there arrived four personages at 
their haunt, not very welcome to their 
chief, who, however, concealed his cha- 
grin at their appearance. These were 



14} THE WONDROUS TALE 

Kisloch the Kourd, and Calidas the In- 
dian, and their inseparable companions, 
the Guebre and the Negro. 



XIII. 

" Noble Captain," said Kisloch, " we 
trust that you will permit us to enlist 
in the band. This is not the first time 
we have served under your orders in this 
spot. Old co-mates i'faith, who have 
seen the best and the worst. We sus- 
pected where you might be found, al- 
though, thanks to the ever felicitous in- 
vention of man, it is generally received 
that you died in battle. I hope your 
Majesty is well," added Kisloch, bowing 
to Schirene. 

" You are very welcome, friends," re- 



OF ALROY, 15 

plied Alroy ; " I know your worth. You 
have seen, as you say, the best and the 
worst, and will, I trust, see better. Died 
in battle, eh ! — that's good !" 

" ''Tis so received," said Calidas. 

"- And what news of our friends ?" 

*' Not over good, but strange." 

" How so ?" 

" Hamadan is taken." 

" I am prepared ; tell me all." 

" Old Bostenay and the Lady Miriam 
are borne prisoners to Bagdad." 

'' Prisoners 1" 

" But so: all will be well with them, I 
trow. The Lord Honain is in high fa- 
vour with the conqueror, and will doubt- 
less protect them." 

" Honain in favour !" 

'' Even so. He made terms for the 
city, and right good ones." 



16 THE WONDROUS TALE 

** Hah ! he was ever dextrous. Well ! 
if he save my sister, I care not for his 
favour.'* 

" There is no doubt. All may yet be 
well, Sir." 

" Let us act, not hope. Where's 
Abner ?" 

" Dead." 

*' How ?" 

'^ In battle." 

" Art sure ?'' 

" I saw him fall, and fought beside 
him." 

" A soldier's death is all our fortune 
now. I am glad he was not captured. 
Where's Medad, Ithamar ?" 

" Fled into Egypt." 

'' We have no force whatever then ?" 

" None but your guards here." 



OF ALROY^. 17 

" They are strong enough to plunder 
a caravan. Honain, you say, in fa- 
vour ?" 

" Very high. He'll make good terms 
for us." 

" This is strange news.'* 

" Very, but true." 

" Well ! you are welcome ! Share our 
fare ; 'tis rough, and somewhat scanty ; 
but we have feasted, and may feast 
again. Fled into Egypt, eh ?" 

"Ay! Sir." 

" Schirene, shouldst like to see the 
Nile ?" 

" I have heard of crocodiles." 



18 THE WONDROUS TALE 



XIV. 

If the presence of Kisloch and his com- 
panions were not very pleasing to Alroy, 
with the rest of the band they soon be- 
came great favourites. Their local know- 
ledge, and their experience of desart life, 
made them valuable allies, and their bois- 
terous jocularity and unceasing merri- 
ment were not unwelcome in the present 
monotonous existenceof the fugitives. As 
for Alroy himself he meditated an escape 
to Egypt. He determined to seize the 
first opportunity of procuring some ca- 
mels, and then dispersing his band, with 
the exception of Benaiah and a few faith- 
ful retainers, he trusted that, disguised as 
merchants, they might succeed in cross- 



OF ALROY. 19 

ing Syria, and entering Africa by Pales- 
tine. With these plans and prospects, 
he became each day more cheerful, and 
more sanguine as to the future. He had 
in his possession some very valuable 
jewels, which he anticipated parting with 
at Cairo for a sum sufficient for all his 
purposes, and having exhausted all the 
passions of life while yet a youth, he 
looked forward to the tranquil termina- 
tion of his existence in some poetic soli- 
tude with his beautiful companion. 

One evening as they returned from 
the Oasis, Alroy guiding the camel that 
bore Schirene, and ever and anon look- 
ing up in her inspiring face, her san- 
guine spirit would have indulged in a 
delightful future. 

" Thus shall we pass the desart, sweet," 
said Schirene. '' Can this be toil ?" 



^0 THE WONDROUS TALE 

'' There is no toil with love," replied 
Alroy. 

*' And we were made for love, and not 
for empire/' rejoined Schirene. 

" The past is a dream," said Alroy. 
** So sages teach us ; but until we act, 
their wisdom is but wind. I feel it now. 
Have we ever lived in aught but desarts, 
and fed on aught but dates ? Methinks 
'tis very natural. But that I am tempted 
by the security of distant lands, I could 
remain here, a free and happy outlaw. 
Time, custom, and necessity form our 
natures. When I first met Scherirah in 
these ruins, I shrank with horror from 
degraded man ; and now I sigh to be his 
heir. We must not think V 

" No, love, we'll only hope," replied 
Schirene ; and they passed through the 
gates. 



OF ALROY. 21 

The night was beautiful, the air was 
still warm, and sweet. Schirene gazed 
upon the luminous heavens. " We 
thought not of these skies when we were 
at Bagdad," she exclaimed ; " and yet, 
my life, what was the brightness of our 
palaces compared to these ? All is left to 
us that man should covet, freedom, beauty, 
and youth. I do believe, ere long, 
Alroy, we shall look back upon the won- 
drous past, as on another and a lower 
world. Would this were Egypt! 'Tis 
my only wish." 

** And it shall soon be gratified. All 
will soon be arranged. A few brief days, 
and then Schirene will mount her camel 
for a longer ride than just to gather 
dates. You'll make a sorry traveller, 
I fear!" 

'^Notl; rU tire ye all." 



92 THE WONDROUS TALE 

They reached the circus, and seated 
themselves round the blazing- fire. Sel- 
dom had Alroy, since his fall, appeared 
more cheerful. Schirene sang an Arab 
air to the band, who joined in joyous 
chorus. It was late ere they sought re- 
pose ; and they retired to their rest san- 
guine and contented. 

A few hours after, at the break of 
dawn, Alroy was roused from his slum- 
bers by a rude pressure on his breast. 
He started ; a ferocious soldier was kneel- 
ing over him ; he would have spurned 
him ; he found his hand manacled. He 
would have risen, his feet were bound. He 
looked round for Schirene, and called her 
name ; he was answered only by a shriek. 
The amphitheatre was filled with Karas- 
mian troops. His own men were sur- 
prised and overpowered. Kisloch and 



OF ALROY. 23 

the Guebre had been on guard. He was 
raised from the ground, and flung upon 
a camel, which was instantly trotted out 
of the circus. On every side he beheld 
a wild scene of disorder and dismay. He 
was speechless from passion and despair. 
The camel was dragged into the desart. 
A body of cavalry instantly surrounded 
it, and they set off at a rapid pace. 
The whole seemed the work of an in- 
stant. 

How many days had passed Alroy 
knew not. He had taken no count of 
time. Night and day were to him the 
same. He was in a stupor. But the 
sweetness of the air, and the greenness of 
the earth, at length partially roused his 
attention. He was just conscious that 
they had quitted the desart. Before him 
was a noble river ; he beheld the Eu- 



24 THE WONDROUS TALE 

phrates from the very spot he had first 
viewed it in his pilgrimage. The strong 
association of ideas called back his me- 
mory. A tear stole down his cheek ; the 
bitter drop stole to his parched lips ; he 
asked the nearest horseman for water. 
The guard gave him a wetted sponge, 
with which, with difficulty, he contrived 
to wipe his lips, and then he let it fall 
to the ground. The Karasmian struck 
him. 

They arrived at the river. The prisoner 
was taken from the camel and placed in 
a covered boat. After some hours, they 
stopped and disembarked at a small vil- 
lage. Alroy was placed upon a donkey 
with his back to its head. His clothes 
were soiled and tattered. The children 
pelted him with mud. An old woman, 
with a fanatic curse, pi ^ced a crown of 



OF ALROy. 25 

paper on his brow. With difficulty his 
brutal guards prevented their victim 
from being torn to pieces. And in such 
fashion, towards noon of the fourteenth 
day, David Alroy again entered Bagdad. 



XV. 

The intelligence of the capture of Al- 
roy spread through the agitated city. 
The Moolahs bustled about as if they had 
received a fresh demonstration of the au- 
thenticity of the prophetic mission. All 
the Dervishes began begging. The men 
discussed affairs in the coffee-houses, and 
the women chatted at the fountains.' 

" They may say what they like, but I 
wish him well,'* said a fair Arab, as she 
arranged her veil. '* He may be an 

VOL. III. c 



gg THE WONDROUS TALE 

impostor, but he was a very handsome 
one." 

"^ All the women are for him, that's 
the truth," responded a companion ; " but 
then we can do him no good." 

" We can tear their eyes out," said a 
third. 

" And what do you think of Alp Ar- 
slan, truly ?" inquired a fourth. 

" I wish he were a pitcher, and then I 
could break his neck," said a fifth. 

" Only think of the Princess !" said a 
sixth. 

" Well 1 she has had a glorious time of 
it," said a seventh. 

" Nothing was too good for her," said 
an eighth. 

*' I like true love," said a ninth. 

^' Well ! I hope he will be too much 
for them all yet," said a tenth. 



OF ALROY. 27 

" I should not wonder/* said an ele- 
venth. 

" He can't," said a twelfth, " he has 
lost his sceptre/* 

" You don't say so," said a thirteenth. 

** It is too true," said a fourteenth. 

" Do you think he was a wizard ?" said 
a fifteenth. *' I vow if there be not a 
fellow looking at us behind those trees." 

" Impudent scoundrel !" said a six- 
teenth. " I wish it were Alroy. Let 
us all scream, and put down our veils." 

And the group ran away. 



XVI. 

Two stout soldiers were playing chess* 
in a coffee-house. 

" May I slay my mother,*' said one, 

c 2 



28 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" but I cannot make a move. I fought 
under him at Nehauend; and though I 
took the amnesty, I have half a mind now 
to seize my sword and stab the first Turk 
that enters." 

" 'Twere but sheer justice/' said his 
companion. " By my father's blessing, 
he was the man for a charge. They may 
say what they like, but compared with 
him. Alp Arslan is a white-livered 
Giaour.'' 

" Here is confusion to him and to thy 
last move. There's the dirhem, I can 
play no more. May I slay my mother, 
though, but I did not think he would 
have let himself be taken." 

'' By the blessing of my father, nor I ; 
but then he was asleep." 

" That makes a difference. He was 
betrayed." 



OF ALROY. Sg 

" All brave men are. They say Kis- 
loch and his set pocket their fifty thou- 
sand by the job." 

" May each dirhem prove a plague 
spot !" 

" Amen ! Dost remember Abner ?'' 

** May I slay my mother if I ever for- 
get him. He spoke to his men like so 
many lambs. What's become of the lady 
Miriam ?" 

" She is here." 

" That will cut Alroy." 

" He was ever fond of her. Dost re- 
member she gained Adoram's life ?" 

" Oh ! she could do anything — next to 
the Queen." 

" Before her, I say before her. He has 
refused the Queen, he never refused the 
Lady Miriam." 

" Because she asked less.'* 



so THE WONDROUS TALE 

'' Dost know it seemed to me that 
things never went on so well after Jabas- 
ter's death ?" 

" So say I. There was a something, 
eh?" 

'* A sort of a peculiar, as it were, kind 
of something, eh ?" 

'' You have well described it. Every 
man felt the same. I have often men- 
tioned it to my comrades. Say what you 
like, said I, but slay my mother, if ever 
since the old gentleman strangled himself 
things don't seem, as it were, in their na- 
tural propinquity. Twas the phrase I 
used." 

" A very choice one. Unless there's a 
natural propinquity, the best arranged 
matters will fall out. However, the ass 
sees farther than his rider, and so it was 
with Alroy, the best commander I ever 
served under, all the same." 



OF ALROY. 31 

: " Let's go forth and see how aflfairs 

run." 

" Ay, do. If we hear any one abuse 
Alroy, we'll cleave his skull." 

'* That will we. There are a good 
many of our stout fellows about; we 
might do something yet." 

" Who knows ?" 

XVII. 

A subterranean dungeon of the citadel 
of Bagdad held in its gloomy limits the 
late Lord of Asia. The captive did not 
sigh, or weep, or wail. He did not speak. 
He did not even think. For several days 
he remained in a state of stupor. On 
the morning of the fourth day, he almost 
unconsciously partook of the wretched 
provision which his gaolers brought him. 



32 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Their torches, round which the bats 
whirled and flapped their wings, and 
twinkled their small eyes, threw a ghast- 
ly glare over the nearer walls of the dun- 
geon, the extremity of which defied the 
vision of the prisoner ; and when the 
gaolers retired, Alroy was in complete 
darkness. 

The image of the past came back to 
him. He tried in vain to penetrate the 
surrounding gloom. His hands were 
manacled, his legs also were loaded with 
chains. The notion that his life might 
perhaps have been cruelly spared in order 
that it might linger on in this horrible 
state of conscious annihilation, filled him 
with frenzy. He would have dashed his 
fetters against his brow, but the chain 
restrained him. He flung himself upon 
the damp and rigid ground. His fall 



OF ALROY. ^ 

disturbed a thousand obscene things. 
He heard the quick glide of a serpent, 
the creeping retreat of the clustering- 
scorpions, and the swift escape of the 
dashing rats. His mighty calamities 
seemed slight, when compared with these 
petty miseries. His great soul could not 
support him under these noisome and 
degrading incidents. He sprang, in dis- 
gust, upon his feet, and stood fearful of 
moving, lest every step should introduce 
him to some new abomination. At 
length, exhausted nature was unable any 
longer to sustain him. He groped his 
way to the rude seat, cut in the rocky 
wall, which was his only accommodation. 
He put forth his hand. It touched the 
slimy fur of some wild animal, that in- 
stantly sprang away, its fiery eyes spark- 
ling in the dark. Alroy recoiled with a 

c5 



34 THE WONDROUS TALE 

sensation of woe-begone dismay. His 
shaken nerves could not sustain him un- 
der this base danger, and these foul and 
novel trials. He could not refrain from 
an exclamation of despair ; and when he 
remembered that he was now far beyond 
the reach of all human solace and sym- 
pathy, even all human aid, for a moment 
his mind seemed to desert him ; and he 
wrung his hands in forlorn and almost 
idiotic woe. 

An awful thing it is — the failing ener- 
gies of a master-mind. He who places 
implicit confidence in his genius, will 
find himself some day utterly defeated 
and deserted. 'Tis bitter ! Every paltry 
hind seems but to breathe to mock you. 
Slow, indeed, is such a mind to credit that 
the never-failing resource can at last be 
wanting. But so it is. Like a dried-up 



OF ALROY. 35 

fountain, the perennial flow and bright 
fertility have ceased, and ceased for ever. 
Then comes the madness of retrospection. 

Draw a curtain ! draw a curtain ! and 
fling- it over this agonizing anatomy — I 
can no more. 

The days of childhood, his sweet sis- 
ter's voice and smiling love, their inno- 
cent pastimes, and the kind solicitude of 
faithful servants, all the soft detail of mild 
domestic life, — these were the sights 
and memories that flitted in wild play 
before the burning vision of Alroy, and 
rose upon his tortured mind. Empire 
and glory, his sacred nation, his imperial 
bride, — these, these were nothing. Their 
worth had vanished with the creative soul 
that called them into action. The pure 
sympathies of nature alone remained, and 
all his thought and grief, all his intelli- 



36 THE WONDROUS TALE 

gence, all his emotion, were centred in 
his sister. 

It was the seventh morning. A guard 
entered at an unaccustomed hour, and, 
sticking a torch into, a niche in the wall, 
announced that a person was without 
who had permission to speak to the pri- 
soner. They were the first human ac- 
cents that had met the ear of Alroy 
during his captivity, which seemed to 
him an age, a long dark period, that 
cancelled all things. He shuddered at 
the harsh tones. He tried to answer, but 
his unaccustomed lips refused their office. 
He raised his heavy arms, and endea- 
voured to signify his consciousness of 
what had been uttered. Yet, indeed, he 
had not listened to the message without 
emotion. He looked forward to the 
grate with strange curiosity ; and as he 



OF ALROY. ^. 

looked, he trembled. The visitor en- 
tered, muffled in a dark caftan. The 
griard disappeared ; and the caftan, fall- 
ing to the ground, revealed Honain. 

" My beloved Alroy," said the brother 
of Jabaster ; and he advanced, and pressed 
him to his bosom. Had it been Miriam, 
Alroy might have at once expired ; but 
the presence of this worldly man called 
back his worldliness. The revulsion of 
his feelings was wonderful. Pride, per- 
haps even hope, came to his aid ; all the 
associations seemed to counsel exertion ; 
for a moment he seemed the same 
Alroy. 

" I rejoice to find at least thee safe, 
Honain." 

" I also, if my security may lead to 
thine." . 

'* Still whispering hope !" 



38 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" Despair is the conclusion of fools." 
" O Honain ! 'tis a great trial. I can 
play my part, and yet methinks 'twere 
better we had not again met. How is 
Schirene ?" 

" Thinking of thee." 

'* 'Tis something that she can think. 
My mind has gone. Where's Miriam ?" 

" Free." 

" That's something. Thou hast done 
that. Good, good Honain, be kind to that 
sweet child, if only for my sake. Thou 
art all she has left." 

'^ She hath thee." 

" Her desolation." 

" Live, and be her refuge." 

" How's that ? These walls— escape ? 
No, no ; it is impossible." 

" 1 do not deem it so." 

*' Indeed ! I'll do any thing. Speak ! 



OF ALROY. 9$ 

speak I Can we bribe ? can we cleave 
their skulls ? can we '* 

" Calm thyself, my friend. There is 
no need of bribes, no need of bloodshed. 
We must make terms." 

" Terms ! We might have made those 
upon the plains of Nehauend. Terms ! 
Terms with a captive victim ?" 

" Why victim ?'' 

" Is Arslan then so generous ?" 

" He is a beast, more savage than the 
boar that grinds its tusks within his 
country's forests." 

" Why speakest thou then of hope ?" 

" I spoke of certainty. I did not men- 
tion hope." 

" Dear Honain, my brain is weak ; 
but I can bear strange things, or else 
I'd not be here. I feel thy thoughtful 
friendship ; but indeed there needs no 



40 THE WONDROUS TALE 

winding words to tell my fate. Pr'ythee, 
speak out." 

" In a word, thy life is safe." 

" What, spared !" 

" If it please thee." 

" Please me ! Life is sweet. I feel 
its sweetness. I want but little. Free- 
dom and solitude are all I ask. My life 
spared ! I'll not believe it. Thou hast 
done this deed, thou mighty man, that 
masterest all souls. Thou hast not for- 
gotten me, thou hast not forgotten the 
days gone by, thou hast not forgotten 
thine^- own Alroy ! Who calls thee 
worldly, is a slanderer. Oh, HonainI 
thou art too faithful !" 

" I have no thought, but for thy ser- 
vice, Prince." 

" Call me not Prince, call me thine 
own Alroy. My life spared ! Tis won- 



OF ALROY. 41 

derful ! When may I go ? Let no one see 
me. Manage that, Honain. Thou canst ma- 
nage all things. I'm for Egypt. Thou hast 
been to Egypt, hast thou not, Honain ?" 

'' A very wondrous land, 'twill please 
thee much." 

'* When may I go ? Tell me when I 
may go. When may I quit this dark 
and noisome cell ? 'Tis worse than all 
their tortures, dear Honain. Air and 
light, and I really think my spirit never 
would break, but this horrible dungeon 

1 scarce can look upon thy face, 

sweet friend. Tis serious." 

" Would'st thou have me gay ?" 

" Yes ! if we are free." 

" Alroy ! thou art a great spirit, the 
greatest that e'er I knew, or ever I have 
read of. I never knew thy like, and 
never shall." 



42 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" Tush, tush, sweet friend, I am a 
broken reed, but still I am free. This is 
no time for courtly phrases. Let's go, 
and go at once." 

" A moment, dear Alroy. I am no 
flatterer. What I said came from my 
heart, and doth concern us much and in- 
stantly. I was saying thou hast no com- 
mon mind, Alroy — indeed thou hast a 
mind unlike all others. Listen, my 
Prince. Thou hast read mankind deeply 
and truly. Few have seen more than 
thyself, and none have so rare a spring of 
that intuitive knowledge of thy race, 
which is a gem to which Experience is 
but a jeweller, and without which no 
Action can befriend us." 

" Well, well !» 

" A moment's calmness. Thou hast 
entered Bagdad in triumph, and thou 



OF ALROY. 49 

hast entered the same city with every 
contumely the base spirit of our race 
could cast upon its victim. 'Twas a 
great lesson." 

" I feel it so.'' 

'* And teaches us how vile and value- 
less is the opinion of our fellow men.'' 

'' Alas ! 'tis true." 

" I am glad to see thee in this whole- 
some temper. 'Tis full of wisdom." 

" The miserable are often wise." 

** But to believe is nothing unless we 
act. Speculation should only sharpen 
Practice. The time hath come to prove 
thy lusty faith in this philosophy. I 
told thee we could make terms. I have 
made them. To-morrow it was doomed 
Alroy should die, and what a death ! A 
death of infinite torture ! Hast ever seen 
a man impaled ?'' ' 



44 THE WONDROUS TALE 

*' Hah I- 

" To view it is alone a doom." 

"God of heaven !" 

*' It is so horrible, that 'tis ever marked, 
that when this direful ceremony occurs, 
the average deaths in cities greatly in- 
crease. 'Tis from the turning of the 
blood in the spectators, who yet from 
some ungovernable madness can ne'er re- 
frain from hurrying to the scene. I 
speak with some authority — I speak as a 
physician ," 

*' Speak no more. I cannot endure it.'' 

" To-morrow this doom awaited thee. 
As for Schirene " 

" Not for her, oh ! surely not for 
her !" 

" No, they were merciful. She is a 
Caliph's daughter. Tis not forgotten. 
The axe would close her life. Her fair 



OF ALROY. 45 

peck would give slight trouble to the 
headsman's art. But for thy sister, but 
for Miriam — she is a witch, a Jewish 
witch ! They would have burnt her 
alive." 

'* ril not believe it, no, no, I'll not be- 
lieve it : damnable, bloody demons 1 
When I had power I spared all— all but 
— ah, me ! ah, me ! why did I live !" 

" Thou dost forget thyself; I speak of 
that which was to have been, not of that 
which is to be. I have stepped in and 
communed with the conqueror. I have 
made terms.*' 

" What are they —what can they be ?" 

" Easy. To a philosopher like Alroy 
an idle ceremony." 

" Be brief, be brief." 

"Thou seest thy career is a great 
scandal to the Moslemin. I mark their 



^ THE WONDROUS TALE 

weakness, and I have worked upon it. 
Thy mere defeat or death will not blot 
out the stain upon their standard and 
their faith. The public mind is wild 
with fantasies since Alroy rose. Men's 
opinions flit to and fro with that fearful 
change that bodes no stable settlement of 
states. None know what to cling to, or 
where to place their trust. Creeds are 
doubted — authority disputed. They 
would gladly account for thy success by 
other than human means, yet must deny 
thy mission. There also is the fame of a 
fair and mighty Princess, a daughter of 
their Caliphs, which they would gladly 
clear. I mark all this, observe, and work 
upon it. So, could we devise some means 
by which thy lingering followers could 
be for ever silenced, this great scandal 
fairly erased, and the public frame 



OF ALROY. 47 

brought to a sounder and more tranquil 
pulse, why they would concede much, 
much, very much." 

" Thy meaning, not thy means, are 
evident/* 

'' They are in thy power." 

" In mine ? 'Tis a deep riddle. Pr'y- 
thee solve it." 

'* Thou wilt be summoned at to-mor- 
row's noon before this Arslan. There, 
in the presence of the assembled people, 
who are now with him as much as they 
were with thee, thou wilt be accused of 
magic, and of intercourse with the in- 
fernal powers. Plead guilty." 

*' Well ! is there more ?" 

" Some trifle. They will then examine 
thee about the Princess. It is not diffi- 
cult to confess that Alroy won the Ca- 
liph's daughter by an irresistible spell — • 
and now 'tis broken." 



48 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" So, SO. Is that all ?" 

" The chief. Thou canst then address 
some phrases to the Hebrew prisoners, 
denying thy Divine mission, and so 
forth — to settle the public mind, ob- 
serve, upon this point for ever." 

" Ay, ay, and then ?" 

" No more, except for form, (upon the 
completion of the conditions, mind, you 
will be conveyed to what land you please, 
with such amount of treasure as you 
choose,) there is no more, except, I say, 
for form, I would, if I were you, ('twill 
be expected,) I would just publicly affect 
to renounce our faith, and bow before 
their prophet." 

" Hah ! Art thou there ? Is this thy 
freedom ? Get thee behind me, tempter ! 

" Never, never, never ! not a jot, not 
a jot : I'll not yield a jot. Were my 



OF ALROY. 49 

doom one everlasting torture, I'd spurn 
thy terms ! Is this thy high contempt of 
our poor kind — to outrage my God ! to 
prove myself the vilest of the vile, and 
baser than the basest ! Rare philosophy ! 
O Honam ! would we had never met \" 

" Or never parted. True. Had my 
word been taken, Alroy would ne'er have 
been betrayed." 

'' No more, no more ; I pray thee. Sir, 
no more. Leave me.*' 

*' Were this a palace, I would. Harsh 
words are softened by a friendly ear, 
when spoken in affliction." 

" Say what they will, I am the Lord's 
anointed. As such I should have lived, 
as such at least I'll die." 

" And Miriam ?" 

" The Lord will not desert her : she 
ne'er deserted him." 

V^OL. III. D 



Sgt THE WONDROUS TALE 

" Schirene ?" 

*' Schirene ! why ! for her sake alone 
I'll die a hero ! Shall it be said she loved 
a craven slave, a base impostor, a vile 
reneg-ade, a villainous dealer in drugs and 
charms ? Oh ! no, no, no ! if only for 
her sake, her sweet, sweet sake, my end 
shall be like my great life. As the Sun I 
rose, like him I set. Still the world is 
warm with my bright fame, and my last 
hour shall not disgrace my noon, stormy 
indeed, but glorious !" 

Honain took the torch from the niche, 
and advanced to the grate. It was not 
fastened : he drew it gently open, and led 
forward a veiled and female figure. The 
veiled and female figure threw herself at 
the feet of Alroy, who seemed lost to 
what was passing. A soft lip pressed his 
hand. He started, his chains clanked. 



OF ALROY. 51 

** Alroy !" softly murmured the kneel- 
ing female. 

" What voice is that ?" wildly ex- 
claimed the Prince of the Captivity. 
" It falls upon my ear like long forgotten 
music. I'll not believe it. No ! I'll not 
believe it. Art thou Schirene ?" 

" I am that wretched thing they called 
thy bride." 

" Oh ! this indeed is torture ! What 
impalement can equal this sharp mo- 
ment ? Look not on me, let not our 
eyes meet ! They have met before, like 
to the confluence of two shining rivers 
blending in one great stream of rush- 
ing light. Bear off that torch, Sir. Let 
impenetrable darkness cover our darker 
fortunes." 

" Alroy !" 

" She speaks again. Is she mad, 

D 2 



LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY OF ILU«^^- 



52 THE WONDROUS TALE 

as I am, that thus she plays with 
agony ?" 

" Sire," said Honain, advancing, and 
laying his hand gently on the arm of the 
captive, " I pray thee moderate this pas- 
sion. Thou hast some faithful friends 
here, who would fain commune in calm- 
ness for thy lasting welfare." 
" Welfare ! He mocks me.** 
" I beseech thee. Sire, be calm. If, 
indeed, I speak unto that great Alroy 
that all men feared and still may fear, I 
pray remember, "tis not in palaces, or in 
the battle field alone, the heroic soul can 
conquer and command. Scenes like 
these are the great proof of a superior 
soul. While we live, our body is a tem- 
ple where our genius pours forth its god- 
like inspiration, and while the altar is 
not overthrown, the deity may still work 



OF ALROY. 5^ 

marvels. Then rouse thyself, great Sire; 
bethink thee, a Caliph or a captive, there 
is no man within this breathing- v^^orld 
like to Alroy. Shall such a being fall 
vvrithout a struggle, like some poor felon, 
who has nought to trust to but the dull 
shuffling accidents of Chance ? I too am 
a prophet, and I feel thou still w^ilt con- 
quer." 

'* Give me my sceptre then, give me 
the sceptre ! I speak to the wrong bro- 
ther. It was not thou — it was not thou 
that gave it me." 

" Gain it once more. The Lord de- 
serted David for a time, yet still he par- 
doned him, and still he died a king." 

'' A woman worked his fall." 

" But thee a woman raises. This 
great Princess, has she not suffered too ? 
Yet her spirit is still unbroken. List to 
her counsel : it is deep and fond.** 



^4 THE WONDROUS TALE 

i 

" So was our love." 

"And is, my Alroy !'* exclaimed the 
Princess. '^ Be calm, be calm, I pray 
thee ! For mv sake be calm ; I am calm 
for thine. Thou hast listened to all Ho- 
nain has told thee ; that wise man, my 
Alroy, that never erred. 'Tis but a word 
he counsels, an empty word, a most un- 
meaning- form. But speak it, and thou 
art free, and Alroy and Schirene may 
blend again their glorious careers, and 
lives of sweet fruition. Dost thou not 
remember when walking in the garden 
of our joy, and palled with empire, how 
often hast thou sighed for some sweet 
isle unknown to man, where thou mightst 
pass thy days with no companion but my 
faithful self, and no adventures but our 
constant loves? Oh ! my beloved, that 
life may still be thine ! And dost thou 



OF ALROY. 55 

faulter? Dost call thyself forlorn with 
such fidelity, and deem thyself a wretch, 
when Paradise with all its beauteous gates 
but woo thy entrance ? Oh ! no, no, no ! 
thou hast forgot Schirene : I fear me 
much, thy over-fond Schirene, who doats 
upon thy image in thy chains more than 
she did when those sweet hands of thine 
were bound with gems, and played with 
her bright locks \" 

" She speaks of another world. I do 
remember something. Who hast sent this 
music to a dungeon ? My spirit softens 
with her melting words. My eyes are 
moist. I weep ! 'Tis pleasant. Sorrow 
is joy compared with my despair. I 
never thought to shed a tear again. My 
brain methinks is cooler." 

" Weep, weep, I pray thee weep ; but 
let me kiss away thy tears, my soul ! 



56 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Didst think thy Schirene had deserted 
thee ? Ah ! that was it that made my 
bird so sad. It shall be free, and fly in a 
sweet sky, and feed on flowers with its 
faithful mate. Ah me ! I am once more 
happy with my boy. There was no mi- 
sery but thy absence, sweet ! Methinks 
this dungeon is our bright kiosk ! Is 
that the sunbeam, or thy smile, my 
love, that makes the walls so joyful !" 
'' Did I smile ?— I'll not believe it." 
" Indeed you did. Ah ! see he smiles 
again. Why this is freedom 1 There is 
no such thing as sorrow. 'Tis a lie to 
frighten fools !" 

«« Why, Honain, what's this ? 'T would 
seem I am really joyful. There's inspi- 
ration in her very breath. I am another 
being. Nay ! waste not kisses on those 
ugly fetters." 



OF ALROY. 57 

" Methinks they are gold.*' 

They were silent. Schirene drew Al- 
roy to his rough seat, and gently placing 
herself on his knees, threw her arms 
round his neck, and buried her face in 
his breast. After a few minutes she 
raised her head, and whispered in his ear 
in irresistible accents of sweet exultation, 
" We shall be free to-morrow \" 

*' To-morrow ! is the trial so near ?' 
exclaimed the captive with an agitated 
voice and changing countenance. *' To- 
morrow !" He threw Schirene aside some- 
what hastily, and sprang from his seat. 
" To-morrow ! would it were over! To- 
morrow ! Methinks there is within that 
single word the fate of ages ! Shall it be 
said to-morrow Alroy 

" Hah! what art thou that risest now 
before me ? Dread, mighty spirit, thou 



5^ THE WONDROUS TALE 

hast come in time to save my last per- 
dition. Take me to thy bosom, 'tis not 
stabbed. They did not stab thee. Thou 
seest me here communing with thy mur- 
derers. What then ? I am innocent. 
Ask them, dread ghost, and call upon 
their fiendish souls to say I am pure. 
They would make me dark as themselves, 
but shall not." 

" Honain, Honain!" exclaimed the 
Princess in a terrible whisper, as she 
flew to the Physician. *' He is wild 
again, he is wild. Calm him, calm him. 
Mark ! how he stands with his extended 
arms, and fixed and vacant eyes, mutter- 
ing most awful words ! My spirit fails 
me. It is too fearful." 

The Physician advanced and stood by 
the side of Alroy, but in vain attempted 
to catch his attention. He ventured to 



OP ALROY. 59 

touch his arm. The Prince started, 
turned round, and recognizing him, ex- 
claimed in a shrieking voice, " Off, 
fratricide !" 

Honain recoiled pale and quivering. 
Schirene sprang to his arm. " What said 
he, Honain ? Thou dost not speak. I 
never saw thee pale before. Art thou too 
mad r 

" Would I were !" 

" All men are growing wild. I am 
sure he said something. I pray thee tell 
me. What was it ?" 

" Ask him." 

*' I dare not. Tell me — tell me, 
Honain!" 

" That I dare not." 

" Was it a word ?" 

" Ay ! a word to wake the dead. Let 
us begone." 



60 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" Without our end ? Coward ! I'll 
speak to him. My own Alroy/' sweetly 
whispered the Princess, as she advanced 
before him. 

" What, has the fox left the tigress ! 
Is't so, eh, eh ? Are there no judgments ? 
Are the innocent only haunted ? I am 
innocent ; I did not strangle thee ! He 
said rightly. Beware, beware ! they who 
did this, may do even fouler deeds. And 
here they are quick at their damned work. 
Thy body suffered, great Jabaster, but 
me they would strangle body and soul !" 

The Princess shrieked, and fell into the 
arms of the advancing Honain, w^ho bore 
her out of the dungeon. 



OF ALROY. 61 



XVIII. 

After the fall of Hamadan, Bostenay 
and Miriam had been carried prisoners to 
Bagdad. Through the interference of 
Honain, their imprisonment had been 
exempted from the usual hardships ; but 
they were still confined to their chambers 
in the citadel. Hitherto all the endea- 
vours of Miriam to visit her brother 
had been fruitless. Honain was the only 
person to whom she could apply for 
assistance, and he, in answer to her im- 
portunities, only regretted his want of 
power to aid her. In vain had she at- 
tempted, by the offer of some remaining 
jewels, to secure the co-operation of her 



62 THE WONDROUS TALE 

guards, with whom her loveliness and the 
softness of her manners had already in- 
gratiated her. She had not succeeded 
even in communicating with Alroy. But 
after the unsuccessful mission of Honain 
to the dungeon, the late Vizier visited 
the sister of the captive, and breaking to 
her with delicate skill the intelligence of 
the impending catastrophe, he announced 
that he had at length succeeded in ob- 
taining for her the desired permission to 
visit her brother, and while she shud- 
dered at the proximity of an event for 
which she had long attempted to prepare 
herself, Honain, with some modifications, 
whispered the means by which he flat- 
tered himself it might yet be averted. 
Miriam listened to him in silence, nor 
could he with all his consummate art 
succeed in extracting from her the slight- 



OF ALROY. 63 

est indication of her own opinion as to 
their expediency. They parted, Honain 
as sanguine as the wicked ever are. 

As Miriam dreaded, both for herself 
and for Ah'oy, the shock of an unex- 
pected meeting, she availed herself of the 
influence of Honain to send Caleb to her 
brother, to prepare him for her presence, 
and to consult him as to the desirable 
moment. Caleb found his late master 
lying exhausted on the floor of his dun- 
geon . At first he would not speak, or even 
raise his head, nor did he for a longtime 
apparently recognize the faithful retainer 
of his uncle. But at length he grew 
milder, and when he fully comprehended 
who the messenger was, and the object of 
the mission, he at first seemed altogether 
disinclined to see his sister, but in the end 
postponed their meeting for the present. 



64 THE WONDROUS TALE 

and, pleading great exhaustion, fixed for 
that sad union, the first hour of dawn. 

The venerable Bostenay had scarcely 
ever spoken since the fall of his nephew : 
indeed it was but too evident that his 
faculties, even if they had not entirely de- 
serted him, were at least greatly impaired. 
He never quitted his couch, he took no 
notice of what occurred. He evinced no 
curiosity, scarcely any feeling. If indeed 
he occasionally did mutter an observation, 
it was generally of an irritable character, 
nor truly did he appear satisfied if any 
one approached him, save Miriam, from 
whom alone he would accept the scanty 
victuals which he ever appeared disin- 
clined to touch. But his devoted niece, 
amid all her harrowing affliction, could 
ever spare to the protector of her youth 
a placid countenance, a watchful eye, a 



OF ALROY. 65 

gentle voice, and a ready hand. Her re- 
ligion and her virtue, the strength of her 
faith, and the inspiration of her inno- 
cence, supported this pure and hapless 
lady amid all her undeserved and unpa- 
ralleled sorrows. 

It was long past midnight, the young 
widow of Abner reposed upon a couch in 
a soft slumber. The amiable Beruna, 
and the beautiful Bathsheba, the blinds 
withdrawn, watched the progress of the 
night. 

" Shall I wake her ?" said the beauti- 
ful Bathsheba. '' Methinks the stars are 
paler ! She bid me rouse her long before 
the dawn." 

" Her sleep is too beautiful I Let us not 
wake her," replied the amiable Beruna. 
'* We rouse her only to sorrow." 

" May her dreams at least be happy," 



66 THE WONDROUS TALE 

rejoined the beautiful Bathsheba. '' She 
sleeps tranquilly, as a flower." 

" The veil has fallen from her head," 
said the amiable Beruna. '' I will re- 
place it lig-htly on her brow. Is that 
well, my Bathsheba ?" 

" It is well, sweet Beruna. Her face 
shrouded by the shawl is like a pearl in 
its shell. See ! she moves !" 

" Bathsheba !" 

" I am here, sweet lady." 

" Is it near dawn ?" 

" Not yet, sweet lady ; it is yet nig-ht. 
It is long past the noon of night, sweet 
lady ; methinks I scent the rising breath 
of morn ; but still 'tis night, and the 
young moon shines like a sickle in the 
heavenly field, amid the starry harvest." 

" Beruna, gentle girl, give me thy 
arm. Til rise." 



OF ALROY. 67 

The maidens advanced, and gently- 
raising their mistress, supported her to 
the window. 

'' Since our calamities," said Miriam, 
" I have never proved such tranquil slum- 
ber. My dreams were slight but sooth- 
ing. I saw him, but he smiled. Have I 
slept long, sweet girls ? Give me a kiss. 
Ye are very watchful." 

" Dear lady, let me bring thy shawl. 
The air is fresh — " 

" But sweet ; I thank thee, no. My 
brow is not so cool it needs a covering. 
'Tis a fair night V 

Miriam gazed upon the wide prospect 
of the moonlit capital. The eminent po- 
sition of the citadel afforded an extensive 
view of the mighty groups of buildings, 
each in itself a city, broken only by some 
vast and hooded cupola, the tall, thin, 



68 THE WONDROUS TALE 

white minarets of the mosques, or the 
black and spiral form of some lonely cy- 
press, and through which the rushing 
Tigris, flooded with light, sent forth its 
broad and brilliant torrent. All was si- 
lent; not a single boat floated on the 
fleet river, not a solitary voice broke the 
stillness of slumbering millions. She 
gazed, and as she gazed, she could not 
refrain from contrasting the present scene, 
which seemed the sepulchre of all the 
passions of our race, with the unrivalled 
excitement of that stirring spectacle which 
Bagdad aflbrded on the celebration of the 
marriage of Alroy. How different then, 
too, was her position to her present, and 
how happy ! The only sister of a devoted 
brother, the lord and conqueror of Asia, 
the bride of his most victorious captain, 
one worthy of all her virtues, and whose 



OF ALROY. 69 

youthful valour had encircled her brow 
with a diadem. For Miriam, exalted 
station had brought neither cares nor 
crimes. It had, as it were, only rendered 
her charity universal, and her benevo- 
lence omnipotent. She could not accuse 
herself — this blessed woman — she could 
not accuse herself, even in this searching 
hour of self-knowledge — she could not 
accuse herself, with all her meekness, and 
modesty, and humility, of having for a 
moment forgotten her dependence on 
her God, or her duty to her neigh- 
bour. 

But when her thoughts recurred to 
that being from whom they were indeed 
scarcely ever absent ; and when she re- 
membered him, and all his life, and all 
the thousand incidents of his youth, 
mysteries to the world, and known only 



70 THE WONDROUS TALE 

to her, but which were indeed the pre- 
science of his fame, and thought of all 
his surpassing qualities, and all his sweet 
affection, his unrivalled glory, and his 
impending fate, the tears, in silent agony, 
forced their way down her pale and pen- 
sive cheek. She bowed her head upon 
Bathsheba's shoulder, and sweet Beruna 
pressed her quivering hand. 

The moon set, the stars grew white and 
ghastly, and, one by one, vanished away. 
Over the distant plain of the Tigris, the 
scene of the marriage pomp, the dark 
purple horizon shivered into a rich streak 
of white and orange. The solemn strain 
of the Muezzin sounded from the Mina- 
rets. Some one knocked at the door. It 
was Caleb. 

" I am ready," said Miriam ; and 
for a moment she covered her face with 



OF ALROY. *ft 

her right hand. '' Think of me, sweet 
maidens ; pray for me !" 



XIX. 

Leaning on Caleb, and lighted by a 
gaoler, bearing torches, Miriam descended 
the damp and broken stairs that led to 
the dungeon. She faultered as she ar- 
rived at the grate. She stopped, and 
leant against the cold and gloomy wall. 
The gaoler and Caleb preceded her. She 
heard the voice of Alroy. It was firm 
and sweet. Its accents re-assured her. 
Caleb came forth with a torch, and held 
it to her feet ; and as he bent down, he 
said, " My Lord bid me beg you to be of 
good heart, for he is.'' 

The gaoler having stuck his torch in 



72 THE WONDROUS TALE 

the niche, withdrew. Miriam desired 
Caleb to stay without. Then, summon- 
ing up all her energies, she entered the 
dreadful abode. Alroy was standing to 
receive her. The light fell full upon his 
countenance. It smiled. Miriam could 
no longer restrain herself. She ran for- 
ward, and pressed him to her heart. 

'' Oh, my best, my long beloved," 
whispered Alroy ; " such a meeting in- 
deed leads captivity captive !" 

But the sister could not speak. She 
leant her head upon his shoulder, and 
closed her eyes, that she might not 
weep. 

" Courage, dear heart ; courage, cou- 
rage !" whispered the captive. " Indeed 
I am very happy !" 

" My brother, my brother !" 

" Had we met yesterday, you would 



OFALROY. 73 

have found me perhaps a little vexed. 
But to-day I am myself again. Since I 
crossed the Tigris, I know not that I 
have felt such self-content. I have had 
sweet dreams, dear Miriam, full of solace, 
and more than dreams. The Lord has 
pardoned me, I truly think," 

" Oh, my brother ! your words are full 
of comfort; for, indeed, I too have 
dreamed, and dreamed of consolation. 
My spirit since our fall has never been 
more tranquil." 

" Indeed I am very happy." 

" Say so again, my David ; let me 
hear again these words of solace !" 

" Indeed, 'tis very true, my faithful 
friend. It is not spoken in kind mockery 
to make you joyous. For know, last eve, 
whether the Lord repented of his wrath, 
or whether some dreadful trials, of which 

VOL. III. E 



74 THE WONDROUS TALE 

we will not speak, and wish not to re- 
member, had made atonement for my 
manifold sins — but so it was, that about 
the time my angel Miriam sent her 
soothing- message, a feeling of repose came 
over me, such as 1 long have coveted. 
Anon, I fell into a slumber, deep and 
sweet, and for those wild and whirling 
images, that of late have darted from my 
brain when it should rest, — glimpses of 
empire and conspiracy, snatches of fierce 
wars and mocking loves, — I stood beside 
our native fountain's brink, and gathered 
flowers with my earliest friend. As I 
placed the fragrant captives in your flow- 
ing locks, and kissed you when you 
smiled, there came Jabaster, that great, 
injured man, no longer stern and awful, 
but with benignant looks, and full of 
love. And he said, * David, the Lord 



OF ALROY. 75 

hath marked thy faithfiihiess, despite the 
darkness of thy dungeon/ So he va- 
nished. He spoke, my sister, of some 
strange temptations by heavenly aid 
withstood. No more of that. I awoke. 
And lo ! I heard my name still called. 
Full of my morning dream, I thought 
it was you, and I answered, * Dear 
sister, art thou here ?' But no one 
answered ; and then reflecting, my 
memory recognized those thrilling tones 
that summoned Alroy in Jabaster's 
cave." 

" The Daughter of the Voice ?" 
" Even that sacred messenger. I am 
full of faith. The Lord hath pardoned 
me. Be sure of that." 

" I cannot doubt it, David. You have 
done great things for Israel ; no one in 
these latter days has risen like you. If 

e2 



76 THE WONDROUS TALE 

you have fallen, you were young, and 
strangely tempted." 

'' Yet Israel, Israel ! Did I not feel a 
worthier leader awaits my country yet, 
my heart would crack. I have betrayed 
my country !" 

" Oh no, no, no ! You have shown 
what we can do, and shall. Your memory 
alone is inspiration. A great career, al- 
though baulked of its end, is still a land- 
mark of human energy. Failure, when 
sublime, is not without its purpose. 
Great deeds are great legacies, and work 
with wondrous usury. By what Man 
has done, we learn what Man can do ; 
and gauge the power and prospects of our 
race." 

" Alas ! there is no one to guard my 
name. 'Twill be reviled ; or worse, 'twill 
be forgotten !" 



OF ALROY. 77 

" Never, never! the memory of great 
actions never dies. The Sun of glory, 
though awhile obscured, will shine at 
last. And so, sweet brother, perchance 
some poet, in some distant age, within 
whose veins our sacred blood may flow, 
his fancy fired with the national theme, 
may strike his harp to Alroy's wild career, 
and consecrate a name too long for- 
gotten !" 

" May love make thee a prophetess !" 
exclaimed Alroy, as he bent down his 
head and embraced her. " Sweetest,'* 
he whispered, " do not tarry. Tis better 
we should part in this firm mood." 

She sprang from him, she clasped her 
hands. " We will not part," she ex- 
claimed, with energy ; " I will die with 
thee." 

" Blessed girl, be calm, be calm ! Do 
not unman me." 



78 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" I am calm. See ! I do not weep. 
Not a tear, not a tear. They are all in 
my heart." 

" Go, go, my Mh'iam, angel of light 
and loveliness ! Tarry no longer : I pray 
thee go. I would not think of the past. 
Let all my mind be centred in the pre- 
sent. Thy presence calls back our bye- 
gone days and softens me too much. My 
duty to my uncle. Go, dearest, go !" 

" And leave thee, leave thee to oh! 

my David, thou hast seen, thou hast 
heard Honain ?" 

" No more, no more ; let not that ac- 
cursed name profane those holy lips. 
Raise not the dsemon in me." ' 

" I am silent, I am silent. Yet, yet 
'tis madness, 'tis madness ! Oh ! my bro- 
ther, thou hast a fearful trial." 

" The God of Israel is my refuge. He 



OF ALROY. 79 

saved our fathers in the fiery furnace. 
He will save me." 

'^ I am full of faith. I pray thee let 
me stay." 

" I would be silent, I vrould be alone. 
I cannot speak, Miriam. I ask one favor, 
the last and dearest, from her who has 
never had a thought but for my v^^ishes — 
blessed being, leave me." 

"I go. Oh ! Alroy, farewell ! Let 
me kiss you. Again, once more ! Let 
me kneel and bless you. Brother, be- 
loved brother, great and glorious brother, 
I am worthy of you : I will not weep. 
I am prouder this dread moment of your 
love, than all your foes can be of their 
hard triumph !" 



80 THE WONDROUS TALE 



XX. 

Beruna and Bathsheba received their 
mistress when she returned to her cham- 
ber. They marked her desolate air. She 
was silent, pale, and cold. They bore 
her to her couch, whereon she sat with a 
most listless and unmeaning look, her 
quivering lips parted, her eyes fixed 
upon the ground in vacant abstraction, 
and her arms languidly folded before 
her. Beruna stole behind her, and sup- 
ported her back with pillows, and Bath- 
sheba, unnoticed, wiped the slight foam 
from her mouth. Thus Miriam remained 
for several hours, her faithful maidens in 
vain watching for any indication of her 
self-consciousness. 



OF ALROY 81 

Suddenly a trumpet sounded. 

" What is that ?" exclaimed Miriam, 
in a shrill voice, and looking up with a 
distracted glance. 

Neither of them answered, since they 
were aware it betokened the going forth 
of Alroy to his trial. 

Miriam remained in the same posture, 
and with the same expression of wild in- 
quiry. Another trumpet sounded, and 
after that a shout of the people. Then 
she raised up her arms to Heaven, and 
bowed her head — and died. 



XXI. 

" Has the second trumpet sounded ?" 
" To be sure : run, run for a good 
place. Where is Abdallah ?" 

e5 



82 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" Selling sherbet in the square. We 
shall find him. Has Alroy come 
forth r 

'* Yes ! he goes the other way. We 
shall be too late. Only think of Abdallah 
selling sherbet !" 

*' Father, let me go ?'* 

" You will be in the way ; you are too 
young ; you will see nothing. Little 
boys should stay at home." 

*' No, they should not. I will go. 
You can put me on your shoulders." 

" Where is Ibrahim ? Where is AH ? 
We must all keep together. We shall 
have to fight for it. I wish Abdallah 
were here. Only think of his selling 
sherbet !" 

" Keep straight forward. That is 
right. It is no use going that way. 
The Bazaar is shut. There is Fakreddin, 



OF ALROY. 83 

there is Osman EfFendi. He has got a 
new paoi'e/' 

" So he has, I declare ; and a very 
pretty boy too." 

'* Father, will they impale Alroy 
alive ?" 

" I am sure I do not know. Never 
ask questions, my dear. Little boys 
never should.** 

" Yes they should. Oh my ! I hope 
they will impale him alive. I shall be 
so disappointed if they do not." 

" Keep to the left. Dash through the 
Butcher's Bazaar : that is open. All 
right, all right. Did you push me. 

Sir r 

'^ Suppose T did push you, Sir — what 
then, Sir ?" 

'' Come along, don't quarrel. That is 
a Karasmian. They think they are to do 



84 THE WONDROUS TALE 

what they like. We are five to one to 
be sure, but still there is nothing like 
peace and quiet. I wish Abdallah were 
here with his stout shoulders. Only 
think of his selling sherbet !" 

XXII. 

The Square of the Grand Mosque, the 
same spot where Jabaster met Abidan by 
appointment, was the intended scene of 
the pretended trial of Alroy. Thither 
by break of day the sight-loving thou- 
sands of the capital had repaired. In the 
centre of the Square a large circle was 
described by a crimson cord, and guarded 
by Karasmian soldiers ; around this the 
swelling multitude pressed like the ga- 
thering waves of ocean, but whenever the 
tide set in with too great an impulse, the 



OF ALROY. 85 

savage Karasmians appeased the ungo- 
vernable element by raising- their brutal 
battle-axes, and breaking the crowns and 
belabouring: the shoulders of their nearest 
victims. As the morning- advanced, the 
terraces of the surrounding houses, covered 
with awnings, were crowded with spec- 
tators. All Baofdad was about. Since 
the marriage of Alroy, there had never 
been such a merry morn as the day of 
his impalement. 

At one end of the circle was erected a 
magnificent throne. Half-way between 
the throne and the other end of the 
circle, but farther back, stood a company 
of Negro eunuchs, hideous to behold, who, 
clothed in white and armed with various 
instruments of torture, surrounded the 
enormous stakes, tall, thin, and sharp, 
that were prepared for the final ceremony. 



86 THE WONDROUS TALE 

The flourish of trumpets, the clash of 
cymbals, and the wild beat of the tam- 
bour, announced the arrival of Alp 
Arslan from the Serail. An avenue to 
the circle had been preserved through 
the multitude. The royal procession 
might be traced as it wound through the 
populace by the sparkling and undu- 
lating line of plumes of honour, and the 
dazzling forms of the waving streamers, 
on which were inscribed the names of 
Allah and the Prophet. Suddenly, amid 
the bursts of music, and the shouts of the 
spectators, many of whom on the terraces 
humbled themselves on their knees. Alp 
Arslan mounted the throne, around 
which ranged themselves his chief cap- 
tains, and a deputation of the Moollahs, 
and Imams, and Cadis, and other prin- 
cipal personages of the city. 



OF ALROY. 87 

The King of Kai-asme was very tall in 
stature, and somewhat meagre in form. 
He was fair, or rather, sandy-coloured, 
with a red beard, and blue eyes, and a 
flat nose. The moment he was seated a 
trumpet was heard in the distance from 
an opposite quarter, and it was soon un- 
derstood throughout the assembly that 
the great captive was about to appear. 

A band of Karasmian guards first en- 
tered the circle and ranged themselves 
round the cord with their backs to the 
spectators. After them came fifty of the 
principal Hebrew prisoners, with their 
hands bound behind them, but evidently 
more for form than security. To these 
succeeded a small covered waggon drawn 
by mules, and surrounded by guards, 
from which was led forth, his legs re- 
lieved from their manacles, but his 



88 THE WONDROUS TALE 

hands still in heavy chains, David 
Alroy ! 

An universal buzz of blended sympa- 
thy, and wonder, and fear, and triumph, 
arose throughout the whole assembly. 
Each man involuntarily stirred. The 
vast populace moved to and fro in agita- 
tion. His garments soiled and tattered, 
his head bare, and his long locks drawn 
off his forehead, pale, and very thin, but 
still unsubdued, the late conqueror and 
Caliph of Bagdad threw around a calm 
and imperial glance upon those who were 
but recently his slaves. 

The trumpets again sounded, order was 
called, and a crier announced that his 
Highness Alp Arslan, the mighty Sove- 
reign of Karasme, their Lord, Protector, 
and King, and avenger of AHah and the 
Prophet, against all rebellious and evil- 



OF ALROY. 89 

minded Jews and Giaours, was about to 
speak. There was a deep and universal 
silence, and then sounded a voice high as 
the eagle's in a storm. 

" David Alroy !" said his conqueror. 
'' You are brought here this day neither 
for trial nor for judgment. Captured in 
arms against your rightful sovereign, you 
are of course prepared, like other rebels, 
for your doom. Such a crime alone de- 
serves the most avenging punishments. 
What then do you merit, who are loaded 
writh a thousand infamies, who have blas- 
phemed Allah and the Prophet, and by 
the practice of magic arts, and the aid of 
the infernal powers, have broken the 
peace of kingdoms, occasioned infinite 
bloodshed, outraged all law, religion, and 
decency, misled the minds of your de- 
luded votaries, and especially by a direct 



90 THE WONDROUS TALE 

compact with Eblis, by the most horrible 
spells and infamous incantations, cap- 
tivated the senses of an illustrious Prin- 
cess, heretofore famous for the practice of 
every virtue, and a descendant of the 
Prophet himself. 

" Behold those stakes of palm wood, 
sharper than a lance ! The most terrible 
retribution that human ingenuity has 
devised for the guilty awaits you. But 
your crimes baffle all human vengeance. 
Look forward for your satisfactory re- 
ward to those infernal powers by whose 
dark co-operation you have occasioned 
such disasters. Your punishment is pub- 
lic, that all men may know that the 
guilty never escape, and that, if your 
heart be visited by the slightest degree of 
compunction for your numerous victims, 
you may this day, by the frank confession 



OF ALROY. 91 

of the irresistible means by which you 
seduced them, exonerate your victims 
from the painful and ignominious end 
with which, through your influence, they 
are now threatened. Mark, O assem- 
bled people, the infinite mercy of the 
Vicegerent of Allah ! He allows the 
wretched man to confess his infamy, and 
to save, by his confession, his unfortunate 
victims. I have said it. Glory to 
Allah!" 

And the people shouted, '* He has said 
it, he has said it ! Glory to Allah ! He 
is great, he is great ! and Mahomed is his 
prophet !" 

"Am I to speak?" inquired Alroy, 
when the tumult had subsided. The me- 
lody of his powerful voice commanded 
universal attention. 

Alp Arslan nodded his head in appro- 
bation. 



92 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" King of Karasme ! I stand here 
accused of many crimes. Now hear my 
answers. 'Tis said I am a rebel. My 
answer is, I am a Prince as thou art, of a 
sacred race, and far more ancient. I owe 
fealty to no one but to my God, and if I 
have broken that, I am yet to learn Alp 
Arslan is the avenger of his power. As 
for thy God and Prophet, 1 know not 
them, though they acknowledge mine. 
'Tis well understood in every polity, my 
people stand apart from other nations, 
and ever will, despite of suffering. So 
much for blasphemy ; I am true to a deep 
faith of ancient days which even the 
sacred writings of thy race still reverence. 
For the arts magical I practised, and the 
connnunion with infernal powers 'tis 
said I held, know. King, I raised the 
standard of my faith, by the direct com- 



OF ALROY. 0ft 

mandment of my God, the great Creator 
of the universe. What need of magic 
then ? what need of paltering with petty 
fiends when backed by his omnipotence ? 
My magic was his inspiration. Need 
I prove why with such aid, my people 
crowded round me ? The time will come 
from out our ancient seed, a worthier chief 
will rise, not to be quelled even by thee. 
Sir. 

'* For that unhappy Princess of whom 
something was said, with no great mercy 
as it seemed to me, that lady is my wife, 
my willing wife, the daughter of a Ca- 
liph — still my wife, although your stakes 
may make her soon a widow. I stand 
not here to account for female fancies. 
Believe me. Sire, she gave her beauty to 
my raptured arms with no persuasions 
but such as became a soldier and a king. 



94 THE WONDROUS TALE 

It may seem strange to thee upon thy 
throne, the flower of Asia should be 
plucked by one so vile as I am. Sir. 
Remember, the accidents of Fortune are 
most strange, I was not always what I 
am. We have met before. There was a 
day, and that too not long since, when, 
but for the treachery of some knaves I 
mark there. Fortune seemed half inclined 
to reverse our fates. Had I conquered, 
I trust I should have shown more 
mercy." 

The King of Karasme was the most 
passionate of men. He had made a speech 
according to the advice and instructions 
of his counsellors, who had assured him, 
that the tone he adopted would induce 
Alroy to confess all that he required, and 
especially to vindicate the reputation of 
the Princess Fchirene, who had already 



OF ALROY. 95 

contrived to persuade Alp Arslan that 
she was the most injured of her sex. The 
King of Karasme stamped thrice on the 
platform of his throne, and exclaimed 
with great fire, " By my beard, ye have 
deceived me; the dog has confessed 
nothing 1" 

All the counsellors and chief Cap- 
tains, and the Moollahs, and the Imams, 
and the Cadis, and the principal person- 
ages of the city, were in great consterna- 
tion. They immediately consulted to- 
gether, and after much disputation, agreed 
that before they proceeded to extremities 
it was expedient to prove what the pri- 
soner would not confess. A most vene- 
rable Scheik, clothed in flowing robes of 
green, with a long white beard, and a 
turban like the tower of Babel, then rose. 
His sacred reputation procured silence 



96 THE WONDROUS TALE 

while he himself delivered a long prayer, 
supplicating Allah and the prophet to con- 
found all blaspheming Jews and Giaours, 
and to pour forth words of truth from the 
mouths of religious men. And then the 
venerable Scheik summoned all witnesses 
against David Alroy. Immediately ad- 
vanced Kisloch the Kourd, who being 
placed in an eminent position, the Cadi 
of Bagdad drew forth a scroll from his 
velvet bag, and read to him a deposition 
wherein the worthy Kisloch stated, that 
he first became acquainted with the pri- 
soner, David Alroy, in some ruins in the 
desart ; the haunt of banditti, of whom 
Alroy was the chief; that he, Kisloch, 
was a reputable merchant, and that his 
caravan had been plundered by these 
robbers, and he himself captured : that 
on the second night of his imprisonment, 



OF ALROY. 97 

Alroy appeared to him in the likeness of 
a lion, and on the third, of a bull with 
fiery eyes : that he was in the habit of 
constantly transforming himself; that he 
frequently raised spirits ; that at length, 
on one terrible night, Eblis himself came 
in great procession, and presented Alroy 
with the sceptre of Solomon Ben Daoud ; 
and that the next day Alroy raised his 
standard, and soon after massacred Hassan 
Subah and his Seljuks, by the visible aid 
of many terrible demons. 

Calidas the Indian, the Guebre, and 
the Negro, and a few congenial spirits, 
were not eclipsed in the satisfactory cha- 
racter of their evidence by the luminous 
testimony of Kisloch the Kourd. The 
irresistible career of the Hebrew con- 
queror was undeniably accounted for, and 
the honour of the Moslemin arms, and 

VOL. III. F 



98 THE WONDROUS TALE 

the purity of the Moslemin faith, were 
established in their pristine glory, and 
all their unsullied reputation. David 
Alroy was proved to be a child of Eblis, 
a sorcerer, and a dealer in charms and 
magical poisons. The people listened 
with horror and with indignation. They 
would have burst through the guards and 
have torn him to pieces, had not they 
been afraid of the Karasmian battle-axes. 
So they consoled themselves with the 
prospect of his approaching tortures. 

The Cadi of Bagdad bowed himself be- 
fore the King of Karasme, and whispered 
at a respectful distance in the royal ear. 
The trumpets sounded, the criers en- 
joined silence, and the royal lips again 
moved. 

" Hear, oh ! ye people, and be wise. 
The chief Cadi is about to read the depo- 



OF ALROY. 99 

sition of the royal Princess Schirene, chief 
victim of the sorcerer/' 

And the deposition was read, which 
stated that David Alroy possessed, and 
wore next to his heart, a talisman, given 
him by Eblis, of which the virtue was so 
great, that if once it were pressed to the 
heart of any woman, she was no longer 
mistress of her will. Such had been the 
unhappy fate of the daughter of the 
Commander of the Faithful. 

''Is it so written ?" inquired the cap- 
tive. 

"It is so written," replied the Cadi, 
" and bears the imperial signature of the 
Princess." 

" It is a forgery." 

The King of Karasme started from his 
throne, and in his rage nearly descended 
its steps. His face was like scarlet, his 

f2 



100 THE WONDROUS TALE 

beard like a flame. A favourite minister 
ventured gently to restrain the royal robe. 

" Kill the dog on the spot," muttered 
the King of Karasrae. 

" The Princess is herself here," said 
the Cadi, " to bear witness to the spells of 
which she was a victim, but from which, 
by the power of Allah and the prophet, 
she is now released." 

Alroy started ! 

'' Advance, royal Princess," said the 
Cadi, " and if the depo.^ition thou hast 
heard be indeed true, condescend to hold 
up the imperial hand that adorned it with 
thy signature." 

A band of eunuchs near the throne 
gave way, a female figure veiled to her 
feet appeared. She held up her hand 
amid the breathless agitation of the whole 
assembly ; the ranks of the eunuchs again 



OF ALROY. 101 

closed ; a loud shriek was heard, and the 
veiled figure disappeared. 

" I am ready for thy tortures, King,'* 
said Alroy, in a tone of deep depression. 
His firmness appeared to have deserted 
him. His eyes v^ere cast upon the 
ground. Apparently he was buried in 
profound thought, or had delivered him- 
self up to despair. 

" Prepare the stakes," said Alp Arslan. 

An involuntary, but universal, shudder 
might be distinguished through the whole 
assembly. 

A slave advanced and offered Alroy a 
scroll. He recognized the Nubian who 
belonged to Honain. His former minis- 
ter informed him that he was at hand, 
that the terms he offered in the dungeon 
might even yet be granted , that if Alroy 
would, as he doubted not, as he entreated 



102 THE WONDROUS TALE 

him, accept them, he was to place the 
scroll in his bosom, but that if he were 
still inexorable, still madly determined 
on a horrible and ignominious end, he 
was to tear the scroll, and throw it into 
the arena. Instantly Alroy took the 
scroll, and with great energy tore it into 
a thousand pieces. A pufF of wind car- 
ried the fragments far and wide. The 
mob fought for these last memorials of 
David Alroy ; and this little incident oc- 
casioned a great confusion. 

In the meantime the Negroes prepared 
the instruments of torture and of death. 

'' The obstinacy of this Jewish dog 
makes me mad,'* said the King of Ka- 
rasme to his courtiers. " I will hold 
some parley with him before he dies." 
The favourite minister entreated his so- 
vereign to be content ; but the royal 



OF ALROY. 103 

beard grew so red, and the royal eyes 
flashed forth such terrible sparks of fire, 
that even the favourite minister at length 
g^ve way. 

The trumpets sounded, the criers called 
silence, and the voice of Alp Arslan was 
again heard. 

" Thou dog, dost see what is preparing 
for thee ? Dost know what awaits thee 
in the halls of thy master Eblis ? Can a 
Jew be influenced even by false pride } 
Is not life sweet ? Is it not better to be 
my slipper bearer than to be impaled ?" 

" Magnanimous Alp Arslan,^' replied 
Alroy , in a tone of undisguised contempt ; 
" thinkest thou that any torture can be 
equal to the recollection that I have been 
conquered by thee ?" 

" By my beard, he mocks me," ex- 
claimed the Karasmian monarch, " he 



104 THE WONDROUS TALE 

defies me. Touch not my robe. I will 
parley with him. Ye see no farther than 
a hooded hawk, ye sons of a blind mo- 
ther. This is a sorcerer ; he hath yet 
some master spell ; he will yet save him- 
self. He will fly into the air, or sink 
into the earth. He laughs at our tor- 
tures." The King of Karasme precipi- 
tately descended the steps of his throne, 
followed by his favourite minister, and 
his counsellors, and chief captains, and 
the Cadis, and the Moollahs, and the 
Imams, and the principal personages of 
the city. 

" Sorcerer !'' exclaimed Alp Arslan, 
" insolent sorcerer ! base son of a base 
mother ! dog of dogs ! dost thou defy us ? 
Does thy master Eblis whisper hope ? 
Dost thou laugh at our punishments ? 
Wilt thou fly into the air ? wilt thou 



OF ALROY. 105 

sink into the earth ? eh, eh ? Is it so, is 
it so ?" The breathless monarch ceased, 
from the exhaustion of passion. He tore 
his beard up by the roots, he stamped 
with uncontrollable rag-e. 

'* Thou art wiser than thy counsellors, 
royal Arslan ; I do defy thee. My mas- 
ter, although not Eblis, has not deserted 
me. I laugh at thy punishments. Thy 
tortures I despise. I shall both sink into 
the earth, and mount into the air. Art 
thou answered ?" 

" By my beard," exclaimed the en- 
raged Arslan, " I am answered. Let 
Eblis save thee, if he can ;" and the King 
of Karasme, the most famous master of 
the sabre in Asia, drew his blade like 
lightning from its sheath, and carried off 
the head of Alroy at a stroke. It fell, 
and as it fell, a smile of triumphant de- 

F 5 



106 THE WONDROUS TALE OF ALROY. 

rision seemed to play upon the dying 
features of the hero, and to ask of his 
enemies, '' Where now were all their 
tortures ?" ^ 



NOTES. 



NOTES. 

Note I. — Page 25. 

The women chatted at the fountain. 

The bath and the fountain are the favourite scenes 
of feminine conversation. 

Note 2. — Page 27. 
Playing chess. 

On the walls of the palace of Amenoph the Second, 
called Medeenet Abuh, at Egyptian Thebes, the 
King is represented playing chess with the Queen. 
Tliis monarch reigned long before the Trojan war. 

Note 3 - Page 43. 
I7npalcd. 
A friend of mine witnessed this horrible punish- 
ment in Upper Egypt. The victim was a man who 
had secretly murdered nine persons. He held an 
official post, and invited travellers and pilgrims to his 
house, whom he regularly disposed of and plundered. 
I regret that I have mislaid his MS. account of the 
ceremony. 



110 NOTES. 



Note 4 — Page 106. 



In the Germen Davidis of Gan%, translated into 
Latin by Vorstius, Lug. 1654, is an extract from a 
Hebrew MS. containing an account of Alroy. I sub- 
join a passage respecting his death for the learned 
reader. " Scribit R. Maimonides, Sultanum inter- 
rogasse ilium, num esset Messias, et dixisse^ Sum, et 
quiBsimsse ah illo regem, quodnam signum hahes ? Et 
respondisse, ut prcBcideref caput , et se in vitam rever- 
surum. Tunc regent jussisse ut caput ejus amputa- 
rent, et obiisse ; sed hoc illi dixisse, ne gravibus tor- 
mentis ipsum enecaret.''' 

" Septem annis ante decretum hoc, de quo supra 
locuti sumus, habuerunt Israelitas vehementes angus- 
tias propter virum Belial, qui seipsum fecit Messiam ; 
et rex atque principes valde accensi sunt excandes- 
centiia contra Judaeos, ut dicerent, eos quaerere in- 
teritum regni sui Messiae petitione. Maledicti 
hujus nomen vocatum fuit David El-David ^aut 
Alroy ex urbe Omadia; et erat ibi ccetus magnus, 
circiter mille familias divites, refertas, honestas et 
felices continens. Atque Ecclesia hasc erat princi- 
pium caetuum habitantium circa fluvium Sabbathion, 



NOTES. Ill 

atque erant plus quam centum Ecclesiae. Erat hie 
initium regionis Mediae, atque lingua eorum erat 
idioma Thargum : inde autem usque ad regionem 
Golan est iter 60 dierum, et sunt sub imperio Regis 
Persiae, cui dant quotannis tributum a 15 annis et 
ultra aureum unum. Vir autem hie David El-David 
studuit coram principe captivitatis Chasdai et coram 
exeellente Scholareha in urbe Bagdad, qui eximius 
erat sapiens in Thalmude et omnibus scientiis Exo- 
tieis, atque in omnibus libris divinatorum, magorum 
et Chaldaeorum. Hie vero David El-David ex au- 
dacia et arrogantia cordis sui elevavit manum contra 
regem, ct collegit Judaeos habitantes in monte 
Chophtan, et seduxit eos, ut exirent in praslium cum 
omnibus gentibus. Ostendit iis signa; sed ignora- 
bant quanam virtute : erant enim homines, qui assere- 
bant istud per modum magias et praestigiationis fieri, 
alii dicebant, potentiam ejus magnam esse propter 
manum Dei. Qui consortium ejus veniebant, vocabant 

eum Messiam, eumque laudabant et extollebant. 

# # * # 

" In regno Persias alio quodam tempore surrexit 
vir quidam Judseus, et seipsum fecit Messiam, atque 
valde prospere egit ; et numerosus ex Israele ad ilium 



112 NOTES. 

confluxit populus. Cum vero audiret rex omnem 
ejus potentiam, atque propositum ejus esse descendere 
in pra&lium cum ipso, misit ad Judaeos congregates in 
regione sua, iisque dixit: Nisi egerint cum hocce 
viro, ut e medio tollatur, certo sciant, se eos omnes 
gladio interempturum, et iino die infantes ac foeminas 
deleturum. Tunc congregatus est totus populus 
Israelis simul, atque contendit ad virum ilium, ceci- 
ditque coram illo in terram ; vehementer supplicatus 
est, clamavit atque ploravit, ut reveteretur a via sua: 
et cur seipsum et omnes afflictos conjiceret in peri- 
culum ; jam enim regem jurasse se immissurum eis 
gladium, et quomodo posset intueri afflictionem om- 
nium coetuum Persiae. Respondit : Veni servatum 
voSy et non vultis. Quern metuistis ? Quisnam coram 
me consistet f Et quid aget rex PersicB^ ut non refor- 
midet me, et gladium meum ? Interrogarunt eum, 
quodnam signum haberet quod esset Messias : Res- 
pondit, aUIA FELICITEU REM GERERET, NEQUE MeS- 

siAM OPUS HABERE ALIO siGNO. Responderunt mul- 
tos similiter egisse, neque prospera usos fuisse fort una ; 
tunc rejecit eos a facie sua cum superba indignatione." 

END OF ALROY. 



THE 



RISE OF ISKANDER. 



THE 



RISE OF ISKANDER. 



I. 



The Sun had set behind the mountains, 
and the rich plain of Athens was suffused 
with the violet glow of a Grecian eve. 
A light breeze rose ; the olive groves 
awoke from their noonday trance, and 
rustled with returning animation, and 
the pennons of the Turkish squadron, 
that lay at anchor in the harbour of 



Ill THE RISE 

Piraeus, twinkled in the lively air. From 
one gate of the city the women came 
forth in procession to the fountain ; from 
another, a band of sumptuous horsemen 
sallied out, and threw their wanton ja- 
velins in the invigorating- sky, as they 
galloped over the plain. The voice of 
birds, the buzz of beauteous insects, the 
breath of beauteous flowers, the quivering 
note of the nightingale, the pittering call 
of the grasshopper, and the perfume 
of the violet, shrinking from the embrace 
of the twilight breeze, filled the purple 
air with music and with odour. 

A solitary being stood upon the tower- 
ing crag of the Acropolis, amid the ruins 
of the Temple of Minerva, and g^zed 
upon the inspiring scene. Around him 
rose the matchless memorials of antique 
art ; immortal columns whose symmetry 



OF ISKANDER. 117 

baffles modern proportion, serene Cary- 
atides, bearing with greater grace a 
graceful burthen, carvings of delicate 
precision, and friezes breathing with 
heroic life. Apparently the stranger, 
though habited as a Moslemin, was not 
insensible to the genius of the locality, 
nor indeed would his form and counte- 
nance have misbecome a contemporary of 
Pericles and Phidias. In the prime 
of life, and far above the common stature, 
but with a frame, the muscular power of 
which was even exceeded by its almost 
ideal symmetry, his high white forehead, 
his straight profile, his oval countenance, 
and his curling lip, exhibited the same vi- 
sage that had inspired the sculptor of the 
surrounding' demigods. 

The dress of the stranger, although 
gorgeous, was, however, certainly not 



118 THE RISE 

classic. A crimson shawl was wound 
round his head, and glittered with a 
trembling- aigrette of diamonds. His 
vest, which set tight to his form, was of 
green velvet, richly embroidered with 
gold and pearls. Over this he wore a 
very light jacket of crimson velvet, 
equally embroidered, and lined with 
sable. He wore also the full white 
camese common among the Albanians ; 
and while his feet were protected by 
sandals, the lower part of his legs was 
guarded by greaves of embroidered green 
velvet. From a broad belt of scarlet 
leather peeped forth the jewelled hilts of 
a variety of daggers, and by his side 

• • • ' 

was an enormous scmiitar, m a scabbard 
of chased silver. 

The stranger gazed upon the wide 
prospect before him w ith an air of pen- 



OF ISKANDER. 119 

sive abstraction. " Beautiful Greece," 
he exclaimed, " thou art still my coun- 
try. A mournful lot is mine, a strange 
and mournful lot, yet not uncheered by 
hope. I am at least a warrior ; and this 
arm, though trained to war against thee 
will not well forget, in the quick hour of 
battle, the blood that flows within it. 
Themistocles saved Greece and died a 
Satrap : I am bred one — let me reverse 
our lots, and die at least a patriot." 

At this moment the Evening Hymn 
to the Virgin arose from a neighbouring 
convent. The stranger started as the 
sacred melody floated towards him, and 
taking a small golden cross from his 
heart, he kissed it with devotion, and 
then descending the steep of the citadel, 
entered the city. 

He proceeded along the narrow wind- 



IfiO THE RISE OF 

ing- streets of Athens until he at length 
arrived in front of a marble palace, in 
the construction of which the architect 
had certainly not consulted the sur- 
rounding models which Time had spared 
to him, but which, however it might 
have offended a classic taste, presented 
altogether a magnificent appearance. 
Half-a-dozen guards, whose shields and 
helmets somewhat oddly contrasted with 
two pieces of cannon, one of which was 
ostentatiously placed on each side of the 
portal, and which had been presented to 
the Prince of Athens by the Republic of 
Venice, lounged before the entrance, and 
paid their military homage to the stranger 
as he passed them. He passed them knd 
entered a large quadrangular garden, 
surrounded by arcades, supported by a 
considerable number of thin, low, pillars, 



OF ISKANDER. 121 

of barbarous workmanship, and various- 
coloured marbles. In the midst of the 
garden rose a fountain, whence the bub- 
bling waters flowed in artificial channels 
through vistas of orange and lemon trees. 
By the side of the fountain on a luxurious 
couch, his eyes fixed upon a richly -illu- 
minated volume, reposed Nicaeus, the 
youthful Prince of Athens. 

' ' Ah ! is it you ?" said the Prince look- 
ing up with a smile, as the stranger 
advanced. " You have arrived just in 
time to remind me that we must do 
something more than read the Persee — 
we must act it." 

" My dear Nicaeus," replied the stran- 
ger, " I have arrived only to bid you 
farewell." 

"Farewell I" exclaimed the Prince in 
a tone of surprise and sorrow, and he 

VOL. III. G 



122 THE RISE 

rose from the couch. " Why ! what is 
this ?" 

" It is too true/' said the stranger, 
and he led the way down one of the walks. 
" Events have occurred which entirely 
baffle all our plans and prospects, and 
place me in a position as difficult as it is 
harrowing. Hunniad es has suddenly 
crossed the Danube in great force, and 
carried every thing before him. I am 
ordered to proceed to Albania instantly, 
and to repair to the camp at the head of 
the Epirots." 

" Indeed !" said Nicaeus with a thought- 
ful air. '' My letters did not prepare me 
for this. Tis sudden ! Is Amurath him- 
self in the field ?" 

" No ; Karam Bey commands. I have 
accounted for my delay to the Sultan 
by pretended difficulties in our treaty, 



OF ISKANDER. 123 

and have held out the prospect of a 
larger tribute/* 

" When we are plotting that that tri- 
bute should be paid no longer !" added 
Nicaeus with a smile. 

" Alas ! my dear friend," replied the 
Turkish Commander ; " my situation has 
now become critical. Hitherto my ser- 
vices for the Moslemin have been con- 
fined to acting against nations of their 
own faith. I am now suddenly sum- 
moned to combat against my secret 
creed, and the best allies of what I must 
yet call my secret country. The move- 
ment, it appears to me, must be made 
now or never, and I cannot conceal from 
myself, that it never could have been pro- 
secuted under less auspicious circum- 
stances." 

" What, you desponding !" exclaimed 

G 2 



124 THE RISE 

Niceeus, " then I must despair. Your 
sanguine temper has alone supported 
me throughout all our dangerous hopes/' 

" And iEschylus ?" said the stranger 
smiling. 

" And iEschylus, certainly," replied 
Nicseus ; " but I have lived to find even 
iEschylus insipid. I pant for action." 

" It may be nearer than we can fore- 
see," replied the stranger. " There is a 
God who fashions all things. He will 
not desert a righteous cause. He know- 
eth that my thoughts are as pure as my 
situation is difficult. I have some dim 
ideas still brooding in my mind, but 
we will not discuss them now. I must 
away, dear Prince. The breeze 'serves 
fairly. Have you ever seen Hunniades?" 

" I was educated at the Court of Tran- 
sylvania," replied Nicseus, looking down 



OF ISKANDER. 125 

with a somewhat embarrassed air. " He 
is a famous knight, Christendom's chief 
bulwark." 

The Turkish Commander sighed. 
" When we meet again," he said, " may 
we meet with brighter hopes and more 
buoyant spirits. At present, I must, in- 
deed, say farewell." 

The Prince turned with a dejected 
countenance, and pressed his companion 
to his heart. " 'Tis a sad end," said he, 
*' to all our happy hours and lofty plans." 

" You are as yet too young to quarrel 
with fortune," replied the stranger, " and 
for myself, I have not yet settled my ac- 
counts with her. However, for the pre- 
sent, farewell, dear Nicseus !'* 

** Farewell," replied the Prince of 
Athens, '' Farewell, dear Iskander !" 



126 THE RISE 



II. 



Iskander was the youngest son of the 
Prince of Epirus, who, with the other 
Grecian Princes, had, at the commence- 
ment of the reign of Amurath the Second, 
in vain resisted the progress of the Turk- 
ish arms in Europe. The Prince of 
Epirus had obtained peace by yielding 
his four sons as hostages to the Turkish 
Sovereign, v^^ho engaged that they should 
be educated in all the accomplishments 
of their rank, and with a due deference 
to their faith. On the death of the 
Prince of Epirus, however, Amurath 
could not resist the opportunity that then 
offered itself of adding to his Empire the 
rich principality he had long coveted. 



OF ISKANDER. 1^ 

A Turkish force instantly marched into 
Epirus, and seized upon Croia, the ca- 
pital city, and the children of its late 
ruler were doomed to death. The beauty, 
talents, and valour of the youngest son, 
saved him, however, from the fate of his 
poisoned brothers. Iskander was edu- 
cated at Adrianople, in the Moslemin 
faith, and as he, at a very early age, 
excelled in feats of arms all the Moslemin 
warriors, he became a prime favourite of 
the Sultan, and speedily rose in his ser- 
vice to the highest rank. 

At this period the irresistible progress 
of the Turkish arms was the subject of 
alarm throughout all Christendom. 

Constantinople, then the capital of the 
Greek empire, had already been more 
than once besieged by the predecessors of 
Amurath, and had only been preserved 



128 THE RISE 

by fortunate accidents and humiliating 
terms. The Despots of Bosnia, Servia, 
and Bulgaria, and the Grecian princes of 
iEtolia, Macedon, Epirus, Athens, Pho- 
cis, Bceotia, and indeed of all the regions 
to the straights of Corinth, were tributa- 
ries to Amurath, and the rest of Europe 
was only preserved from his grasp by the 
valour of the Hungarians and the Poles, 
whom a fortunate alliance had now united 
under the sovereignty of Uladislaus, who, 
incited by the pious eloquence of the 
Cardinal of St. Angelo, the Legate of the 
Pope, and, yielding to the tears and 
supplications of the Despot of Servia, had, 
at the time our story opens, quitted Buda, 
at the head of an immense army, crossed 
the Danube, and, joining his valiant 
Viceroy, the famous John Hunniades, 
Vaivode of Transylvania, defeated the 



OF ISKANDER. IQD 

Turks with great slaughter, relieved all 
Bulgaria, and pushed on to the base of 
Mount Haemus, known in modern times 
as the celebrated Balkan. Here the 
Turkish General, Karam Bey, awaited 
the Christians, and hither to his assist- 
ance was Iskander commanded to repair 
at the head of a body of Janissaries, who 
had accompanied him to Greece, and the 
tributary Epirots. 

Had Iskander been influenced by vul- 
gar ambition, his loftiest desires might 
have been fully gratified by the career 
which Amu rath projected for him. Tlie 
Turkish Sultan destined for the Grecian 
Prince the hand of one of his daughters, 
and the principal command of his armies. 
He lavished upon him the highest digni- 
ties and boundless wealth ; and, whether 
it arose from a feeling of remorse, or of 

G 5 



130 THE RISE 

affection for a warrior, whose unexampled 
valour and unrivalled skill had already 
added some of the finest provinces of 
Asia to his rule, it is certain that Iskan- 
der might have exercised over Amurath 
a far greater degree of influence than was 
enjoyed by any other of his courtiers. 
But the heart of Iskander responded with 
no sympathy to these flattering favours. 
His Turkish education could never era- 
dicate from his memory the conscious- 
ness that he was a Greek ; and although 
he was brought up in the Moslemin faith, 
he had, at an early period of his career, 
secretly recurred to the creed of his 
Christian fathers. He beheld in Amu- 
rath the murderer of" his dearest kins- 
men, and the oppressor of his country ; 
and although a certain calmness of tem- 
per, and coolness of judgment, which 



OF ISKANDER. 131 

very early developed themselves in his 
character, prevented him from ever giving- 
any indication of his secret feelings, 
Iskander had long meditated on the ex- 
alted duty of freeing his country. 

Dispatched to Greece, to arrange the 
tributes and the treaties of the Grecian 
Princes, Iskander became acquainted 
with the young Nicaeus ; and their ac- 
quaintance soon matured into friendship. 
Niceeus was inexperienced ; but nature 
had not intended him for action. The 
young Prince of Athens would loll by 
the side of a fountain, and dream of the 
wonders of old days. Surrounded by his 
eunuchs, his priests, and his courtiers, he 
envied Leonidas, and would have emu- 
lated Themistocles. He was passionately 
devoted to the ancient literature of his 
country, and had the good taste, rare at 



132 THE RISE 

that time, to prefer Demosthenes and 
Lysias to Chrysostom and Gregory, and 
the choruses of the Grecian Theatre to 
the hymns of the Greek Church. The 
sustained energy and noble simplicity of 
the character of Iskander, seemed to re- 
call to the young Prince the classic he- 
roes, over whom he was so often musing, 
while the enthusiasm and fancy of Ni- 
caeus, and all that apparent weakness of 
will, and those quick vicissitudes of emo- 
tion, to which men of a fine susceptibility 
are subject, equally engaged the sympathy 
of the more vigorous and constant and 
experienced mind of his companion. 

To ISicaeus, Iskander had, for the first 
time in his life, confided much of his 
secret heart ; and the young Prince fired 
at the inspiring tale. Often they con- 
sulted over the fortunes of their country, 



OF ISKANDER. 133 

and, excited by their mutual invention, 
at length even dared to hope that they 
might affect its deliverance, when Iskan- 
der was summoned to the army. It was 
a mournful parting. Both of them felt 
that the last few months of their lives 
had owed many charms to their com- 
panionship. The parting of friends, 
united by sympathetic tastes, is always 
painful ; and friends, unless this sympa^ 
thy subsist, had much better never meet. 
Iskander stepped into the ship, sorrowful, 
but serene ; Nicseus returned to his pa- 
lace moody and fretful ; lost his temper 
with his courtiers, and, when he was 
alone, even shed tears. 



134> THE RISE 



III. 

Three weeks had elapsed since the 
parting of Iskander and Nicseus, when 
the former, at the head of ten thousand 
men, entered, by a circuitous route, the 
defiles of Mount Hsemus, and approached 
the Turkish camp, which had been 
pitched upon a vast and elevated table- 
ground, commanded on all sides by su- 
perior heights, which, however, were 
fortified and well garrisoned by Janissa- 
ries. The Epirots halted, and immedi- 
ately prepared to raise their tents, while 
their commander, attended by a few' of 
his officers, instantly proceeded to the 
pavilion of Karam Bey. 

The arrival of Iskander diffused ereat 



OF ISKANDER. 135 

joy among the soldiery ; and as he passed 
through the encampment, the exclama- 
tions of the Turkish warriors announced 
how ready they were to be led to the 
charge by a chieftain who had been 
ever successful. A guard of honour, by 
the orders of Karam Bey, advanced, to 
conduct Iskander to his presence ; and 
soon, entering the pavilion, the Grecian 
Prince exchanged courtesies with the 
Turkish General. After the formal com- 
pliments had passed, Karam Bey waved 
his hand, and the pavilion was cleared, 
with the exception of Mousa, the Chief 
Secretary, and favourite of Karam. 
" You have arrived in good time, Is- 
kander, to assist in the destruction of the 
Christian dog^/' said the Bey. "■ Flush- 
ed with their accursed success, they have 
advanced too far. Twice they have en- 



136 THE RISE 

deavoured to penetrate the mountains ; 
and each time they have been forced to 
retire, with great loss. The passages are 
well barricadoed with timber and huge 
fragments of rock. The dogs have lost 
all heart, and are sinking under the joint 
sufferings of hunger and cold. Our 
scouts tell me they exhibit symptoms of 
retreat. We must rush down from the 
mountains, and annihilate them." 

" Is Hunniades here in person ?" in- 
quired Iskander. 

'' He is here," replied Karam, " in per- 
son — the dog of dogs ! Come, Iskander, 
his head would be a fine Ramadan present 
to Amu rath. 'Tis a head worth three 
tails, I guess ?" 

Mousa, the chief secretary, indulged in 
some suppressed laughter at this joke. 
Iskander smiled. 



OF ISKANDER. 137 

** If they retreat we must assuredly at- 
tack them," observed Iskander, musingly. 
" I have a persuasion that Hunniades 
and myself will soon meet." 

''If there be truth in the Prophet !" 
exclaimed Karam, '' I have no doubt of 
it. Hunniades is reserved for you, Bey. 
We shall hold up our heads at court yet, 
Iskander. You have had letters lately ?" 

" Some slight words." 

" No mention of us, of course ?" 

" Nothing, except some passing praise 
of your valour and discretion." 

" We do our best, we do our best. 
Will Isa Bey have iEtolia, think you ?" 

" I have no thoughts. Our royal father 
will not forget his children, and Isa Bey 
is a most valiant chieftain.'' 

" You heard not that he was coming 
here }" inquired Karam. 



IS3 THE RISE 

" Have you ?" responded the cautious 
Iskander. 

'* A rumour, a rumour/' replied Ka- 
ram. " He is at Adrianople, think 
you ?" 

" It may be so : I am, you know, from 
Athens." 

'' True, true. We shall beat them, 
Iskander, we shall beat them." 

" For myself, I feel sanguine,** replied 
the Prince, and he arose to retire. " I 
must at present to my men. We must 
ascertain more accurately the movements 
of the Christians before we decide on our 
own. I am inclined myself to reconnoitre 
them. How far may it be ?" 

" There is not room to form our array 
between them and the mountains," re- 
plied Karam." 

" 'Tis well. Success attend the true 



OF ISKANDER. 139 

believers ! By to-morrow's dawn we shall 
know more." 



IV. 

Iskander returned to his men. Night 
was coming- on. Fires and lights blazed 
and sparkled in every direction. The air 
was clear but very cold. He entered his 
tent, and muffling himself up in his 
pelisse of sables, he mounted his horse, 
and declining any attendance, rode for 
some little distance, until he had escaped 
from the precincts of the camp. Then 
he turned his horse towards one of the 
wildest passes of the mountain, and gal- 
loping at great speed, never stopped 
until he had gained a considerable ascent. 
The track became steep and rugged. The 



140 THE RISE 

masses of loose stone rendered his pro- 
gress slow; but his Anatolian charger 
still bore him at intervals bravely, and 
in three hours' time he had gained the 
summit of Mount Haemus. A brilliant 
moon flooded the broad plains of Bul- 
garia with shadowy light. At the base 
of the mountainous range, the red watch- 
fires denoted the situation of the Chris- 
tian camp. 

Iskander proceeded down the descent 
with an audacious rapidity ; but his 
charger was thorough-bred, and his mo- 
ments were golden. Ere midnight, he 
had reached the outposts of the enemy, 
and was challeng-ed bv a sentinel. 

*' Who goes there ?" 

" A friend to Christendom." 

" The word ?" 

*' I have it not— nay, calmly. I am 



OF ISKANDER. 141 

alone, but I am not unarmed. I do not 
know the word. I come from a far 
country, and bear important tidings to 
the great Hunniades ; conduct me to that 
chief." 

" May I be crucified if I will,'^ re- 
sponded the sentinel, " before 1 know 
who and what you are. Come, keep off, 
unless you wish to try the effect of a 
Polish lance," continued the sentinel ; 
" 'tis something, I assure you, not less 
awkward than your Greek fire, if Greek 
indeed you be." 

"My friend, you are a fool," said Is- 
kander, " but time is too precious to 
argue any longer." So saying, the Turk- 
ish commander dismounted, and taking 
up the brawny sentinel in his arms with 
the greatest ease, threw him over his 
shoulder, and threatening the astounded 



142 THE RISE 

soldier with instant death if he struggled, 
covered him with his pelisse, and entered 
the camp. 

They approached a watch-fire, around 
which several soldiers were warming 
themselves. 

" Who goes there ?" inquired a second 
septinel. 

" A friend to Christendom," answered 
Iskander. 

'' The word ?" 

Iskander hesitated. 

" The word, or III let fly," said the 
sentinel, elevating his cross bow. 

" ' The Bridge of Buda,' " instantly 
replied the terrified prisoner beneath the 
pelisse of Iskander. 

" Why did not you answer before, 
then ?" said one of the guards. 

" And why do you mock us by chang- 



OF ISKANDER. 143 

ing your voice ?" said another. " Come, 
get on with you, and no more jokes." 

Iskander proceeded through a street of 
tents, in some of which were lights, but 
all of which were silent. At length, he 
met the esquire of a Polish knight re- 
turning from a convivial meeting, not a 
little elevated . 

" Who are you ?" inquired Iskander. 

" I am an Esquire," replied the gen- 
tleman. 

" A shrewd man, I doubt not, who 
would make his fortune," replied Iskan- 
der. " You must know great things 
have happened. Being on guard, I have 
taken a prisoner, who has deep secrets to 
divulge to the Lord Hunniades. Thither, 
to his pavilion, I am now bearing him. 
But he is a stout barbarian, and almost 
too much for me. Assist me in carrying 



14* THE RISE 

him to the pavilion of Hunniades, and 
you shall have all the reward and half 
the fame." 

*' You are a very civil spoken young 
gentleman," said the Esquire. '' I think 
I know your voice. Your name, if I mis- 
take not, is Leckinski ?"' 

" A relative. We had a common an- 
cestor.*' 

'' I thought so. I know the Leckins- 
kies ever by their voice. 1 am free to 
help you on the terms you mention — all 
the reward and half the fame. 'Tis a 
strong barbarianism, is it ? We cannot 
cut its throat, or it will not divulge. All 
the reward and half the fame ! I will be 
a Knight to-morrow. It seems a sort of 
fish, and has a smell." 

The Esquire seized the shoulders of the 
prisoner, who would have spoken had he 



OF ISKANDER. 145 

not been terrified by the threats of Is- 
kander, who, carrying the legs of the sen- 
tinel, allowed the Polish gentleman to 
lead the way to the pavilion of Hun- 
niades. Thither they soon arrived ; and 
Iskander, dropping his burthen, and 
leaving the prisoner without to the charge 
of his assistant, entered the pavilion of 
the General of the Hung-arians. 

He was stopped in a small outer apart- 
ment by an officer, who inquired his 
purpose, and to whom he repeated his 
desire to see the Hungarian leader, with- 
out loss of time, on important business. 
Tlie officer hesitated ; but, summoning 
several guards, left Iskander in their cus- 
tody, and, stepping behind a curtain, 
disappeared. Iskander heard voices, but 
could distinguish no words. Soon the 
officer returned, and, ordering the guards 

VOL. Ill H 



146 THE RISE 

to disarm and search Iskander, directed 
the Grecian Prince to follow him. Draw- 
ing aside the curtain, L?kander and his 
attendant entered a low apartment of 
considerable size. It was hung with 
skins. A variety of armour and dresses 
were piled on couches. A middle-aged 
man, of majestic appearance, muffled up 
in a pelisse of furs, with long chestnut 
hair, and a cap of crimson velvet and 
ermine, was walking up and down the 
apartment, and dictating some instruc- 
tions to a person who was kneeling on 
the ground, and writing by the bright 
flame of a brazen lamp. The bright 
flame of the brazen lamp fell full upon 
the face of the Secretary. Iskander be- 
held a most beautiful woman. 

She looked up as Iskander entered. 
Her large dark eyes glanced through his 



OF ISKANDER. I47 

soul. Her raven hair descended to her 
shoulders in many curls on each side of 
her face, and was braided with strings of 
immense pearls. A broad cap of white 
fox-skin crowned her whiter forehead. 
Her features were very small, but sharply 
moulded, and a delicate tint gave ani- 
mation to her clear fair cheek. She 
looked up as Iskander entered, with an 
air rather of curiosity than embarrass- 
ment. 

Hunniades stopped, and examined his 
visitor with a searching inquisition. 
" Whence come you ?" inquired the 
Hungarian chieftain. 

'* From the Turkish camp," was the 
answer. 

*' An envoy or a deserter ?" 

'' Neither." 

^* What then >" 

H 2 



148 THE RISE 

" A convert." 

" Your name ?" 

" Lord Hunniades," said Iskander, 
" that is for your private ear. I am 
unarmed, and \yqvq I otherwise, the first 
knight of Christendom can scarcely fear. 
I am one in birth and rank your equal ; 
if not in fame, at least, I trust, in honour. 
My time is all-precious : I can scarcely 
stay here while my horse breathes. Dis- 
miss your attendant." 

Hunniades darted a glance at his visi- 
tor which would have baffled a weaker 
brain, but Iskander stood the scrutiny 
calm and undisturbed. " Go, Stanis- 
laus," said the Vaivode to the officer. 
" This lady. Sir," continued the chief- 
tain, " is my daughter, and one from 
whom I have no secrets." 

Iskander bowed lowly as the officer 
disappeared. 



OF ISKANDER. 149 

" And now," said Hunniades, " to 
business. Your purpose ?" 

" 1 am a Grecian Prince, and a com- 
pulsory ally of the Moslemin. In a 
word, my purpose here is to arrange a 
plan by which we may effect at the 
same time your triumph and my free- 
dom." 

" To whom, then, have I the honour of 
speaking ?" inquired Hunniades. 

" My name, great Hunniades, is per- 
haps not altogether unknown to you : 
they call me Iskander." 

" What, the right arm of Amurath, 
the conqueror of Caramania, the flower 
of Turkish chivalry ? Do I indeed be- 
hold that matchless warrior ?" exclaimed 
Hunniades, and he held forth his hand 
to his guest, and ungirding his own sword, 
offered it to the Prince. " Iduna," con- 



150 THE RISE 

tinued Hunniades, to his daughter, " you 
at length behold Iskander." 

" My joy is great, Sir," replied Iduna, 
" if I indeed rightly understand that we 
may count the Prince Iskander a cham- 
pion of the Cross." 

Iskander took from his heart his golden 
crucifix and kissed it before her. " This 
has been my companion and consolation 
for Icmg years, lady," said Iskander; 
'' you, perhaps, knovv my mournful his- 
tory, Hunniades. Hitherto my pre- 
tended sovereign has not required me to 
bare my scimitar against my Christian 
brethren. That hour, however, has at 
length arrived, and it has decided me to 
adopt a line of conduct long meditated. 
Karam Bey, who is aware of your neces- 
sities, the moment you commence your 
retreat, will attack you. I shall com- 



OF ISKANDER. 151 

mand his left wing. In spite of his 
superior power and position, draw up in 
array, and meet him with confidence. 
I propose, at a convenient moment in the 
day, to withdraw my troops, and with 
the Epirots hasten to my native country, 
and at once raise the standard of inde- 
pendence. It is a bold measure, but 
Success is the child of Audacity. We 
must assist each other with mutual diver- 
sions. Single-handed it is in vain for 
me to commence a struggle, which, with 
all adventitious advantages, will require 
the utmost exertion of energy, skill, and 
patience. But if yourself and the King 
Uladislaus occupy the armies of Amurath 
in Bulgaria, I am not without hope of 
ultimate success, since I have to inspire 
me all the most urgent interests of hu- 
manity, and combat, at the same time, 



152 THE RISE 

for my God, my country, and my lawful 
crown." 

" Brave Prince, I pledge you my 
troth," said Hunniades, coming forward 
and seizing his hand ; '* and while Iskan- 
der and Hunniades live, they will never 
cease until they have achieved their great 
and holy end." 

" It is a solemn compact," said Iskan- 
der, " more sacred than if registered by 
all the scribes of Christendom. Lady 
Iduna, your prayers !" 

" They are ever with the Champions 
of the Cross," replied the daughter of 
Hunniades. She rose, the large cloak in 
which she was enveloped fell from her 
exquisite form. " Noble Iskander,^ this 
rosary is from the Holy Sepulchre," con- 
tinued Iduna ; " wear it for the sake and 
memory of that blessed Saviour, who 
died for our sins." 



OF ISKANDER. 153 

Iskander held forth his arm and 
touched her delicate hand as he received 
the rosary, which, pressing to his lips, he 
placed round his neck. 

" Great Hunniades," said the Grecian 
Prince, '' I must cross the mountains be- 
fore dawn. Let me venture to entreat 
that we should hear to-morrow that the 
Christian camp is in retreat." 

" Let it be even so," said the Hunga- 
rian, after some thought, " and may to- 
morrow's Sun bring brighter days to 
Christendom." And with these words 
terminated the brief and extraordinary 
visit of Iskander to the Christian general. 



H o 



154 THE RISE 



V. 



The intelligence of the breaking up of 
the Christian camp, and the retreat of the 
Christian army, soon reached the Divan 
of Karam Bey, who immediately sum- 
moned Iskander to consult on the neces- 
sary operations. The chieftains agreed 
that instant pursuit was indispensable, 
and soon the savage Hsemus poured forth 
from its green bosom swarms of that 
light cavalry which was perhaps even a 
more fatal arm of the Turkish power than 
the famous Janissaries themselves. They 
hovered on the rear of the retreating 
Christians, charged the wavering, cap- 
tured the unwary. It was impossible to 
resist their sudden and impetuous move- 



•\ 



OP ISKANDER. 155 

ments, which rendered their escape as se- 
cure as their onset was overwhelming. 
Wearied at length by the repeated as- 
saults, Hunniades, who, attended by 
some chosen knights, had himself re- 
paired to the rear, gave orders for the 
army to halt and offer battle. 

Their pursuers instantly withdrew to a 
distance, and gradually forming into two 
divisions, awaited the arrival of the ad- 
vancing army of the Turks. The Mosle- 
min came forward in fierce array, and 
with the sanguine courage inspired by 
expected triumph. Very conspicuous 
^v'as Iskander bounding in his crimson 
vest upon his ebon steed, and waving 
his gleaming scimitar. 

The Janissaries charged, calling upon 
Allah ! with an awful shout. The Chris- 
tian knights, invoking the Christian 



156 THE RISE 

saints, received the Turks at the points 
of their lances. But many a noble lance 
was shivered that morn, and many a bold 
rider and worthy steed bit the dust of 
that field, borne down by the irresistible 
numbers of their fierce adversaries. 
Every where the balls and the arrows 
whistled through the air, and sometimes 
an isolated shriek heard amid the general 
clang, announced another victim to the 
fell and mysterious agency of the Greek 
fire. 

Hunniades, while he performed all the 
feats of an approved warrior, watched 
with anxiety the disposition of the Turk- 
ish troops. Hitherto, from the nature of 
their position, but a portion of both 
armies had interfered in the contest, and 
as yet, Iskander had kept aloof. But 
now, as the battle each instant raged 



OF ISKANDER. 157 

with more fury, and as it was evident 
that ere Ions: the main force of both 
armies must be brought into collision, 
Hunniades, with a terrible suspense, 
watched whether the Grecian Prince 
were willing, or even capable of exe- 
cuting his plan. Without this fulfil- 
ment, the Christian hero could not con- 
ceal from himself that the day must be 
decided against the Cross. 

In the mean time Iskander marked 
the course of events with not less eager- 
ness than Hunniades. Already Karam 
Bey had more than once summoned him 
to bring the Epirots into action. He 
assented ; but an hour passed away with- 
out changing his position. At length, 
more from astonishment than rage, the 
Turkish Commander sent his chief secre- 
tary Mousa himself to impress his wishes 



158 THE RISE 

upon his colleague, and obtain some ex- 
planation of his views and conduct. 
Mousa found Iskander surrounded by 
some of the principal Epirot nobles, 
all mounted on horseback, and standing 
calmly under a wide-spreading plane 
tree. The chief secretary of Karam Bey 
was too skilful a courtier to permit his 
countenance to express his feelings, and 
he delivered himself of his mission rather 
as if he had come to request advice, than 
to communicate a reprimand. 

" Your master is a wise man, Mousa," 
replied Iskander ; * ' but even Karam 
Bey may be mistaken. He deems that 
a battle is not to be won by loitering 
under a shadowy tree. Now I differ 
with him, and I even mean to win this 
day by such a piece of truancy. How- 
ever, it may certainly now be time for 



OF ISKANDER. 159 

more active work. You smile encou- 
ragement, good Mousa. Giorgio, Deme- 
trius, to your duty !" 

At these words, two stout Epirots 
advanced to the unfortunate Secretary, 
seized and bound him, and placed him on 
horseback before one of their comrades. 

" Now all who love their country fol- 
low me !" exclaimed Iskander. So say- 
ing, and at the head of five thousand 
horsemen, Iskander quitted the field at a 
rapid pace. 



VI. 

With incredible celerity Iskander and 
his cavalry dashed over the plains of 
Roumelia, and never halted except for 
short and hurried intervals of rest and 



160 THE RISE 

repose, until they had entered the moun- 
tainous borders of Epirus, and were 
within fifty miles of its capital, Croia. 
On the eve of entering the kingdom of 
his fathers, Iskander ordered his guards 
to produce the chief secretary of Karam 
Bey. Exhausted with fatigue, vexation, 
and terror, the disconsolate Mousa was 
led forward. 

" Cheer up, worthy Mousa !" said Is- 
kander, lying his length on the green 
turf. " We have had a sharp ride ; but 
I doubt not we shall soon find ourselves, 
by the blessing of God, in good quarters. 
There is a city at hand which they call 
Croia, and in which once, as the rumour 
runs, the son of my father shoi^ld 
not have had to go seek for an en- 
trance. No matter. Methinks, worthy 
Mousa, thou art the only man in our 



OF ISKANDER. l6l 

society that can sign thy name. Come 
now, write me an order signed Karam 
Bey to the Governor of this said city, for 
its dehvery up to the valiant Champion 
of the Crescent, Iskander, and thou shalt 
ride in future at a pace more suitable 
to a Secretary." 

The worthy Mousa humbled himself to 
the ground, and then taking his writing 
materials from his girdle, inscribed the 
desired order, and delivered it to Is- 
kander, who, glancing at the inscription, 
pushed it into his vest. 

" I shall proceed at once to Croia, with 
a few friends," said Iskander; '* do you, 
my bold companions, follow me this eve 
in various parties, and by various routes. 
At dead of the second night, collect in 
silence before the gates of Croia !" 

Thus speaking, Iskander called for his 



162 THE RISE 

now refreshed charger, and, accompanied 
by two hundred horsemen, bade farewell 
for a brief period to his troops, and soon 
having crossed the mountains, descended 
into the fertile plains of Epirus. 

When the Sun rose in the morning, 
Iskander and his friends beheld at the 
further end of the plain a very fine city 
shining in the light. It was surrounded 
with lofty turretted walls flanked by 
square towers, and was built upon a 
gentle eminence, which gave it a very 
majestic appearance. Behiad it rose a 
lofty range of purple mountains of very 
picturesque form, and the highest peaks 
capped with snow. A noble lake, from 
which troops of wild fowl occasionally 
rose, expanded like a sheet of silver on 
one side of the city. The green breast 
of the contiguous hills sparkled with 
white houses. 



OF ISKANDER. l63 

" Behold Croia!" exclaimed Iskander. 
" Our old fathers could choose a site, 
comrades. We shall see whether they 
expended their time and treasure for 
strangers, or their own seed." So say- 
ing, he spurred his horse, and with pant- 
ing hearts and smiling faces, Iskander 
and his company had soon arrived in the 
vicinity of the city. 

The city was surrounded by a beautiful 
region of corn-fields and fruit trees. The 
road was arched with the overhanging 
boughs. The birds chirped on every 
spray. It was a blithe and merry morn. 
Iskander plucked a bunch of olives as he 
cantered along. '* Dear friends,'' he said, 
looking round with an inspiring smile, 
** let us gather our first harvest !" And, 
thereupon, each putting forth his rapid 
hand, seized, as he rushed by, the em- 



164 THE RISE 

blem of possession, and following- the 
example of his leader, placed it in his 
cap. 

They arrived at the gates of the city, 
which was strongly garrisoned ; and Is- 
kander, followed by his train, galloped 
up the height of the citadel. Alighting 
from his horse, he was ushered into the 
divan of the Governor, an ancient Pacha, 
who received the conqueror of Caramania 
with all the respect that became so illus- 
trious a champion of the Crescent. After 
the usual forms of ceremonious hospita- 
lity, Iskander, with a courteous air, pre- 
sented him the order for delivering up 
the citadel ; and the old Pacha, resigning 
himself to the loss of his post with Orien- 
tal submission, instantly delivered ' the 
keys of the citadel and town to Iskander, 
and requested permission immediately to 
quit the late scene of his command. 



OF ISKANDER. 1^5 

Quitting the citadel, Iskander now 
proceeded through the whole town, and 
in the afternoon reviewed the Turkish 
garrison in the great square. As the late 
Governor was very anxious to quit Croia 
that very day, Iskander insisted on a con- 
siderable portion of the garrison accompa- 
nying him as a guard of honour, and 
returning the next morning. The rest 
he divided in several quarters, and placed 
the gates in charge of his own compa- 
nions. 

At midnight the Epirots, faithful to 
their orders, arrived and united beneath 
the walls of the city, and after inter- 
changing the signals agreed upon, the 
gates were opened. A large body in- 
stantly marched and secured the citadel. 
The rest, conducted by appointed leaders, 
surrounded the Turks in their quarters. 



i66 THE RISE 

And suddenly, in the noon of night, in 
that great city, arose a clang so dreadful 
that people leapt up from their sleep and 
stared with stupor. Instantly the ter- 
race of every house blazed with torches, 
and it became as light as day. Troops 
of armed men were charging down the 
streets, brandishing their scimitars and 
yataghans, and exclaiming, " The Cross, 
the Cross!"—" Liberty!"—'' Greece!" 
— " Iskander and Epirus !" The towns- 
men recognized their countrymen by their 
language and their dress. The name of 
Iskander acted as a spell. They stopt 
not to inquire. A magic sympathy at 
once persuaded them that this great man 
had, by the grace of Heaven, recurred to 
the creed and country of his fathers. And 
so every townsman, seizing the nearest 
weapon, with a spirit of patriotic frenzy, 



OF ISKANDER. iQj 

rushed into the streets, crying out " The 
Cross, the Cross ! Liberty ! Greece ! Is- 
kander and Epirus !" Ay ! even the 
women lost all womanly fears, and sti- 
mulated instead of soothing the impulse 
of their masters. They fetched them 
arms, they held the torches, they sent 
them forth with vows and prayers and 
imprecations, their children clinging to 
their robes, and repeating with enthu- 
siasm, phrases which they could not com- 
prehend. 

The Turks fought with the desperation 
of men, who feel that they are betrayed, 
and must be victims. The small and 
isolated bodies were soon massacred, all 
with cold steel, for at this time, although 
some of the terrible inventions of modern 
warfare were introduced, their use was 
not general. The citadel, indeed, was 



l68 THE RISE 

fortified with cannon ; but the greater 
part of the soldiery trusted to their 
crooked swords, and their unerring jave- 
lins. The main force of the Turkish 
garrison had been quartered in an old 
Palace of the Archbishop, situate in the 
middle of the city on a slightly rising 
and open ground, a massy building of 
rustic stone. Here the Turks, although 
surrounded, defended themselves despe- 
rately, using their cross-bows with ter- 
rible effect ; and hither, the rest of the 
city being now secured, Iskander himself 
repaired to achieve its complete deliver- 
ance. 

The Greeks had endeavoured to carry 
the principal entrance of the Palace by 
main force, but the strength of the portal 
had resisted their utmost exertions, and 
the arrows of the besieged had at length 



OF ISKANDER. l69 

forced them to retire to a distance. Is- 
kander directed that two pieces of cannon 
should be dragged down from the citadel, 
and then played against the entrance. 
In the meantime, he ordered immense 
piles of damp faggots to be lit before the 
building, the smoke of which prevented 
the besieged from taking any aim. The 
ardour of the people was so great, that the 
cannon were soon served against the pa- 
lace, and their effects were speedily re- 
marked. The massy portal shook ; a few 
blows of the battering ram, and it fell. 
The Turks sallied forth, were received 
with a shower of Greek fire, and driven 
in with agonizing yells. Some endea- 
voured to escape from the windows, and 
were speared or cut down ; some appeared 
wringing their hands in despair upon the 
terraced roof. Suddenly the Palace was 

VOL. III. I 



170 THE RISE 

announced to be on fire. A tall white 
blueish flame darted up from a cloud of 
smoke, and soon, as if by magic, the 
whole back of the building- was encom- 
passed with rising- tongues of red and 
raging light. Amid a Babel of shrieks, 
and shouts, and cheers, and prayers, and 
curses, the roof of the Palace fell in with 
a crash, which produced amid the be- 
siegers an awful and momentary silence, 
but in an instant they started from their 
strange inactivity, and rushing forward, 
leapt into the smoking ruins, and at the 
same time completed the massacre and 
achieved their freedom. 



OF ISKANDER. 1?^ 



VII. 

At break of dawn Iskander sent cou- 
:iers throughout all Epirus, announcing 
;he fall of Croia, and that he had raised 
;he standard of independence in his an- 
jient country. He also despatched a 
:rusty messenger to Prince Nicaeus at 
A-thens, and to the great Hunniades. 
Fhe people were so excited throughout all 
Epirus, at this great and unthoughtof in- 
telligence, that they simultaneously rose 
in all the open country, and massacred the 
lurks, and the towns were only restrained 
in a forced submission to Amurath, by 
the strong garrisons of the Sultan. 

Now Iskander was very anxious to effect 
the removal of these garrisons without 

I 2 



172 THE RISE 

loss of time, in order that if Amurath 
sent a great power against him, as he ex- 
pected, the invading army might have 
nothing to rely upon but its own force, 
and that his attention might not in any 
way be diverted from effecting their 
overthrow. Therefore, as soon as his 
troops had rested, and he had formed his 
new recruits into some order, which, with 
their willing spirits, did not demand 
many days, Iskander set out from Croia, 
at the head of twelve thousand men, and 
marched against the strong city of Pe- 
trella, meeting in his way the remainder 
of the garrison of Croia on their return, 
who surrendered themselves to him at 
discretion. Petrella was only one day's 
march from Croia, and when Iskander 
arrived there he requested a conference 
with the Governor, and told his tale so 



OF ISKANDER. 173 

well, representing the late overthrow ot 
the Turks by Hunniades, and the inca- 
pacity of Amiirath at present to relieve 
him, that the Turkish commander agreed 
to deliver up the place, and leave the 
country with his troops, particularly as 
the alternative of Iskander to these easy 
terms was ever conquest without quarter. 
And thus, by a happy mixture of auda- 
city and adroitness, the march of Iskan- 
der throughout Epirus, was rather like a 
triumph than a campaign, the Turkish 
garrisons imitating, without any excep- 
tion, the conduct of their comrades at 
Petrella, and dreading the fate of their 
comrades at the capital. In less than a 
month, Iskander returned to Epirus, 
having delivered the whole country from 
the Moslemin yoke. 

Hitherto Iskander had heard nothing 



'[J4> THE RISE 

either of Hunniades or Nicaeus. He 
learnt therefore with great interest as 
he passed through the gates of the city 
that the Prince of Athens had arrived 
at Croia the preceding eve, and also that 
his messenger had returned from the 
Hungarian camp. Amid the acclama- 
tions of an enthusiastic people, Iskander 
once more ascended the citadel of Croia. 
Nicaeus received him at the gate. Is- 
kander sprang from his horse, and em- 
braced his friend. Hand in hand, and 
followed by their respective trains, they 
entered the fortress palace. 

'' My dear friend, " said Iskander, 
when they were once more alone, " you 
see we were right not to despair. Two 
months have scarcely elapsed since we 
parted without a prospect, or with the 
most gloomy one, and now we are in 



OF ISKANDER. 175 

a fair way of achieving" all that we can 
desire. Epirus is free !" 

" I came to claim my share in its 
emancipation/* said Nicseus with a smile, 
" but Iskander is another Caesar !" 

"You will have many opportunities 
yet, believe me, Nicaeus, of proving- your 
courage and your patriotism," replied 
Iskander, " Amurath, will never allow 
this affair to pass over in this quiet man- 
ner. I did not commence this struggle 
without a conviction that it would demand 
all the energy and patience of a long 
life. I shall be rewarded if I leave free- 
dom as an heritage to my countrymen ; 
but for the rest, I feel that I bid fare- 
well to every joy of life, except the en- 
nobling consciousness of performing a 
noble duty. In the meantime, I under- 
stand a messenger awaits me here from 



176 THE RISE 

the great Hunniades. Unless that shield 
of Christendom maintain himself in his 
present position, our chance of ultimate 
security is feeble. With his constant 
divei*sion in Bulgaria, we may contrive 
here to struggle into success. You some- 
times laugh at my sanguine temper, Ni- 
cseus. To say the truth, I am more se- 
rene than sanguine, and was never more 
conscious of the strength of my opponent 
than now, when it appears that I have 
beaten him. Hark ! the people cheer. 
I love the people, Niceeus, who are ever 
influenced by genuine and generous 
feelings. They cheer as if they had 
once more gained a country. Alas! they 
little know what they must endure even 
at the best. Nay ! look not gloomy ; 
we have done great things, and will 
do more. Who waits without there ? 



OF ISKANDER. 177 

Demetrius ! Call the messenger from 
Lord Hunniades." 

An Epirot bearing- a silken packet was 
now introduced, which he delivered to 
Iskander. Reverently touching the hand 
of his chieftain, the messenger then 
kissed his own and withdrew. Iskander 
broke the seal, and drew forth a letter 
from the silken cover. 

" So ! this is well ! " exclaimed the 
Prince with great animation, as he threw 
his quick eye over the letter. *' As 1 
hoped and deemed, a most complete vic- 
tory. Karam Bey himself a prisoner, 
baggage, standards, great guns, treasure. 
Brave soldier of the Cross ! (may I 
prove so ! ) Your perfectly devised 
movement, (poh, poh !) Ilah ! what is 
this ?" exclaimed Iskander, turning pale ; 
his lip quivered, his eye looked dim. 

I o 



178 THE RISE 

He walked to an arched window. His 
companion, who supposed that he was 
reading-, did not disturb him. 

'* Poor, poor Hunniades!" at length 
exclaimed Iskander, shaking his head. 

" What of him?" inquired Nicseus 
quickly. 

" The sharpest accident of war !" re- 
plied Iskander. " It quite clouds my 
spirit. We must forget these things, we 
must forget. Epirus ! he is not a patriot 
who can spare a thought from thee. And 
yet, so young, so beautiful, so gifted, 
so worthy of a hero ! — when I saw her 
by her great father's side, sharing his 
toils, aiding his councils, supplying his 
necessities, methought I gazed upon a 
ministering angel ! —upon — " 

" Stop, stop in mercy's name, Iskan- 
der !" exclaimed Nicseus in a very agi- 



OF ISKANDER. 179 

tated tone. " What is all this ? Surely 
no,— surely not — surely Iduna — !" 

« 'Tis she !" 

" Dead ?'' exclaimed Nicaeus rushing- 
up to his companion, and seizing' his 
arm. 

" Worse, much worse !" 

" God of Heaven!" exclaimed the 
young Prince with almost a frantic air." 
Tell me all, tell me all ! This suspense 
fires my brain. Iskander, you know not 
what this woman is to me — the sole ob- 
ject of my being, the bane, the blessing 
of my life ! Speak, dear friend, speak ! 
I beseech you ! where is Iduna }'* 

" A prisoner to the Turk." 

'^ Iduna a prisoner to the Turk ! I'll 
not believe it ! Why do we wear swords } 
Where's chivalry ? Iduna, a prisoner to 
the Turk ! 'Tis false. It cannot be. 



180 THE RISE 

Iskander, you are a coward ! I am a 
coward 1 All are cowards ! A prisoner 
to the Turk ! Iduna ! What, the Rose 
of Christendom ! has it been plucked by 
such a turbaned dog as Amurath ? Fare- 
well, Epirus ! Farewell, classic Athens ! 
Farewell, bright fields of Greece, and 
dreams that made them brighter ! The 
Sun of all my joy and hope is set, and set 
for ever !" 

So saying, Nicaeus, tearing his hair 
and garments, flung himself upon the 
floor, and hid his face in his robes. 

Iskander paced the room with a trou- 
bled step and thoughtful brow. After 
some minutes he leant down by the 
Prince of Athens, and endeavoured to 
console him. 

*' It is in vain, Iskander, it is in vain," 
said Nicaeus. " I wish to die." 



OF ISKANDER. 181 

'* Were I a favoured lover, in such a 
situation," replied Iskander, " I should 
scarcely consider death my duty, unless 
the sacrifice of myself preserved ray mis- 
tress." 

" Hah !" exclaimed Nicseus, starting- 
from the ground. " Do you conceive, 
then, the possibility of rescuing her ?" 

" If she live, she is a prisoner in the 
Seraglio at Adrianople. You are as 
good a judge as myself of the prospect 
that awaits your exertions. It is, with- 
out doubt, a difficult adventure, but such, 
methinks, as a Christian knight should 
scarcely shun." 

** To horse," exclaimed Nicaeus, " to 

horse and yet what can I do ? Were 

she in any other place but the capital 1 
might rescue her by force, but in the 
heart of their empire — it is impossible. 



182 THE RISE 

Is there no ransom that can tempt the 
Turk ? My principality would rise in 
the balance beside this jewel." 

" That were scarcely wise, and cer- 
tainly not just," replied Iskander ; '* but 
ransom will be of no avail. Hunniades 
has already offered to restore Karam Bey, 
and all the prisoners of rank, and the 
chief trophies, and Amurath has refused 
to listen to any terms. The truth is, 
Id una has found favour in the eyes of his 
son, the young Mahomed." 

" Holy Virgin ! hast thou no pity on 
this Christian maid ?" exclaimed Nicseus. 
"The young Mahomed! Shall this 
licentious infidel — ah ! Iskander, dear, 
dear Iskander, you who have so much 
wisdom, and so much courage ; you who 
can devise all things, and dare all things ; 
help me, help me ; on my knees I do, be- 



OF ISKANDER. 183 

seech you, take up this crying cause of 
foul oppression, and for the sake of all 
you love and reverence — ^j^our creed, 
your country, and perchance your friend, 
let your great genius, like some solemn 
angel, haste to the rescue of the sweet 
Id una, and save her, save her I" 

" Some thoughts like these were rising 
in my mind when first I spoke," replied 
Iskander. '' This is a better cue, far more 
beseeming Princes than boyish tears, and 
all the outward misery of woe, a tat- 
tered garment and dishevelled locks. 
Come, Niceeus, we have to struggle with 
a mighty fortune. Let us be firm as Fate 
itself." 



184 THE RISE 



VIII. 

Immediately after his interview with 
Nicaeus, Iskander summoned some of the 
chief citizens of Croia to the citadel, and 
submitting to them his arrangements for 
the administration of Epirus, announced 
the necessity of his instant departure for 
a short interval ; and the same evening, 
ere the moon had risen, himself and the 
Prince of Athens quitted the city, and 
proceeded in the direction of Adrianople. 
They travelled with great rapidity until 
they reached a small town upon the fron- 
tiers, where they halted for one day. 
Here, in the Bazaar, Iskander purchased 
for himself the dress of an Armenian 
physician. In his long dark robes,, and 



OF ISKANDER. 185 

large round cap of black wool, his face 
and hands stained, and his beard and 
mustachios shaven, it seemed impossible 
that he could be recognized. Nicaeus 
was habited as his page, in a dress of 
coarse red cloth, setting tight to his 
form, with a red cap, with a long blue 
tassel. He carried a large bag contain- 
ing drugs, some surgical instruments, 
and a few books. In this guise, as soon 
as the gates were open on the morrow, 
Iskander, mounted on a very small mule, 
and Nicaeus on a very large donkey, the 
two Princes commenced the pass of the 
mountainous range, an arm of the Balkan 
which divided Epirus from Roumelia. 

" I broke the wind of the finest charger 
in all Asia when I last ascended these 
mountains," said Iskander ; "1 hope this 
day's journey may be accepted as a sort 
of atonement." 



186 THE RISE 

" Faith ! there is little doubt I am the 
best mounted of the two," said Nicseus. 
*' However, 1 hope we shall return at a 
sharper pace." 

" How came it, my Niceeus," said Is- 
kander, " that vou never mentioned to 
me the name of Iduna when we were at 
Athens ? I little supposed when I made 
my sudden visit to Hunniades, that I was 
about to appeal to so fair a host. She is a 
rarely gifted lady." 

'* I knew of her being at the camp as 
little as yourself,'' replied the Prmce of 
Athens, " and for the rest, the truth is, 
Iskander, there are some slight crosses in 
our loves which Time, I hope, will fashion 
rightly." So saying, Niceeus pricked on 
his donkey, and flung his stick at a bird 
which was perched on the branch of a 
tree. Iskander did not resume a' topic 



OF ISKANDER. 18? 

to which his companion seemed disin- 
clined. Their journey was tedious. To- 
wards nightfall they reached the summit 
of the usual track ; and as the descent 
was difficult, they were obliged to rest 
until day-break. 

On the morrow they had a magnificent 
view of the rich plains of Roumelia, and 
in the extreme distance, the great city of 
Adrianople, its cupolas and minarets 
blazing and sparkling in the Sun. This 
glorious prospect at once revived all their 
energies. It seemed that the moment of 
peril and of fate had arrived. They 
pricked on their sorry steeds ; and on the 
morning of the next day, presented them- 
selves at the gates of the city. The tho- 
rough knowledge which Iskandcr pos- 
sessed of the Turkish character, obtained 
them an entrance, which was at one time 



188 THE RISE 

almost doubtful, from the irritability and 
impatience of Nicseus. They repaired 
to a caravansera of good repute in the 
neighbourhood of the Seraglio ; and hav- 
vinof eno-a^ed their rooms, the Armenian 
physician, attended by his page, visited 
several of the neigbouring coffee-houses, 
announcing, at the same time, his arrival, 
his profession, and his skill. 

As Iskander felt pulses, examined 
tongues, and distributed drugs and 
charms, he listened with interest and 
amusement to the conversation of which 
he himself was often the hero. He found 
that the Turks had not yet recovered 
from their consternation at his audacity 
and success. They were still wondering, 
and if possible more astounded than in- 
dignant. The politicians of the coffee- 
houses, chiefly consisting of Janissaries, 



OF ISKAXDER. 189 

were loud in their murmurs. The popu- 
larity of Amu rath had vanished before 
the triumph of Hunniades, and the rise 
of Iskander. 

" But Allah has in some instances 
favoured the faithful," remarked Iskan- 
der ; " I heard in my travels of your 
having captured a great princess of the 
Giaours ?" 

" God is great !" said an elderly Turk 
with a long white beard. '* The Hakim 
congratulates the faithful because they 
have taken a woman !" 

'* Not so, merely," replied Iskander ; 
" I heard the woman was a Princess. If 
so, the people of Franguestan will pay any 
ransom for their great women ; and, by 
giving up this fair Giaour, you may free 
many of the faithful." 

" Mashallah !" said another ancient 



190 THE RISE 

Turk, sipping" his coffee. " The Hakim 
speaks wisely." 

'• May I murder my mother !" ex- 
claimed a young Janissary, with gr ea 
indignation. " But this is the very 
thing that makes me wild against Amu- 
rath. Is not this Princess a daughter of 
that accursed Giaour, that dog of dogs, 
Hunniades ? and has he not offered for 
her ransom, our brave Karam Bey him- 
self, and his chosen warriors ? and has 
not Amurath said Nay ? And why has 
he said Nay ? Because his son, the Prince 
Mahomed, instead of fighting against 
the Giaours, has looked upon one of their 
women, and has become a Mejnoun. 
Pah ! May I murder my mother, — but 
if the Giaours were in full march to the 
city, I'd not fight. And let him tell 
this to the Cadi who dares; for, there 



OF ISKANDER. igi 

are ten thousand of us, and we have 
sworn by the Kettle — but we will 
not fight for Giaours, or those who love 
Giaours !" 

" If you mean me, Ali, about going to 
the Cadi," said the chief eunuch of Ma- 
homed, who was standing by, *' let me tell 
you I am no tale-bearer, and scorn to do 
an unmanly act. The young Prince can 
beat the Giaours without the aid of those 
who are noisy enough in a coffee-house, 
when they are quiet enough in the 
field. And, for the rest of the business, 
you may all ease your hearts ; for the 
Frangy Princess you talk of, is pining 
away, and will soon die. The Sultan has 
offered a hundred purses of gold to any 
one who cures her : but the sold will 
never be counted by the Hasnadar, or 
I will double it." 



19^ THE RISE 

" Try your fortune, Hakim," said se- 
veral laughing" loungers to Iskander. 

" Allah has stricken the Frangy Prin- 
cess," said the old Turk with a white 
beard. 

" He will strike all Giaours," said his 
ancient companion, sipping his coffee. 
" Tis so written." 

" Well ! I do not like to hear of wo- 
men-slaves pining to death," said tlie 
young Janissary, in a softened tone, 
" particularly when they are young. 
Amu rath should have ransomed her, or he 
might have given her to one of his offi- 
cers, or any young fellow that had par- 
ticularly distinguished himself" And so, 
twirling his mustachios, and flinging 
down his piastre, the young Janissary 
strutted out of the coffee-house. 

" When we were young," said th6 old 



OF ISKANDER. 193 

Turk with the white beard to his com- 
panion, shaking- his head, " when we 
were young " 

'* We conquered Anatolia, and never 
opened our mouths," rejoined his com- 
panion. 

" I never offered an opinion till I was 
sixty," said the old Turk ; " and then it 
was one which had been in our family 
for a century/' 

*' No wonder Hunniades carries every 
thing before him," said his companion. 

" And that accursed Iskander," said 
the old man. 

The chief Eunuch, finishing his vase of 
sherbet, moved away. The Armeniau 
Physician followed him. 



VOL III. 



19i * THE RISE 



IX. 

The chief Eunuch turned into a burial- 
ground, through which a way led, by an 
avenue of cypress-trees, to the quarter 
of the Seraglio. The Armenian physi- 
cian, accompanied by his page, followed 
him. 

" Noble Sir !" said the Armenian phy- 
sician ; " may I trespass for a moment on 
your Lordship's attention ?" 

" Worthy Hakim, is it you ?" replied 
the chief Eunuch, turning round with an 
encouraoing smile of courteous conde- 
scension, — " your pleasure ?" 

" I would speak to you of important 
matters," said the Physician. 

The Eunuch carelessly seated himself 



OF ISKANUER. IQo 

on a richly carved tomb, and crossing his 
legs with an air of pleasant superiority, 
adjusted a fine emerald that sparkled on 
his finger, and bade the Hakim address 
him without hesitation. 

** I am a Physician," said the Arme- 
nian. 

The Eunuch nodded. 
" And I heard your Lordship in the 
coffee-house mention that the Sultan, our 
sublime Master, had off*ered a rich re- 
ward to any one who could effect the 
cure of a favourite captive.'* 

" No less a reward than one hundred 
purses of gold,'' remarked the Eunuch. 
" The reward is proportioned to the ex- 
igency of the case. Believe me, worthy 
Sir, it is desperate." 

** With mortal means," replied the Ar- 
menian ; *' but I possess a talisman of 

k2 



196 THE RISE 

magical influence, which no disorder 
can resist. I would fain try its effi- 
cacy." 

*' This is not the first talisman that has 
been offered us, worthy Doctor," said the 
Eunuch, smiling incredulously. 

" But the first that has been offered on 
these terms,*' said the Armenian. " Let 
me cure the captive, and of the one 
hundred purses, a moiety shall belong to 
youi'self. Ay! so confident am 1 of suc- 
cess, that I deem it no hazard to com- 
mence our contmct by this surety." And 
so saying, the Armenian took from his 
finger a gorgeous carbuncle, and offered 
it to the Eunuch. The worthy dependant 
of the Seraglio had a great tast in jewel- 
lery. He examined the stone with ad- 
miration, and placed it on his finger with 
complacency. " I require no induce- 



OF ISKAXDER. 197 

ments to promote tlie interests of science, 
and the purposes of charity," said the Eu- 
nuch, with a patronizing- air. *' 'Tis 
assuredly a pretty stone, and, as the me- 
morial of an ing-enious stranger, whom 
I respect, I shall, with pleasure, retain 
it. You were saying something about a 
talisman. xVre you serious? I doubt 
not that there are means which might 
obtain you the desired trial ; but the 
Prince INIahomed is as violent when dis- 
pleased or disappointed as munificent 
when gratified. Cure this Christian cap- 
tive, and we may certainly receive the 
promised purses: fail, and your head ^will 
as assuredly be flung into the Seraglio 
moat, to say nothing of my own." 

" Most noble Sir !" said the Physician ; 
" I am willing- to undertake the experi- 
ment on the terms you mention. Rest 



198 THE RISE 

assured that the patient, if alive, must, 
with this remedy, speedily recover. You 
marvel ! Believe me, had you witnessed 
the cures which it has already eflfected, 
you would only wonder at its otherwise 
incredible influence." 

" You have the advantage," replied the 
Eunuch, " of addressing a man who has 
seen something of the world. I travel 
every year to Anatolia with the Prince 
Mahomed. Were I a narrow-minded 
bigot, who had never been five miles 
from Adrianople in the whole course of 
my life, I might indeed be sceptical. But 
I am a patron of science, and have heard 
of talismans. How much mi^-ht this rinsj 
-weigh, think you ?" 

*' I have heard it spoken of as a car- 
buncle of uncommon size," replied the 
Armenian. 



OF ISKANDER. 199 

*' Where did you say you lodged, Ha- 
kim ?'• 

'* At the Khan of Bedreddin." 

'* A very proper dwelling. Well, we 
shall see. Have you more jewels ? I 
might, perhaps, put you in the way of 
parting with some at good prices. The 
Khan of Bedreddin is very conveniently 
situated. 1 may, perhaps, towards even- 
ing, taste your coffee at the Khan of Bed- 
reddin, and we will talk of this said 
talisman. Allah be with you, worthy 
Hakim !" The Eunuch nodded, not 
without encouragement, and went his 
way. 

" Anxiety alone enabled me to keep 
my countenance," said Nicaeus. " A 
patron of science, forsooth 1 Of all the 
insolent, shallow-brained, mpacious cox- 
combs " 



^00 THE RISE 

" Hush, my friend !" said Iskander, 
with a smile. " The chief Eunuch of the 
heir apparent of the Turkish empire is a 
far greater man than a poor prince, or a 
proscribed rebel. This worthy can do 
our business, and I trust will. He clearly 
bites, and a richer bait will, perhaps, se- 
cure him. In the meantime, we must be 
patient, and remember whose destiny is 
at stake." 



X. 



The chief Eunuch did not keep the ad- 
venturous companions long in suspence ; 
for, before the Muezzin had announced 
the close of day from the minaret^, he 
had reached the Khan of Bedreddin, and 
inquired for the Armenian physician. 



OF ISKAXUER. (201 

** We have no time to lose," said the 
Eunuch to Iskander. " Brino' ^vith vou 
whatever you may require, and follow 
me." 

The Eunuch led the way, Iskander and 
NicfEus maintaining" a respectful distance. 
After proceeding down several streets, 
they arrived at the burial-ground, where 
they had conversed in the morning ; and 
when they had entered this more retired 
spot, the Eiuuich fell back, and addressed 
his companion. 

*' Now, worthy Hakim," he said, " if 
you deceive me f will never patronize a 
man of science again. I found an oppor- 
tunity of speaking to the Prince this af- 
ternoon of your talisman, and he has 
taken from my representations such a 
fancy for its immediate proof, that T found 
it quite impossible to postpone its trial 



202 THE RISE 

even until to-morrow. I mentioned the 
terms. I told the Prince your life was 
the pledge. I said nothing of the moiety 
of the reward, worthy Hakim. That is 
an affair between ourselves. I trust to 
your honour, and I always act thus with 
men of science." 

" I shall not disgrace my profession 
or your confidence, rest assured," re- 
plied Iskander. " And am I to see the 
captive this night ?" 

'' I doubt it not. Are you prepared ? 
We might, perhaps, gain a little time, if 
very necessary." 

" By no means, Sir ; Truth is ever 
prepared " 

1 bus conversing, they passed through 
the burial-ground, and approached some 
high, broad walls, forming a terrace, and 
planted with young sycamore-trees. The 



OF ISKANDER. 203 

Eunuch tapped, with his silver stick, at a 
small gate, which opened, and admitted 
them into a garden, full of large clumps 
of massy shrubs. Through these a wind- 
ing walk led for some way, and then 
conducted them to an open lawn, on 
which was situate a vast and irregular 
building. As they approached the pile, a 
young man of very imperious aspect 
rushed forward from a gate, and abruptly 
accosted Iskander. 

" Are you the Armenian Physician ?" 
he inquired. 

Iskander bowed assent. 

" Have you got your talisman ? You 
know the terms ? Cure this Christian 
girl and you shall name your own re- 
ward; fail, and I shall claim your forfeit 
head." 

" The terms are well understood, 



204 THE RISE 

mighty Prince," said Iskander, for the 
young man was no less a personage than 
the son of Amurath, and future con- 
queror of Constantinople ; " but I am 
confident there will be no necessity for 
the terror of Christendom claiming any 
other heads than those of his enemies." 

" Kaflis will conduct you at once to 
your patient," said Mahomed. " For 
myself, I cannot rest until 1 know the 
result of your visit. I shall wander about 
these gardens, and destroy the flowers, 
which is the only pleasure now left me." 

Kaflis motioned to his companions to 
advance, and they entered the Seraglio. 

At the end of a long gallery they came 
to a great portal, which Kaflis opened, 
and Iskander and Niceeus for a moment 
supposed that they had arrived at the 
chief hall of the Tower of Babel, but they 



OF ISKANDER. '205 

found the shrill din only proceeded from 
a large company of women, who were 
employed in distilling the rare atar of 
the jasmine flower. All their voices 
ceased on the entrance of the strangers, as 
if by a miracle ; but when they had ex- 
amined them, and observed that it was 
only a Physician and his boy, their awe, 
or their surprise, disappeared ; and they 
crowded round Iskander, some holding 
out their wrists, others lolling out their 
tongues, and some asking questions, which 
perplexed alike the skill and the modesty 
of the adventurous dealer in magical me- 
dicine. The annoyance, however, was 
not of great duration, for Kaflis so be- 
laboured their fair shoulders with his ofii- 
cial baton, that they instantly retreated 
with precipitation, uttering the most vio- 
lent shrieks, and bestowing on the Eunuch 



206 THE RISE 

SO many titles, that Iskander and his 
pag-e were quite astounded at the intui- 
tive knowledge which the imprisoned 
damsels possessed of that vocabulary of 
abuse, which is in general mastered only 
by the experience of active existence. 

Quitting this chamber, the Eunuch and 
his companions ascended a lofty staircase. 
They halted, at length, before a door. 
" This is the chamber of the tower," said 
their guide, " and here we shall find the 
fair captive." He knocked, the door was 
opened by a female slave, and Iskander 
and Nic8eus, with an anxiety they could 
with difficulty conceal, were ushered into 
a small but sumptuous apartment. In 
the extremity was a recess covered with 
a light gauzy curtain. The Eunuch bid- 
ding- them keep in the back-ground, ad- 
vanced, and cautiously withdrawing the 



OF ISKANDER. 207 

curtain slightly aside, addressed some 
words in a low voice to the inmate of the 
recess. In a few minutes the Eunuch 
beckoned to Iskander to advance, and 
whispered to him : ** She would not at 
first see you, but I have told her you are 
a Christian, the more the pity, and she 
consents." So saying, he withdrew the 
curtain, and exhibited a veiled female 
figure lying on a couch. 

*' Noble lady," said the Physician in 
Greek, which he had ascertained the 
Eunuch did not comprehend ; " pardon 
the zeal of a Christian friend. Though 
habited in this garb, I have served under 
your illustrious Sire. I should deem my 
life well spent in serving the daughter of 
the great Hunniades." 

*' Kind stranger," replied the captive, 
'* I was ill-prepared for such a meeting. 



208 THE RISE 

I thank you for your sympathy, but my 
sad fortunes are beyond human aid/' 

" God works by humble instruments, 
noble lady," said Iskander, " and with 
his blessing we may yet prosper." 

*' I fear that I must look to death as 
my only refug-e," replied Iduna, '* and 
still more, I fear that it is not so present 
a refuge as my oppressoi's themselves 
imagine. But you are a physician ; tell 
me then how speedily Nature will make 
me free." 

She held forth her hand, which Iskan- 
der took and involuntarily pressed. *' No- 
ble lady," he said, " my skill is a mere 
pretence to enter these walls. The only 
talisman I bear with me is a messas^e 
from vour friends." 

" Indeed !" said Iduna, in a very agi- 
tated tone. 



OF ISK.\NDER. 209 

" Restrain yourself, noble lady," said 
Iskander, interposing, " restrain yourself. 
Were you any other but the daughter of 
Hunniades 1 would not have ventured 
upon this perilous exploit. But I know 
that the Lady Id una has inherited some- 
thing more than the name of her great 
ancestors — their heroic soul. If ever there 
were a moment in her lile in which it 
behoved her to exert all her ener2fies, that 
moment has arrived. The physician who 
addresses her, and his attendant who 
waits at hand, are two of the Lady Idu- 
na's most devoted friends. There is no- 
thing that they will not hazard, to effect 
her delivery ; and they have matured a 
plan of escape which they are sanguine 
must succeed. Yet its completion will 
require, on her part, great anxiety of 
mind, greater exertion of body, danger, 



210 THE RISE 

fatig-ue, privation. Is the Lady Iduua 
prepared for all this endurance, and all 
this hazard ?" 

" Noble friend,'* replied Iduna, " for 
I cannot deem you a stranger, and none 
but a most chivalric knight could have 
entered upon this almost forlorn adven- 
ture ; you have not, I trust, miscalculated 
my character. I am a slave, and unless 
heaven will interpose, must soon be a dis- 
honoured one. My freedom and my fame 
are alike at stake. There is no danger, 
and no suffering which I will not gladly 
welcome, provided there be even a remote 
chance of regaining my liberty and se- 
curing my honour." 

'* You are in the mind I counted on. 
Now, mark my words, dear Lady. Seize 
an opportunity this evening of expressing 
to your gaolers that you have already ex- 



OF ISKANDER. £H 

perienced some benefit from my visit, 
and announce your rising* confidence in 
my skill. In the meantime I will make 
such a report that our daily meetings 
will not be difficult. For the present, 
farewell. The Prince Mahomed waits 
without, and I would exchange some 
words with him before I go." 

" And must we part without my being 
acquaiated with the generous friends to 
whom I am indebted for an act of devo- 
tion which almost reconciles me to my 
sad fate?" said Iduna. '* You will not, 
perhaps, deem the implicit trust reposed 
in you by one whom you have no interest 
to deceive, and who, if deceived, cannot 
be placed in a worse position than she at 
present fills, as a very gratifying mark of 
confidence, yet that trust is reposed in 
you ; and let me, at least, sooth the gall- 



212 THE RISE 

ing dreariness of my solitary houi's, by 
the recollection of the friends to whom I 
am indebted for a deed of friendship 
which has filled me ^vith a feeling of 
wonder from which 1 have not yet re- 
covered." 

*' The person who has penetrated the 
Seraglio of Constantinople in disguise to 
rescue the Lady Iduna," answered 
Iskander, " is the Prince Niceeus." 

" Nicaeus !" exclaimed Iduna, in an 
agitated tone. " The voice to which I 
listen is surely not that of the Prince 
Nicaeus ; nor the form on which I gaze/* 
she added, as she unveiled. Beside her 
stood the tall figure of the Armenian 
physician. She beheld his swarthy and 
unrecognized countenance. She cast her 
dark eyes around with an air of beautiful 
perplexity. 



OF ISKANDER. 219 

*' I am a friend of the Prince ?^icoeus," 
said the Physician. " He is here. Shall 
he advance ? Alexis," called out Iskan- 
der, not waiting for her reply. The page 
of the Physician came forward, but the 
Eunuch accompanied him. " All is 
right," said Iskander to Kaflis. " We 
are sure of our hundred purses. But, 
without doubt, with any other aid, the 
case were desperate." 

" There is but one God," said tlie 
Eunuch, polishing his carbuncle, with 
a visage radiant as the gem. " I never 
repented patronizing men of science. The 
Prince waits without. Come along !" 
He took Iskander by the arm. " Where 
is your boy ? What are you doing there, 
Sir ?" inquired the Eunuch, sharply, of 
Nicaeus, who was tarrying behind, and 
kissing the hand of Iduna. 

" I was asking the lady for a favour 



214 THE RISE 

to go to the cofFee-house with," replied 
Nicaeus, with pouting- lips ; " you forget 
that I am to have none of the hundred 
purses." 

** True/* said the Eunuch ; " there is 
something in that. Here, boy, here is a 
piastre for you. I like to encourage 
men of science, and all that belong to 
them. Do not go and spend it all in one 
morning, boy, and when the fair captive 
is cured, if you remind me, boy, perhaps 
I may give you another." 



XL 

Kaflis and his charge again reached 
the garden. The twilight was nearly 
past. A horseman galloped up to them, 
followed by several running footmen. It 
was the Prince. 



OF ISKANDER. 215 

" Well, Hakim," he inquired, in his 
usual abrupt style, " can you cure her ?" 

" Yes," answered Iskander, firmly. 

" Now listen, Hakim," said Mahom- 
ed. "I must very shortly leave the 
city, and proceed into Epirus at the 
head of our troops. I have sworn two 
things, and I have sworn them by the 
holy stone. Ere the new moon, I will 
have the heart of Iduna and the head of 
Iskander !" 

The Physician bowed. 

" If you can so restore the health of 
this Frangy girl," continued Mahomed, 
" that she may attend me within ten 
days into Epirus, you shall claim from 
my treasury what sum you like and be- 
come Physician to the Seraglio. Wliat 
say you ?" 

" My hope and my belief is," replied 



216 TUK RISE 

Iskander, " that within ten days she 
may breathe the air of Epirus." 

*' By my father's beard, you are a man 
after my own heart," exclaimed the 
Prince ; " and since thou dealest in 
talismans, Hakim, can you give me a 
charm that will secure me a meeting 
with this Epirot rebel within the term, 
so that I may keep my oath. What say 
you ? — what say you ?" 

" There are such spells,'' replied Iskan- 
der. " But mark, I can only secure the 
meeting, not the head." 

" That is my part," said Mahomed, 
with an arrogant sneer. " But the 
meeting, the meeting ?" 

" You know the Fountain of Kallista 
in Epirus. Its virtues are renowned." 

" I have heard of it." 

" Plunge your scimitar in its mid- 



OF ISKANDER. 217 

night waters thrice, on the eve of the 
New Moon, and each time summon the 
enemy you would desire to meet. He 
will not fail you." 

*' If you cure the captive, I will credit 
the legend, and keep the appointment," 
replied Mahomed, thoughtfully. 

** I have engaged to do that," replied 
the Physician. 

" Well, then, I shall redeem my 
pledge," said the Prince. 

** But mind," said the Physician, 
** while I engage to cure the lady and 
produce the warrior, I can secure your 
Highness neither the heart of the ont 
nor the head of the other." 

" Tis understood," said Mahomed. 



VOL. III. 



218 THE RIS 



XII. 

The Armenian Physician did not fail 
to attend his captive patient at an early 
hour on the ensuing morn. His patron 
Kaflis received him with an encouraging 
smile. " The talisman already works," 
said the Eunuch : " she has past a good 
night, and confesses to an improvement. 
Our purses are safe. JMethinks I already 
count the gold. But I say, worthy 
Hakim, come hither, come hither," and 
Kaflis looked around to be sure that no 
one was within hearing. " I say," and 
here he put on a very mysterious air in- 
deed, " the Prince is generous : you un- 
derstand } We go shares. We shall not 
quarrel. I never yet repented pa- 



OF ISKANDER. 219 

tronizing a man of science, and I am 
sure I never shall. The Prince you see is 
violent, but generous. I would not cure 
her too soon, eh ?" 

" You take a most discreet view of 
affairs," responded Iskander, with an air 
of complete assent, and they entered the 
chamber of the tower. 

Iduna performed her part with great 
dexterity ; but indeed it required less 
skill than herself and her advisers had at 
first imagined. Her malady, although it 
might have ended fatally, was in its ori- 
gin entirely mental, and the sudden 
prospect of freedom, and of restoration to 
her country and her family, at a moment 
when she had delivered herself up to 
despair, afforded her a great and instan- 
taneous benefit. She could not indeed 
sufficiently restrain her spirits, and smiled 

L 2 



220 THE RISE 

incredulously when Iskander mentioned 
the impending- exertion and fatignes with 
doubt and apprehension. His anxiety to 
return immediately toEpirus, determined 
him to adopt the measures for her rescue 
without loss of time, and on his third 
visit, he prepared her for making the 
great attempt on the ensuing morn. 
Hitherto Iskander had refrained from re- 
vealing himself to Iduna. He was in- 
duced to adopt this conduct by various 
considerations. He could no longer con- 
ceal from himself that the daughter of 
Hunniades exercised an influence over 
his feelings which he was unwilling to 
encourage. His sincere friendship for 
Niceeus, and his conviction that it was 
his present duty to concentrate all his 
thought and affection in the cause of 
his country, would have rendered him 



OF ISKANDER. 221 

anxious to have resisted any emotions of 
the kind, even could he have flattered 
himself that there was any chance of their 
being- returned by the object of his rising 
passion. But Iskander was as modest as 
he was brave and gifted. The disparity 
of age between himself and Iduna ap- 
peared an insuperable barrier to his 
hopes, even had there been no other 
obstacle. Iskander struggled with his 
love, and with his strong mind the strug- 
gle, though painful, was not without 
success. He felt that he was acting in a 
manner which must ultimately tend to 
the advantage of his country, the happi- 
ness of his friend, and perhaps the main- 
tenance of his own self-respect. For he 
had too much pride not to be very sen- 
sible to the bitterness of rejection. 

Had he perceived more indications of 



222 THE RISE 

a very cordial feeling subsisting between 
Nicgeus and Iduna, he would perhaps 
not have persisted in maintaining his 
disguise. But he had long suspected 
that the passion of the Prince of Athens 
was not too favourably considered by the 
daughter of Hunniades, and he was 
therefore exceedingly anxious that Ni- 
caeus should possess all the credit of the 
present adventure, which Iskander scarcely 
doubted, if successful, would allow Ni- 
caeus to urge irresistible claims to the 
heart of a mistress whom he had rescued 
at the peril of his life from slavery and 
dishonour, to offer rank, reputation, and 
love. Iskander took, therefore, several 
opportunities of leading Iduna to believe 
that he was merely a confidential .agent 
of Nicseus, and that the whole plan of her 
rescue from the Seraglio of Adrianople 



OF ISKANDER. 223 

had been planned by his young friend. 
In the mean time, during the three days 
on which they had for short intervals met, 
very few words had been interchanged 
between Nicaeus and his mistress. Those 
words, indeed, had been to him of the 
most inspiring nature, and expressed such 
a deep sense of gratitude, and such Uvely 
regard, that Nicaeus could no longer resist 
the delightful conviction that he had at 
length created a permanent interest in 
her heart. Often he longed to rush to 
her couch, and press her hand to his lips. 
Even the anticipation of future happi- 
ness could not prevent him from envying 
the good fortune of Iskander, who was 
allowed to converse with her without 
restraint ; and bitterly, on their return to 
the khan, did he execrate the pompous 
Eunuch for all the torture which he 



224 THE RISE 

occasioned him by his silly conversation, 
and the petty tyranny of office with 
which Kaflis always repressed his at- 
tempts to converse for a moment with 
Iduna. 

In the mean time all Adrianople 
sounded with the preparations for the 
immediate invasion of Epirus, and the 
return of Iskander to his country became 
each hour more urgent. Every thing 
being prepared, the adventurers deter- 
mined on the fourth morning to attempt 
the rescue. They repaired as usual to 
the Serail, and were attended by Kaflis to 
the chamber of the tower, who congra- 
tulated Iskander on their way on the 
rapid convalescence of the captive. When 
they had fairly entered the chamber, the 
Physician being somewhat in advance, 
Nicaeus, who was behind, commenced pro- 



OF ISKANDER. 225 

ceedings by knocking down the Eunuch, 
and Iskander instantly turning round to 
his assistance, they succeeded in g^agging 
and binding the alarmed and astonished 
Kaflis. Iduna then habited hei-self in a 
costume exactly similar to that worn by 
Niceeus, and which her friends had 
brought to her in their bag. Iskander 
and Iduna then immediately quitted the 
Serail without notice or suspicion, and 
hurried to the khan, where they mounted 
their horses, that were in readiness, and 
hastened without a moment's loss of time 
to a fountain without the gates, where 
they waited the arrival of Nicaeus with 
anxiety. After remaining a few minutes 
in the chamber of the tower, the Prince 
of Athens stole out, taking care to secure 
the door upon Kaflis. He descended the 
staircase, and escaped through the Serail 

l5 



iifi THE RISE 

without meeting any one, and had nearly 
reached the gate of the gardens, when he 
was challenged by some of the eunuch 
guard at a little distance. 

" Hilloa \" exclaimed one, *' I thought 
you passed just now ?*' 

** So I did," replied Niceeus with ner- 
vous effrontery ; *' but I came back for 
my bag, which I left behind," and giving 
them no time to reflect, he pushed his 
way through the gate with all the impu- 
dence of a page. He rushed through the 
burial ground, hurried through the streets, 
mounted his horse, and galloped through 
the gates. Iskander and Iduna were in 
sight, he waved his hand for them at 
once to proceed, and in a moment, with- 
out exchanging a word, they were all 
galloping at full speed, nor did they 
breathe their horses until sunset. 



OF ISKANDER. Hgf 

By nightfall they had reached a small 
wood of chestnut trees, where they rested 
for two hours, more for the sake of their 
steeds than their own refreshment, for 
anxiety prevented Iduna from indulging 
in any repose, as much as excitement 
prevented her from feeling any fatigue. 
Iskander lit a fire and prepared their 
rough meal, unharnessed the horses, and 
turned them out to their pasture. Ni- 
caeus made Iduna a couch of fern, and 
supported her head, while, in deference to 
his entreaties, she endeavoured in vain to 
sleep. Before midnight they were again 
on their way, and proceeded at a rapid 
pace towards the mountains, until a few 
hours before noon, when their horses 
began to sink under the united influence 
of their previous exertions and the in- 
creasing heat of the day. Iskander looked 



228 THE RISE 

serious, and often threw a backward glance 
in the direction of Adrianople. 

" We must be beyond pursuit," said 
Nicaeus. " I dare say poor Kaflis is still 
gagged and bound." 

" Could we but once reach the moun- 
tains," replied his companion, " I should 
have little fear, but I counted upon our 
steeds carrying us there without faltering. 
We cannot reckon upon more than three 
hours' start. Prince. Our friend Kaflis 
is too important a personage to be long 
missed." 

" The holy Virgin befriend us !" said 
the Lady Iduna. " I can urge my poor 
horse no more." 

They had now ascended a small rising 
ground, which gave them a wide pros- 
pect over the plain. Iskander halted and 
threw an anxious glance around him. 



OF ISKANDER. j!29 

** There are some horsemen in the dis- 
tance whom I do not like," said the Phy- 
sician. 

*' I see them," said Nicseus ; " travel- 
lers like ourselves." 

** Let us die sooner than be taken," 
said Iduna. 

" Move on," said the Physician, " and 
let me observe these horsemen alone. I 
would there were some forest at hand. 
In two hours we may gain the moun- 
tains." 

The daughter of Hunniades and the 
Prince of Athens descended the rising 
ground. Before them, but at a consi- 
derable distance, was a broad and rapid 
river, crossed by a ruinous Roman bridge. 
The opposite bank of the river was the 
termination of a narrow plain, which led 
immediately to the mountains. 



2.30 THE RISE 

" Fair Iduna, you are safe," said the 
Prince of Athens. 

" Dear Niceeus," replied his compa- 
nion, " imagine what I feel. It is too 
wild a moment to express my gratitude." 

" I trust that Iduna will never express 
her gratitude to Nicaeus," answered the 
Prince ; " it is not, I assure you, a fa- 
vourite word with him." 

Their companion rejoined them, urg- 
ing his wearied horse to its utmost speed. 

" Nicaeus !*' he called out, " halt !" 

They stopped their willing horses. 

" How now ! my friend ;" said the 
Prince ; " you look grave ?" 

" Lady Iduna !" said the Armenian, 
*' we are pursued." 

Hitherto the prospect of success, ^and 
the consciousness of the terrible destiny 
that awaited failure, had supported Iduna 



OF ISKANDER. 231 

under exertions, which under any other 
circumstances must have proved fatal. 
But to learn, at the very moment that 
she was congratulating- herself on the fe- 
licitous completion of their daring- enter- 
prise, that that dreaded failure was abso- 
lutely impending-, demanded too great 
an exertion of her exhausted energies. 
She turned pale; she lifted up her im- 
ploring hands and eyes to heaven in 
speechless agony, and then bending down 
her head, wept with unrestrained and 
harrowing violence. The distracted Ni- 
cseus sprung from his horse, endeavoured 
to console the almost insensible Iduna, 
and then woefully glancing at his fellow 
adventurer, wrung his hands in despair. 
His fellow adventurer seemed lost in 
thought. 

" They come," said Nicaeus, starting ; 



232 THE RISE 

" methinks I see one on the brow of the 
hill. Away ! fly ! Let us at least die 
fighting. Dear, dear Iduna, would that 
my life could ransom thine. O God ! 
this is indeed agony." 

'* Escape is impossible," said Iduna, in 
a tone of calmness which astonished them. 
" They must overtake us. Alas ! brave 
friends, I have brought ye to this ! 
Pardon me, pardon me ! I am ashamed 
of my selfish grief. Ascribe it to other 
causes than a narrow spirit and a weak 
mind. One course is alone left to us. 
We must not be taken prisoners. Ye are 
warriors, and can die as such. I am only 
a woman, but I am the daughter of 
Hunniades. Nicoeus, you are my father's 
friend ; I beseech you sheathe your dag- 
ger in my breast." 

The Prince in silent agony pressed his 



OF ISKANDER. 233 

hands to his sight. His limbs quivered 
with terrible emotion. Suddenly he ad- 
vanced and threw himself at the feet of 
his hitherto silent comrade. ** Oh ! Is- 
kander!'* exclaimed Nicaeus, '* great and 
glorious friend ! my head and heart are 
both too weak for these awful trials — 
save her, save her 1" 

" Iskander !" exclaimed the thunder- 
struck Iduna. *' Iskander !" 

" I have, indeed, the misfortune to be 
Iskander, beloved lady," he replied. 
" This is, indeed, a case almost of despe- 
ration, but if I have to endure more than 
most men, I have, to inspire me, influ- 
ences which fall to the lot of few — your- 
self and Epirus. Come ! Nicaeus, there is 
but one chance — we must qriin the bridge.* 
Thus speaking, Iskander caught Iduna 
in his arms, and remounting his steeds 



234 THE RISE 

and followed by the Prince of Athens, 
hurried towards the river. 

" The water is not fordable/* said Is- 
kander, when they had arrived at its 
bank. " The bridge I shall defend ; and 
it will go hard if I do not keep them at 
bay long- enough for you and Iduna to 
gain the mountains. Away ; think no 
more of me ; nay ! no tear, dear lady, or 
you will unman me. An inspiring smile, 
and all will go well. Hasten to Croia, 
and let nothing tempt you to linger in 
the vicinity, with the hope of my again 
joining you. Believe me, we shall meet 
again, but act upon what I say, as if they 
were my dying words. God bless you, 
Nicaeus ! No murmuring. For once let 
the Physician, indeed, command his page. 
Gentle lady, commend me to your fa- 
ther. Would I had such a daughter in 



OF ISKANDER. 235 

Epirus, to head my trusty brethren if I 
fall ! Tell the great Hunniades, my le- 
gacy to him is my country. Farewell, 
farewell !" 

'' I will not say farewell," exclaimed 
Iduna, *' I too can fight. I will stay and 
die with you." 

" See they come ! Believe me I shall 
conquer. Fly, fly, thou noble girl! 
Guard her well, Nicaeus. God bless 
thee, boy ! Live and be happy. Nay, 
nay, not another word. The farther ye 
are both distant, trust me, the stronger 
will be my arm. Indeed, indeed, I do 
beseech ye, fly 1" 

Niceeus placed the weeping Iduna in 
her saddle, and after leading her horse 
over the narrow and broken bridge, 
mounted his own, and then they ascended 
together the hilly and winding track. 



236 THE RISE 

Iskander watched them as they went. 
Often Iduna waved her kerchief to her 
forlorn champion. In the meantime 
Iskander tore off his Armenian robes and 
flung them into the river, tried his foot- 
ing on the position he had taken up, 
stretched his limbs, examined his dag- 
gers, flourished his scimitar. 

The bridge would only permit a single 
rider to pass abreast. It was supported 
by three arches, the centre one of very 
considerable size, the others small, and 
rising out of the shallow water on each 
side. In many parts the parapet wall 
was broken, in some even the pathway 
was almost impassable from the masses 
of fallen stone, and the dangerous fissures. 
In the centre of the middle arch was an 
immense key-stone, on which was sculp- 
tured, in high relief, an enormous hel- 



OF ISKANDER. 237 

met, which indeed gave, among the 
people of the country, a title to the 
bridge. 

A band of horsemen dashed at full 
speed, with a loud shout, down the hill. 
They checked their horses, when to their 
astonishment they found Iskander with 
his drawn scimitar, prepared to resist 
their passage. But they paused only for 
a moment, and immediately attempted 
to swim the river. But their exhausted 
horses drew back with a strong instinct 
from the rushing waters : one of the 
band alone, mounted on a magnificent 
black mare, succeeding in his purpose. 
The rider was half-way in the stream, his 
high-bred steed snorting and struggling 
in the strong current. Iskander, with 
the same ease as if he were plucking the 
ripe fruit from a tree, took up a pon- 



238 THE RISE 

derous stone, and hurled it with fatal 
precision at his adventurous enemy. The 
rider shrieked and fell, and rose no more : 
the mare, relieved from her burthen, ex- 
erted all her failing energies, and suc- 
ceeded in gaining the opposite bank. 
There, rolling herself in the welcome 
pasture, and neighing with a note of 
triumph, she revelled in her hard escape. 

** Cut down the Giaour !" exclaimed 
one of the horsemen, and he dashed at 
the bridge. His fragile blade shivered 
into a thousand pieces as it crossed the 
scimitar of Iskander, and in a moment 
his bleeding head fell over the parapet. 

Instantly the whole band, each emu- 
lous of revenging his comrades, rushed 
without thought at Iskander, and endea- 
voured to overpower him by their irre- 
sistible charge. His scimitar flashed like 



OF ISKANDER. 239 

lig-htning. The two foremost of his ene- 
mies fell, but the impulse of the numbers 
prevailed, and each instant, although 
dealing" destruction with every blow, he 
felt himself losing ground. At length he 
was on the centre of the centre arch, an 
eminent position, Avhich allowed him for 
a moment to keep them at bay, and gave 
him breathing time. Suddenly he made 
a desperate charge, clove the head of the 
leader of the band in two, and beat them 
back several yards ; then swiftly return- 
ing to his former position, he summoned 
all his supernatural strength, and stamp- 
ing on the mighty, but mouldering* key- 
stone, he forced it from its form, and 
broke the masonry of a thousand years. 
Amid a loud and awful shriek, horses and 
horsemen, and the dissolving fragments 
of the scene for a moment mingled as 



240 THE RISE 

it were in airy chaos, and then plunged 
with a horrible plash into the fatal depths 
below. Some fell, and, stunned by the 
massy fragments, rose no more ; others 
struggled again into light, and gained 
with difficulty their old shore. Amid 
them, Iskander, unhurt, swam like a 
river God, and stabbed to the heart the 
only strong swimmer that was making 
his way in the direction of Epirus. 
Drenched and exhausted, Iskander at 
length stood upon the opposite margin, 
and wranghis garments, while he watched 
the scene of strange destruction. 

Three or four exhausted wretches were 
lying bruised and breathless on the op- 
posite bank : one drowned horse was 
stranded near them, caught by the rushes. 
Of all that brave company the rest had 
vanished, and the broad, and blue, and 



OF ISKANDER. 241 

sunny waters rushed without a shadow 
beneath the two remaining- arches. 

'* Iduna ! thou art safe," exclaimed 
Iskander. " Now for Epirus !" So say- 
ing", he seized the black mare, renovated 
by her bath and pasture, and vaulting on 
her back, was in a few minutes bounding 
over his native hills. 



XIII. 

In the meantime let us not forget the 
Prince of Athens and the Lady Iduna. 
These adventurous companions soon lost 
sight of their devoted champion, and en- 
tered a winding ravine, which gradually 
' brought them to the summit of the fii*st 
chain of the Epirot mountains. From it 
they looked down upon a vast and rocky 

VOL. 111. M 



242 THE RISE 

valley, through which several mule tracks 
led in various directions, and entered the 
highest barrier of the mountains which 
rose before them, covered with forests of 
chestnut and ilex. Niceeus chose the 
track which he considered least tempting 
to pursuit, and towards sunset they had 
again entered a ravine washed by a 
mountain stream. The course of the 
waters had made the earth fertile and 
beautiful. Wild shrubs of gay and plea- 
sant colours refreshed their wearied eye- 
sight, and the perfume of aromatic plants 
invigorated their jaded senses. Upon 
the bank, too, of the river a large cross of 
roughly carved wood brought comfort to 
their Christian hearts, and while the 
holy emblem filled them with hope and 
consolation, and seemed an omen of re- 
fuge from their Moslemin oppressors, a 



OF ISKANDER. 24-3 

venerable Eremite, with a long white 
beard descending over his dark robes, 
and leaning on a statf of thorn, came 
forth from an adjoining cavern to breathe 
the evening air and pour forth his even- 
ing orisons. 

Iduna and Niceeus had hitherto prose- 
cuted their sorrowful journey almost in 
silence. Exhausted with anxiety, afHic- 
tion, and l)odily fatigue, with diliiculty 
the daughter of Hunniades could pre- 
serve her seat upon her steed. One 
thought alone interested her, and by its 
engrossing influence maintained her 
under all her sufferings — the memory ot 
Iskander. Since she first met him, at 
the extraordinary interview in her father"? 
pavilion, often had the image of the hero 
recurred to her fancy, often had she 
mused over his great qualities and strange 

M 2 



244 THE RISE 

career. His fame, so dangerous to female 
hearts, was not diminished by his pre- 
sence. And now, when Iduna re- 
collected that she was indebted to him 
for all that she held dear, that she owed 
to his disinterested devotion, not only 
life, but all that renders life desirable, — 
honour and freedom, country and kin- 
dred, — that image was invested with asso- 
ciations and with sentiments, which, had 
Iskander himself been conscious of their 
existence, would have lent redoubled vi- 
gour to his arm, and fresh inspiration to 
his energy. More than once Iduna had 
been on the point of inquiring of Nicaeus 
the reason which had induced alike him 
and Iskander to preserve so strictly the 
disguise of his companion. But a feel- 
ing which she did not choose to analyze, 
struggled successfully with her curiosity : 



S 



OF ISKANDER. 21o 

she felt a reluctance to speak of Iskandcr 
to the Prince of Athens. In the mean- 
time Niceeus himself was not apparently 
very anxious of conversing upon the sul)- 
ject, and after the first rapid expressions 
of fear and hope as to the situation of 
their late comrade, they relapsed into 
silence, seldom broken by Nicaeus, but to 
deplore the sufferings of his mistress, — 
lamentations which Iduna answered with 
a faint smile. 

The refreshing scene wherein they had 
now entered, and the cheering appearance 
of the Eremite were subjects of mutual 
congratulation, and Niceeus, somewhat 
advancing, claimed the attention of the 
holy man, announcing their liaith, im- 
prisonment, escape, and sufferings, and 
entreating hospitality and refuge. The 
Eremite pointed with his staff to the 



246 THE RISE 

winding- path, which ascended the bank 
of the river to the cavern, and welcomed 
the pilgrims in the name of their blessed 
Saviour to his wild abode and simple 
fare. 

The cavern widened when they en- 
tered, and comprised several small apart- 
ments. It ■ was a work of the early 
Christians, who. had found a refuge in 
their days of persecution, and Art had 
completed the beneficent design of Na- 
ture. The cavern was fresh, and sweet, 
and clean. Heaven smiled upon its 
pious inmate through an aperture in the 
roof; the floor was covered with rushes; 
in one niche rested a brazen cross, and in 
another a perpetual lamp burnt before a 
picture, where Madonna smiled / with 
meek tenderness upon her young" Divi- 
nity. 



OF ISKANDER. ^47 

The Eremite placed upon a block of 
wood, the surface of which he had hiiixself 
smoothed, some honey, some dried fish, 
and a wooden bowl filled with the pure 
stream that flowed beneath them : a sim- 
ple meal but welcome. His guests seated 
themselves upon a rushy couch, and 
while they refreshed themselves, he gently 
inquired the history of their adventures. 
As it was evident that the Eremite, from 
her apparel, mistook the sex of Iduna, 
Nicaeus thought fit not to undeceive him, 
but passed her off as his brother. He 
described themselves as two Athenian 
youths, who had been captured while 
serving as volunteers under the great 
Hunniades, and who had efi^ected their 
escape from Adrianople under circum- 
stances of great peril and difficulty ; and 
when he had gratified the Eremite's 



248 THE RISE 

curiosity respecting their Christian bre- 
thren in Paynim lands, and sympatheti- 
cally marvelled with him at the advancing 
fortunes of the Crescent, Nicaeus, who 
perceived that Iduna stood in great need 
of rest, mentioned the fatigues of his 
more fragile brother, and requested per- 
mission for him to retire. Whereupon 
the Eremite himself, fetching a load of 
fresh rushes, arranged them in one of the 
cells, and invited the fair Iduna to repose. 
The daughter of Hunniades first hum- 
bling herself before the altar of the Vir- 
gin, and offering her gratitude for all the 
late mercies vouchsafed unto her, and 
then bidding a word of peace to her 
host and her companion, withdrew to 
her hard-earned couch, and soon, was 
buried in a sleep as sweet and innocent as 
herself. 



OF ISKANDER. 249 

But repose fell not upon the eye-lids of 
Nicreus in spite of all his labours. The 
heart of the Athenian Prince was dis- 
tracted by the two most powerful of 
passions — Love and Jealousy — and when 
the Eremite, pointing out to his guest his 
allotted resting-place, himself retired to 
his resiiilar and simple slumbers, Niceeus 
quitted the cavern, and standing upon the 
bank of the river, gazed in abstraction 
upon the rushing waters foaming in the 
moonlight. The Prince of Athens, with 
many admirable qualities, was one of 
those men who are influenced only by 
their passions, and who, in the aflairs of 
life, are invariably guided by their ima- 
gination instead of their reason. At pre- 
sent all thought and feeling, all consider- 
ations, and all circumstances, merged in 
the overpowering love he entertained for 

M 5 



250 THE RISE 

Iduna, his determination to obtain her at 
all cost and peril, and his resolution that 
she should never again meet Iskaiider, 
except as the wife of Nicaeus. Compared 
with this paramount object, the future 
seemed to vanish. The emancipation of 
his country, the welfare of his friend, 
even the maintenance of his holy creed, all " 
those great and noble objects for Avhich, 
under other circumstances, he would have 
been prepared to sacrifice his fortune and 
his life, no longer interested or influenced 
him ; and while the legions of the Cres- 
cent were on the point of pouring into 
Greece to crush that patriotic and Chris- 
tian cause over which Iskander and him- 
self had so often mused, whose interests 
the disinterested absence of Iskander, oc- 
casioned solely by his devotion to Ni- 
caeus, had certainly endangered, and per- 



OF ISKANDER. 251 

haps, could the events of the last few 
hours be known, even sacrificed, the 
Prince of Alliens resolved, unless Iduna 
would consent to become his, at once to 
carry off tlie daug^hter of Hunniades to 
some distant country. Nor indeed, even 
with his easily excited vanity, was Ni- 
caeus sanguine of obtaining- his purpose 
by less violent means. He was already a 
rejected suitor, and under circumstances 
which scarcely had left hope. Nothing' 
but the sole credit of her chivalric rescue 
could perhaps have obtained for him the 
interest in the heart of Iduna which he 
coveted. For while this exploit proffered 
an irresistible claim to her deepest grati- 
tude, it indicated also, on the part of her 
deliverer, the presence and possession of 
all those great qualities, the absence of 
which in the character and conduct ci' 



252 THE RISE 

her suitor, Iduna had not, at a former 
period, endeavoured to conceal to be the 
principal cause of his rejection. And 
now, by the unhappy course of circum- 
stances, the very deed on which he count- 
ed, with sanguine hope, as the sure means 
of his success, seemed as it were to have 
placed him in a still inferior situation 
than before. The constant society of his 
mistress had fanned the flame which, 
apart from her and hopeless, he had en- 
deavoured to repress, to all its former 
force and ardour ; while, on the other 
handj he could not conceal from himself, 
that Iduna must feel that he had played 
in these great proceedings but a second- 
ary part ; that all the genius and all the 
generosity of the exploit rested with Is- 
kander, who, after having obtained her 
freedom by so much energy, peril, saga- 



i 



OF ISKANDER. 253 

city and skill, had secured it by a de- 
voted courage which might shame all the 
knights of Christendom, perhaps, too, 
had secured it by his own life. 

What if Iskander were no more ? It 
was a great contingency. The eternal 
servitude of Greece, and the shameful 
triumph of the Crescent, were involved, 
perhaps, in that single event. And could 
the possession of Iduna compensate for 
such disgrace and infamy ? Let us not 
record the wild response of passion. 

It was midnight ere the restless Nicaeus, 
more exhausted by his agitating reverie, 
than by his previous exertions, returned 
into the cavern, and found refuge in 
sleep from all his disquietudes. 



2o4> THE RISE 



XIV. 

The Eremite rose with the Sun ; and 
while he was yet at matins, was joined 
by Iduna, refreshed and cheerful after 
her unusual slumbers. After performing 
their devotions, her venerable host pro- 
posed that they should g-o forth and en- 
joy the morning air. So, descending the 
precipitous bank of the river, he led the 
way to a small glen, the bed of a tribu- 
tary rivulet, now nearly exhausted. 
Beautiful clumps of birch-trees, and tall 
thin poplars, rose on each side among 
the rocks which were covered with bright 
mosses, and parasitical plants of gay and 
various colours. One side of the glen 
was touched with the golden and grateful 



OF ISKANDER. 255 

beams of the rising- Sun, and the other 
was in deep shadow. 

" Here you can enjoy nature and free- 
dom in security ;" said the Eremite, "for 
your enemies, if they have not already 
given up their pursuit, will scarcely 
search this sweet solitude/* 

'* It is indeed sweet, holy father," said 
Iduna ; " but the captive, who has es- 
caped from captivity, can alone feel all 
its sweetness.*' 

*' It is true," said the Eremite ; " I 
also have been a captive." 

" Indeed ! holy father. To the Infi- 
dels ?" 

" To the Infidels, ^-entle pilgrim." 

" Have you been at Adrianople ?" 

" My oppressors were not the Paynim," 
replied the Eremite, '' but they were 
enemies far more dire — my own evil pas- 



2,56 THE RISE 

sions. Time was when my eye sparkled 
like thine, j^entle pilgrim, and my heart 
was not as pure/' 

" God is merciful," said Iduna, " and 
without his aid, the strongest are but 
shadows." 

" Ever think so," replied the Eremite, 
'' and you will deserve rather his love 
than his mercy. Thirty long years have 
I spent in this solitude, meditating upon 
the past, and it is a theme yet fertile in 
instruction. My hours are never heavy, 
and Memory is to me what Action is to 
other men," 

'• You have seen much, holy father ?*' 

" And felt more. Yet you will per- 
haps think the result of all my experience 
very slight, for I can only say unto thee, 
trust not in thyself." 

" It is a great truth," remarked Iduna, 
'' and leads to a higher one." 



OF ISKANDER. 25? 

** Even so," replied the Eremite. " We 
are full of wisdom in old age, as in winter 
this river is full of water, but the fire of 
youth, like the summer Sun, dries up the 
stream." 

Iduna did not reply. The Eremite 
attracted her attention to a patch of cresses 
on the opposite bank of the stream. 
" Every morn I rise only to discover 
fresh instances of omnipotent benevo- 
lence," he exclaimed. " Yesterday ye 
tasted my honey and my fish. To-day I 
can offer ye a fresh dainty. We will 
break our fast in this pleasant glen. Rest 
ihou here, gentle youth, and I will sum- 
mon thy brother to our meal. I fear me 
much he does not bear so contented a 
spirit as thyself." 

*' He is older, and has seen more," re- 
plied Iduna. 



'25S THE RISE 

The Eremite shook his head, and lean- 
ing on his staff, returned to the cavern. 
Iduna remained, seated on a mossy rock, 
listening to the awakening birds, and 
musing over the fate of Iskander. While 
she was indulging in this reverie, her 
name was called. She looked up with a 
blush, and beheld Nicseus. 

'' How fares my gentle comrade ?" in- 
quired the Prince of Athens. 

" As well as I hope you are, dear Ni- 
caeus. We have been indeed fortunate in 
finding so kind a host." 

" I think I may now congratulate you 
on your safety," said the Prince. " This 
unfrequented pass will lead us in two 
days to Epirus, nor do I indeed now fear 
pursuit." / 

" Acts and not words must express in 
future how much we owe to you,'" said 



OF ISKAXDER. O.59 

Iduna. ''My joy would be complete if 
my father only knew of our safety, and 
if our late companion were here to share 
it." 

" Fear not for my friend," replied 
Niceeus. " I have faith in the fortune of 
liikander." 

" If any one could succeed under such 
circumstances, he doubtless is the man," 
rejoined Iduna; " but it was indeed an 
awful crisis in his fate." 

" Trust me, dear lady, it is wise to 
banish gloomy thoug-hts." 

" We can give him only our thoughts," 
said Iduna, " and when we remember 
how much is dependent on his life, can 
they be cheerful ?" 

" Mine must be so, when I am in the 
presence of Iduna ;" replied Niceeus. 
fc - The daughter of Ilunniades gathered 



2(10 THE RISE 

moss from the rock, and threw it into 
the stream. 

" Dear lady," said the Prince of 
Athens, seating himself by her side, and 
stealing her gentle hand. " Pardon me, 
if an irrepressible feeling at this moment 
impels me to xecur to a subject, which, I 
would fain hope, were not so unpleasing 
to you, as once unhappily you deemed it. 
Oh ! Iduna, Iduna, best and dearest, we 
are once more together ; once more I 
gaze upon that unrivalled form, and listen 
to the music of that matchless voice. I 
sought you, I perhaps violated my pledge, 
but T sought you in captivity and sorrow. 
Pardon me, pity me, Iduna ! Oh ! 
Iduna, if possible, love me!" 

She turned away her head, she turned 
away her streaming eyes. " It is impos- 
sible not to love my deliverer," she re- 



OF ISKANDER. 26l 

plied, in a low and tremnlous voice, 
'* even could he not prefer the many 
other claims to affection -which are pos- 
sessed by the Prince of Athens. I was 
not prepared for this renewal of a most 
painful subject, perhaps under no cir- 
cumstances ; but least of all, under 
those in which we now find our- 
selves." 

** Alas!" exclaimed the Prince; ''I 
can no longer controul my passion. My 
life, not my happiness merely, depends 
upon Iduna becoming mine. Bear with 
me, my beloved, bear with me ! Were 
k you Nicaeus, you too would need forgive- 
ness." 

" I beseech you, cease !" exclaimed 
Iduna, in a firmer voice ; and, withdraw- 
ing her hand, she suddenly rose. " This 
is neither the time nor place for such 



2G2 THE RISE 

conversatiou . I have not forgotten that, 
but a few days back, I was a hopeless cap- 
tive, and that my liie and fame are even 
now in danger. Great mercies have been 
vouchsafed to me ; but still I perhaps 
need the hourly interposition of heavenly 
aid. Other than such worldly thoughts 
should fill my mind, and do. Dear Ni- 
caeus," she continued, in a more soothing 
tone, " you have nobly commenced a 
most heroic enterprize : fulfil it in like 
spirit." 

He would have replied ; but at this 
moment, the staff of the Eremite sounded 
among the rocks. Baffled, and dark with 
rage and passion, the Prince of Athens 
quitted Iduna, and strolled towards the 
upper part of the glen, to conceal his 
anger and disappointment. 

•' Eat, gentle youth," said the Eremite. 



OF ISKANDER. 268 

'* Will not thy brother join us ? What 
may be his name ?" 

" NicaBus, holy father." 

" And thine V* 

Iduna blushed and hesitated. At 
leng-th, in her confusion, she replied 
" Iskandcr." 

" Niccieus!" called out the Emerite, 
" Iskander and myself await thee !" 

Iduna trembled. She was ag-reeably 
surprised when the Prince returned with 
a smihng countenance, and joined in the 
meal, with many cheerful words. 

" Now, I propose," said the Eremite, 
" that youi-self and your brother Iskander 
should tarry with me some days, if, in- 
deed, my simple fare have any tempta- 
tion." 

** I thank thee, holy father," replied 
Nicseus, '' but our affairs are urgent ; nor 



264 THE RISE 

indeed could I have tarried here at all, 
had it not been for my young Iskander 
here, who, as you may easily believe, is 
little accustomed to his late exertions. 
But, indeed, towards sunset, we must 
proceed." 

" Bearing with us," added Iduna, '' a 
most grateful recollection of our host." 

" God be with ye, wherever ye may 
proceed," replied the Eremite. 

•' My trust is indeed in him," rejoined 
Iduna. 



XV. 

And so, two hours before sunset, 
mounting their refreshed horses, Nicaeus 
and Tduna quitted, with many kind 
words, the cavern of the Eremite, and 



OF ISKANDER. ^65 

took their way along the winding bank 
of the river. Throughout the moonlit 
night they travelled, ascending the last 
and highest chain of mountains, and 
reaching the summit by dawn. The 
cheerful light of morning revealed to 
them the happy plains of a Christian 
country. With joyful spirits they de- 
scended into the fertile land, and stopped 
at a beautiful Greek village, embowered 
in orchards and groves of olive-trees. 

The Prince of Athens instantly in- 
quired for the Primate, or chief person- 
age of the village, and was conducted to 
his house ; but its master, he was in- 
formed, was without, supervising the 
commencement of the vintage. Leaving 
Iduna with the family of the Primate, 
Nicoeus went in search of him. The 
vineyard was full of groups, busied in the 

VOL. III. N 



^66 THE RISE 

most elegant and jo}ous of human occu- 
pations, gathering", with infinite bursts of 
merriment, the harvest of the vine. 
Some mounted on ladders, fixed against 
the festooning branches, plucked the rich 
bunches, and threw them below, where 
girls, singing in chorus, caught them in 
panniers, or their extended drapery. In 
the centre of the vineyard, a middle-aged 
man watched with a calm, but vigilant 
eye, the whole proceedings, and occa- 
sionally stimulated the indolent, or 
prompted the inexperienced. 

" Christo !" said the Prince of Athens, 
Avhen he had approached him. The Pri- 
mate turned round, but evidently did 
not immediately recognize the person who 
addressed him. 

" I see," continued the Prince, '' that 
my meditated caution was unnecessary. 



OF ISKANDER. 2(J7 

My strange garb is a sufficient dis- 
guise." 

** The Prince Nicaeus !" exclaimed the 
Primate. '' He is, indeed, disguised, but 
will, I am sure, pardon his faithful ser- 
vant." 

" Not a word, Christo 1" replied the 
Prince. " To be brief. I have crossed the 
mountains from Roumelia, and have only 
within this hour recognized the spot 
whither I have chanced to arrive. I have 
a companion with me. I would not be 
known. You comprehend } Aiikirs of 
state. I take it for granted that there 
are none here who will recognize me, 
after three years' absence, in this 
dress." 

** You may feel secure, my Lord," re- 
plied Christo. *' If you puzzled me, who 
have known you since you were no big- 

N 2 



5268 THE RISE 

ger than this bunch of grapes, you will 
quite confound the rest." 

" Tis well. I shall stay here a day or 
two, in order to give them an opportunity 
to prepare for my reception. In the 
mean time, it is necessary to send on a 
courier at once. You must manage all 
this for me, Christo. How are your 
daughters ?" 

" So, so, please your Highness,*' re- 
plied Christo. " A man with seven 
daughters has got trouble for every day in 
the week." 

'' But not when they are as pretty as 
your's are ?" 

*' Poll ! poll ! Handsome is that hand- 
some does ; and as for Alexina, she wants 
to be married." 

'' Very natural. Let her marry, by all 
means." 



I 



OF ISKANDER. 269 

** But Helena wants to do the same." 

" More natural still ; for, if possible, 
she is prettier For my part, I could 
marry them both." 

" Ay, ay ! that is all very well ; but 
handsome is that handsome does. I 
have no objection to Alexina marrying, 
and even Helena; but tlien there is 
Lais ." 

" Hah ! hah ! hah !" exclaimed the 
Prince. ** I see, my dear Christo, that 
my foster sisters give you a very proper 
portion of trouble. However, I must be 
off to my travelling companion. Come 
in as soon as you can, my dear fellow, and 
we will settle every thing. A good vin- 
tage to you, and only as much mischief 
as necessary." So saying, the Prince 
tripped away. 

" Well ! who would have thought of 



270 THE RISE 

seeing him here !" exclaimed the worthy 
Primate. " The same gay dog as ever ! 
What can he have been doing in Rou- 
melia ? Affairs of state, indeed ! I'll 
wager my new Epiphany scarf, that, 
whatever the affairs are, there is a pretty 
girl in the case." 



XVI. 

The fair Iduna, after all her perils and 
sufferings, was at length sheltered in safety 
under a kind and domestic roof. Alexina, 
and Helena, and Lais, and all the other sis- 
ters emulated each other in the attentions 
which they lavished upon the two bro- 
thers, but especially the youngest. Their 
kindness, indeed, was only equalled by 
their ceaseless curiosity, and had they 



OF ISKANDER. ^Jl 

ever waited for the answers of Iduna to 
their questions, the daughter of Ilunni- 
ades might, perhaps, have heeu some- 
what puzzled to reconcile her responses 
with probability. Helena answered the 
questions of Alexina : Lais anticipated 
even Helena. All that Iduna had to do, 
was to smile and be silent, and it was 
universally agreed that Iskander was sin- 
gularly shy as well as excessively hand- 
some. In the meantime, when Niceeus 
met Iduna in the evening of the second 
day of their visit, he informed her that 
he had been so fortunate as to resume an 
acquaintance with an old companion in 
aruLsin the person of a neighbouring noble, 
who had invited them to rest at his castle at 
the end of their next day's journey. He 
told her likewise that he had dispatched 
a courier to Croia to inquire after Iskan- 



272 THE RISE 

der, who, he expected, in the course of a 
very few days, would bring- them intelli- 
gence to guide their future movements, 
and decide whether they should at once 
proceed to the capital of Epirus, or ad- 
vance into Bulgaria, in case Hunniades 
was still in the field. On the morrow, 
therefore, they proceeded on their jour- 
ney. Nicaeus had procured a litter for 
Iduna, for which her delicate health was 
an excuse to Alexina and her sisters, and 
they were attended by a small body of 
well-armed cavalry, for according to the 
accounts which Nicaeus had received, the 
country was still disturbed. They de- 
parted at break of day, Nicaeus riding by 
the side of the litter, and occasionally 
making the most anxious inquiries kfter 
the well-being of his fair charge. An 
hour after noon they rested at a well, 



OF ISKANDER. 273 

surrounded by olive trees, until the ex- 
treme heat was somewhat allayed ; and 
then remounting, proceeded in the direc- 
tion of an undulating' ridge of green hills, 
that partially intersected the wide plain. 
Towards sunset the PrinceW Athens with- 
drew the curtains of the litter, and called 
the attention of Iduna to a veiy fair 
castle, rising on a fertile eminence and 
sparkling in the quivering beams of dying 
light. 

" I fear," said Nicaeus, " that my friend 
Justinian will scarcely have returned, 
but we are old comrades, and he desired 
me to act as his Seneschal. For your 
sake I am sorry, Iduna, for I feel con- 
vinced that he would please you." 

" It is, indeed, a fair castle," replied 
Iduna, ** and none but a true knight de- 
serves such a noble residence." 

N 5 



274 THE RISE 

While she spoke the commander of the 
escort sounded his bugle, and they com- 
menced the ascent of the steep, a wind- 
ing* road, cut through a thick wood of 
evergreen shrubs. The gradual and easy 
ascent soon brought them to a portal 
flanked with towers, which admitted them 
into the outworks of the fortification. 
Here they found several soldiers on guard, 
and the commander again sounding his 
bugle, the gates of the castle opened, and 
the Seneschal, attended by a suite of 
many domestics, advanced and welcomed 
Nicaeus and Iduna. The Prince ot 
Athens dismounting, assisted his fair 
companion from the litter, and leading 
her by the hand, and preceded by the 
Seneschal, entered the castle. 

They passed through a magnificent 
hall, hung with choice armour, and as- 



OF ISKANDER. 275 

cending a staircase, of Pentelic marble, 
were ushered into a suite of lofty cham- 
bers, lined with Oriental tapestry, and 
furnished with many costly couches and 
cabinets. While they admired a spec- 
tacle so different to any thing they had 
recently beheld or experienced, the Se- 
neschal, followed by a number of slaves 
in splendid attire, advanced and offered 
them rare and choice refreshments, coffee 
and confectionary, sherbets and spiced 
wines. When they had partaken of this 
elegant cheer, Nicaeus intimated to the 
Seneschal that the Lady Iduna might 
probably wish to retire, and instantly a 
discreet matron, followed by six most 
beautiful girls, each bearing a fragrant 
torch of cinnamon and roses, advanced 
and offered to conduct the Lady Iduna to 
her apartments. 



276 THE RISE 

The matron and her company of mai- 
dens conducted the daughter of Hunni- 
ades down a long gallery, which led to a 
suite of the prettiest chambers in the 
world. The first was an ante-chamber, 
painted like a bower, but filled with the 
music of living birds ; the second, which 
was much larger, was entirely covered 
with A^enetian mirrors, and resting on a 
bright Persian carpet, were many couches 
of crimson velvet, covered with a variety 
of sumptuous dresses ; the third room was 
a bath, made in the semblance of a gigan- 
tic shell. Its roof was of transparent ala- 
baster, glowing with shadowy light. 



OF ISKANDER. 277 



XVII. 

A flourish of trumpets announced the 
return of the Lady Iduna, and the Prince 
of Athens, magnificently attired, came 
forward with a smile and led her, with a 
compliment on her resuming the dress of 
her sex, if not of her country, to the ban- 
quet. Iduna was not uninfluenced by 
that excitement which is insensibly pro- 
duced by a sudden change of scene and 
circumstances, and especially by an un- 
expected transition from hardship, peril, 
and suffering, to luxury, security, and 
enjoyment. Their spirits were elevated 
and gay : she smiled upon Nicaeus with 
a cheerful sympathy. They feasted, they 



278 THE RISE 

listened to sweet music, they talked over 
their late adventures, and animated by 
their own enjoyment, they became more 
sanguine as to the fate of Iskander. 

*' In two or three days we shall know 
more," said Nicaeus. '' In the mean- 
time, rest is absolutely necessary to you. 
It is only now that you will begin to be 
sensible of the exertion you have made. 
If Iskander be at Croia, he has already 
informed your father of your escape ; if 
he have not arrived, I have arranged that 
a courier shall be dispatched to Hun- 
niades from that city. Do not be anx- 
ious. Try to be happy. I am myself 
sanguine that you will find all well. 
Come, pledge me your father's health, 
fair lady, in this goblet of Tenedos ! " 

" How know I that at this mo- 
ment he may not be at the point of 



OF ISKANDER. 279 

death ?" replied Iduna. " When I am 
absent from those I love, I dream only of 
their unhappiness." 

" At this moment also," rejoined 
Nicaeus, *' he dreams perhaps of your im- 
prisonment among- barbarians. Yet how 
mistaken ! Let that consideration sup- 
port you. Come ! here is to the Ere- 
mite." 

*' As willing-, if not as sumptuous a 
host as our present one," said Iduna; 
" and when, by-the-bye, do you think 
that your friend, the Lord Justinian, will 
arrive." 

" Oh ! never mind him," said Nicaeus. 
" He would have arrived to-morrow, but 
the great news which I gave him has pro- 
bably chan2;"ed his })lans. I told him of 
the approaching invasion, and he has 
perhaps found it necessary to visit the 



280 THE RISE 

neighbouring chieftains, or even to go on 
to Croia." 

" Well-a-day 1" exclaimed Iduna, " I 
would we were in my father's camp!" 

"We shall soon be there, dear lady," 
replied the Prince. " Come, worthy 
Seneschal," he added, turning to that 
functionary, " drink to this noble lady's 
happy meeting with her friends." 



XVIII. 

Three or four days passed away at the 
castle of Justinian, in which Nicteus used 
his utmost exertions to divert the anxiety 
of Iduna. One day was spent in exa- 
mining the castle, on another he amused 
her with a hawking party, on a third he 
carried her to the neighbouring ruins of 



OF ISKANDER. 281 

a temple, and read his favourite iEschylus 
to her amid its lone and elegant columns. 
It was impossible for any one to be more 
amiable and entertaining-, and Iduna 
could not resist from recognizing his 
many virtues and accomplishments. The 
courier had not yet returned from Croia, 
which Niceeus accounted for by many 
satisfactory reasons. The suspence, how- 
ever, at length became so painful to 
Iduna, that she proposed to the Prince 
of Athens that they should, without 
further delay, proceed to that city. As 
usual, Nicaeus was not wanting in many 
plausible arguments in favour of their 
remaining at the castle, but Iduna w^as 
resolute. 

** Indeed, dear Nicaeus," she said, "my 
anxiety to see my father, or hear from 
him, is so great, that there is scarcely any 



282 THE RISE 

danger which 1 would not encounter to 
gratify my wish. I feel that I have 
already taxed your endurance too much. 
But we are no longer in a hostile land, 
and guards and guides are to be eng-aged. 
Let me then depart alone !" 

" Iduna !" exclaimed Nicaeus, re- 
proachfully. ** Alas ! Iduna, you are 
cruel, but I did not expect this !" 

" Dear Nicaeus !" she answered, '* you 
always misinterpret me ! It would infi- 
nitely delight me to be restored to Hun- 
niades by yourself, but these are no com- 
mon times, and you are no common 
person. You forget that there is one 
that has greater claims upon you even 
than a forlorn maiden — your country. 
And whether Iskander be at Croia 6r not, 
Greece requires the presence and exer- 
tions of the Prince of Athens." 



OF ISKANDER. 28S 

'* I have no country," replied Nicaeus, 
mournfully, " and no object for which to 
exert myself." 

" Nicaeus ! Is this the poetic patriot 
who was yesterday envying Themis- 
tocles ?" 

*' Alas ! Iduna, yesterday you were 
my muse. I do not wonder you are 
wearied of this castle," continued the 
Prince in a melancholy tone. '' This 
spot contains nothing* to interest you ; 
but for me, it holds all that is dear, and — 
oh ! gentle maiden, one smile from you, 
one smile of inspiration, and I would not 
envy Themistocles, and might perhaps 
rival him." 

They were walking together in the 
hall of the castle ; Iduna stepped aside 
and affected to examine a curious 
buckler, Nicaeus followed her, and 



284 THE RISE 

placing his arm gently in hers, led her 
away. 

" Dearest Iduna," he said, " pardon 
me, but men struggle for their fate. 
Mine is in your power. It is a contest 
between misery and happiness, glory and 
perhaps infamy. Do not then wonder 
that I will not yield my chance of the 
brighter fortune without an effort. Once 
more I appeal to your pity, if not to 
your love. Were Iduna mine, were she 
to hold out but the possibility of her 
being mine, there is no career — solemnly 
I avow what solemnly I feel — there is no 
career of which I could not be capable, 
and no conditions to which I would not 
willingly subscribe. But this certainty, 
or this contingency, I must have : I can- 
not exist without the alternative. And 
now, upon my knees, I implore her to 
grant it to me !" 



OF ISKANDER. fjgfi 

** Nicseus/' said Iduna, " this conti- 
nued recurrence to a forbidden subject is 
most ung-enerous." 

" Alas! Iduna, my life depends upon 
a word, which you will not speak, and 
you talk of generosity ! No ! Iduna, 
it is not I that am ungenerous." 

" Let me say then unreasonable, Prince 
ucseus. 

" Say what you like, Iduna, provided 
you say that you are mine." 

" Pardon me. Sir ; I am free." 

" Free ! You have ever underrated me, 
Iduna. To whom do you owe this 
boasted freedom ?" 

*' This is not the first time," remarked 
Iduna, " that you bave reminded me of 
an obligation, the memory of which is 
indelibly impressed upon my heart, and 
lor which even the present conversation 



(528 THE RISE 

cannot make me feel less grateful. I can 
never forget that I owe all that is dear to 
yourself and your companion." 

*' My companion !" replied the Prince 
of Athens, pale and passionate. " My 
companion ! Ami ever to be reminded 
of my companion ?'* 

'* Nicaeus !" said Iduna ; " if you for- 
get what is due to me, at least endea- 
vour to remember what is due to your- 
self !" 

" Beautiful being !" said the Prince ad- 
vancing and passionately seizing her hand ; 
*' pardon me! — pardon me! 1 am not 
master of my reason ; I am nothing, I 
am nothing while Iduna hesitates." 

'' She does not hesitate, Niceeus. I 
desire — I require that this conversation 
shall cease — shall never, never be re- 
newed." 



OF ISKANDER. 287 

"And I tell thee, haughty woman," 
said the Prince of x\thens grinding his 
teeth, and speaking with violent action, 
" that I will no longer be despised with 
impunity. Iduna is mine, or is no one 
else^s." 

" Js it possible ?" exclaimed the daugh- 
ter of Hunniades. " Is it indeed come to 
this } But why am I surprised ! I have 
long known Nicaeus. 1 quit this castle 
instantly." 

'* You are a prisoner," replied the 
Prince very calmly, and leaning with 
folded arms against the wall. 

*' A prisoner!" exclaimed Iduna, a 
little alarmed — "A prisoner 1 I defy 
you. Sir. You are only a guest like my- 
self. I will appeal to the Seneschal 
in the absence of his Lord. He will 
never permit the honour of his master's 



288 THE RISE 

flag to be violated by the irrational ca- 
price of a passionate boy/' 

" What lord ?" inquired Nicaeus. 

" Your friend, the Lord Justinian," 
answered Iduna. " He could little anti- 
cipate such an abuse of his hospitality." 

" My friend, the Lord Justinian !" re- 
plied Nicaeus with a malignant smile. " I 
am surprised that a personage of the Lady 
Iduna's deep discrimination should so 
easily be deceived by ' a passionate boy !* 
Is it possible that you could have sup- 
posed for a moment that there was any 
other Lord of this castle, save your de- 
voted slave ?" 

" What !" exclaimed Iduna, really 
frightened. 

" I have indeed the honour of finding 
the Lady Iduna my guest," continued 
Nicaeus in a tone of bitter raillery. 



OF ISKANDER. 289 

" This castle of Kallista, the fairest in all 
Epirus, I inherit from my mother. Of 
late I have seldom visited it ; but indeed 
it will become a favourite residence of 
mine, if it be, as I anticipate, the scene 
of my nuptial ceremony." 

Iduna looked around her with astonish- 
ment, then threw herself upon a couch, 
and burst into tears. The Prince ot 
Athens walked up and down the hall 
with an air of determined coolness. 

" PerHdious I" exclaimed Iduna be- 
tween her sobs. 

" Lady Iduna," said the Prince, and 
he seated himself by her side. " I wiil 
not attempt to palliate a deception which 
your charms could alone inspire and can 
alone justify. Hear me. Lady Iduna, 
hear me with calmness. I love you ; I 
love you \vith a passion which has been 

VOL. III. o 



I 



290 THE RISE 

as constant as it is strong. My birth, my 
rank, my fortunes, do not disqualify me 
lor an union with the daughter of the 
great Hunniades. If my personal claims 
may sink in comparison with her surpass- 
ing excellence, I am yet to learn that 
any other Prince in Christendom can 
urge a more effective plea. 1 am young ; 
the ladies of the court have called me 
handsome ; by your great father's side I 
have broken some lances in your honour; 
and even Idunaonce confessed she thought 
me clever. Come, come, be merciful ! 
Let my beautiful Athens receive a fitting 
mistress ! A holy father is in readiness, 
dear maiden. Come now, one smile ! In 
a few days we shall reach your father's 
camp, and then we will kneel, a^ I do 
now, and beg a blessing on our happy 
union." As he spoke, he dropped upon his 



OF ISKANDER. 291 

knee, and stealing her hand, looked into 
her face. It was sorrowful and gloomy. 

*' It is in vain, Nicaeus," said Idiina, 
" to appeal to your g-enerosity ; it is 
useless to talk of the past; it is idle to 
reproach you for the present. I am a 
woman, alone and pei'secuted, where I 
could least anticipate persecution. Ni- 
caeus, I never can be your's ; and now I 
deliver myself to the mercy of Almighty 
God." 

" Tis well," said Nicaeus. " From 
the tower of the Castle you may behold 
the waves of the Ionian Sea. You will 
remain here a close prisoner, until one of 
my galleys arrive from Piraeus to bear us 
to Italy. Mine you must be, Iduna. It 
remains for you to decide under what 
circumstances. Continue in your obsti- 
nacy, and you may bid farewell for ever 

o 2 



Oi)2 THE RISE 

to your country and to your father. Be 
reasonable, and a destiny awaits you, 
which offers everything that has hitherto 
been considered the source or cause of 
happiness." Thus speaking, the Prince 
retired, leaving the Lady Iduna to her 
own unhappy thoughts. 



XIX. 

The Lady Iduna was at first inclined to 
view- the conduct of the Prince of Athens 
as one of those passionate and passing 
ebullitions in which her long acquaintance 
with him had taught her he was accus- 
tomed to indulge. But when on retiring 
soon after to her apartments, she was 
m formed by her attendant matron that 
she must in future consider herself a pri- 



OF ISKANDER, 293 

soner, and not venture agtiin to quit them 
without permission, she began to tremble 
at the possible violence of an ill-regulated 
mind. She endeavoured to interest her 
attendant in her behalf; but the matron 
was too well schooled to evince any feel- 
ing or express any opinion on the sub- 
ject ; and indeed, at length, fairly in- 
formed Iduna that she was commanded to 
confine her conversation to the duties of 
her office. 

The Lady Iduna was very unhappy 
She thought of her father, she thought of 
Iskander. The past seemed a dream; she 
was often tempted to believe that she was 
still, and had ever been, a prisoner in the 
Serail of Adrianople ; and that all the late 
wonderful incidents of her life were but 
the shifting scenes of some wild slumber. 
And then some slight incident, the sound 



294 THE RISE 

of a hell, or the si^-ht of some holy em- 
blem, assured her she was in a Christian 
land, and convinced her of the strange 
truth that she was indeed in captivity, 
and a prisoner, above all others, to the 
fond companion of her youth. Her in- 
dignation at the conduct of Nicaeus roused 
her courage ; she resolved to make an 
effort to escape. Her rooms w^ere only 
lighted from above; she determined to 
steal forth at night into the gallery ; the 
door was secured . She hastened back to 
her chamber in fear and sorrow, and wept. 
Twice in the course of the day the 
stern and silent matron visited Iduna 
with her food ; and as she retired, secured 
the door. This was the onl}^ individual 
that the imprisoned Lady ever beheld. 
And thus heavily rolled on upwards of 
a week. On the eve of the ninth day. 



OF ISK^VNDER. 295 

Iduna was surprised by the matron pre- 
senting- her a letter as she quitted the 
chamber for the night. Iduna seized it 
with a feeling- of curiosity not unmixed 
with pleasure. It was the only incident 
that had occurred during her captivity. 
She recoo^nized the hand-writinsf of Ni- 
eaeus, and threw it down with vexation 
at her silliness in supposing, for a mo- 
ment, that the matron could have been 
the emissary of any other person. 

Yet the letter must be read, and at 
length she opened it. It informed her 
that a ship had arrived from Athens at 
the coast, and that to-morrow she must 
depart for Italy. It told her also, that 
the Turks, under Mahomed, had in- 
vaded Albania ; and that the Hungarians 
under the command of her father, had 
come to support the Cross. It said no- 



290 THE RISE 

thing of Iskander. But it reminded her 
that little more than the same time that 
would carry her to the coast to embark 
for a foreign land, would, were she wise, 
alike enable Nicaeus to place her in her 
father's arms, and allow him to join in 
the great struggle for his country and his 
creed. The letter was written with firm- 
ness, but tenderly. It left, however, on 
the mind of Iduna an impression of the 
desperate resolution of the writer. 

Now it so happened that as this un- 
happy lady jumped from her couch, and 
paced the room in the perturbation of her 
mind, the wind of her drapery extin- 
guished her lamp. As her attendant, or 
gaoler, had paid her last visit for the day, 
there seemed little chance of its being 
again illumined. The miserable are al- 
ways more unhappy in the dark. Light 



OF ISKANDER. i<><J7 

is the greatest of comforters. And so 
this little misfortune seemed to the for- 
lorn Iduna almost overwhelming. And 
as she attempted to look around, and 
wrung her hands in very woe, her atten- 
tion was attracted by a brilliant streak 
of light upon the wall, which greatly 
surprised her. She groped her w^ay in 
its direction, and slowly stretching forth 
her hand, observed that it made its way 
through a chink in the frame of one of 
the great mirrors whicn were inlaid in 
the wall. And as she pressed the frame, 
she felt to her surprise that it sprang for- 
ward. Had she not been very cautious 
the advancing mirror would have struck 
her with great force, but she had presence 
of mind to withdraw her hand very gra- 
dually, repressing the swiftness of the 
spring. The aperture occasioned by the 

o5 



298 THE RISE 

opening of the mirror consisted of a re- 
ces?5, formed by a closed-up window. An 
old wooden shutter, or blind, in so ruin- 
ous a state, that the light freely made its 
way, w^as the only barrier against the 
elements. Iduna, seizing the handle 
which remained, at once drew it open 
with little difficulty. 

The captive gazed with gladdejied feel- 
ings upon the free and beautiful scene. 
Beneath her rose the rich and aromatic 
shrubs tinged with the soft and silver light 
of eve : before her extended the wide and 
fertile champaign, skirted by the dark 
and undulating mountains : in the clear 
sky, glittering and sharp, sparkled the 
first crescent of the New Moon, an auspi- 
cious omen to the Moslemin invaders. 

Iduna gazed with joy upon the land- 
scape, and then hastily descending from 



OF ISKANDER. 299 

the recess,she placed her hands to her eyes, 
so long;- unaccustomed to the light. Per- 
haps, too, she indulged in momentary 
meditation. For suddenly seizing- a num- 
ber of shawls which were lying on one of 
the couches, she knotted them together, 
and then striving with all her force, she 
placed the heaviest couch on one end of 
the costly cord, and then throwing the 
other out of the window, and entrusting 
herself to the merciful care of the holy 
Virgin, the bi-ave daughter of Hunuiades 
successfully dropped down into the gar- 
den below. 

She stopped to breathe, and to revel in 
her emancipated existence. It was a bold 
enterprise gallantly achieved. But the 
danger had now only commenced. She 
found that she had li^-hted at the back of 
the castle. She stole along upon tip-toe, 



300 THE RISE 

timid as a fawn. She remembered a 
small wicket-gate that led into the open 
country. She arrived at it. It was of 
course guarded. The single sentinel was 
kneeling before an image of St. George, 
beside him was an empty drinking-cup 
and an exhausted wine-skin. 

" Holy Saint !" exclaimed the pious 
sentinel, " preserve us from all Turkish 
infidels !" Iduna stole behind him. 
" Shall men who drink no wine conquer 
true Christians !'* continued the sentinel. 
Iduna placed her hand upon the lock. 
" We thank thee for our good vintage/* 
said the sentinel. Iduna opened the 
gate with the noiseless touch which a 
feminine finger can alone command. 
'• And for the rise of the Lord Iskander !*' 
added the sentinel. Iduna escaped ! 

Now she indeed was free. Swiftly she 



OF ISKANDER. 301 

ran over the wide plain. She hoped to 
reach some town or village before her 
escape could be discovered, and she hur- 
ried on for three hours without restinsf. 
She came to a beautiful grove of olive- 
trees that spread in extensive ramifica- 
tions about the plain. And through this 
beautiful grove of olive-trees her path 
seemed to lead. So she entered and ad- 
vanced. And when she had journeyed 
for about a mile, she came to an open 
and very verdant piece of ground, which 
was, as it were, the heart of the grove. 
In its centre rose a fair and antique struc- 
ture of white marble, shroudinii from the 
noonday Sun the perennial flow of a 
very famous fountain. It was near on 
midnight. Iduna was wearied, and she 
sat down upon the steps of the fountain 
for rest. And while she was musing 



302 THE RISE 

over all the strang-e adventures of her 
life, she heard a rustling in the wood, 
and being alarmed, she rose and hid her- 
self behind a tree. 

And while she stood there, with palpi- 
tating heart, the figure of a man ad- 
vanced to the fountain from an opposite 
direction of the grove. He went up the 
steps, and looked down upon the spring 
as if he were about to drink, but instead 
of doing that, he drew his scimitar and 
plunged it into the water, and called out 
with a loud voice the name of " Iskan- 
der !" three times. Whereupon Iduna, 
actuated by an irresistible impulse, came 
forward from her hiding place, but in- 
stantly gave a loud shriek when she be- 
held — the Prince Mahomed ! 

'*0h ! night of glory !" exclaimed the 
Prince, advancing. " Do I indeed be- 



OF ISKANDER. 303 

hold the fair Iduna ! This is truly 
magic !" 

" Away 1 away !" exclaimed the dis- 
tracted Iduna, as she endeavoured to fly 
from him. 

" He has kept his word, that cunning- 
leech, better than I expected," said Ma- 
homed, seizing her. 

*' As well as you deserve, ravisher !" 
exclaimed a majestic voice. A tall hgure 
rushed forward from the wood and dash- 
ed back the Turk. 

" I am here to complete my contract, 
Prince Mahomed, " said the stranger, 
drawing his sword. 

" Iskander !" exclaimed the Prince. 

*' We have met beibre, Prince. Let 
us so act now that we may meet lor the 
last time." 

*' Infamous, infernal traitor,"' exclaimed 



304 THE RISE 

Mahomed, '' dost thou, indeed, imagine 
that I will sully my imperial blade with 
the blood of my runaway slave ! No ! 
I came here to secure thy punishment, 
but I cannot condescend to become thy 
punisher. Advance, guards, and seize 
him ! Seize them both !" 

Iduna flew to Iskander, who caught 
her in one arm, while he waved his 
scimitar with the other. The guards of 
Mahomed poured forth from the side of 
the grove whence the Prince had issued. 

*' And dost thou, indeed, think, Ma- 
homed," said Iskander, '' that I have 
been educated in the Seraglio to be duped 
by Moslemin craft. I offer thee single 
combat if thou desirest it, but combat as 
we may, the struggle shall be equal." 
He whistled, and instantly a body of 
Hungarians, headed by Hunniades him- 



OF ISKANDER. 305 

self, advanced from the side of the grove 
whence Iskander had issued. 

" Come on, then," said Mahomed ; 
" each to his man." Their swords clashed, 
but the principal attendants of the son of 
Amurath, deeming the affair, under the 
present circumstances, assumed the cha- 
racter of a mere rash adventure, bore 
away the Turkish Prince. 

" To-morrow, then, this fray shall be 
decided on the plains of Kallista," said 
Mahomed . 

" Epirus is prepared," replied Iskan- 
der. 

The Turks withdrew. Iskander bore 
the senseless form of Iduna to her father. 
Hunniades embraced his long lost child. 
They sprinkled her face with water from 
the fountain. She revived. 

" Where is Nicseus," inquired Iskan- 



.'30(i THE RISE 

der ; and how came you again, dear 
lady, in the power of Mahomed ?" 

" Alas ! noble Sir, my twice deliverer," 
answered Iduna, " I have, indeed, again 
been doomed to captivity, but my per- 
secutor, I blush to say, was this time a 
Christian Prince." 

" Holy Virgin !" exclaimed Iskander. 
" V/ho can this villain be ?" 

'• The villain, Lord Iskander, is your 
friend ; and your pupii, dear father." 

" Niceeus, of Athens !" exclaimed Hun- 
niades. 

Iskander was silent and melancholy. 

Thereupon the Lady Iduna recounted 
to her father and Iskander, sitting be- 
tween them on the margin of the fount, 
all that had occurred to her, since herself 
and Nicaeus parted with Iskander ; nor 
did she omit to relate to Hunniades all 



OF ISKANDEIl. SO? 

the devotion of Iskander, respecting- which, 
like a truly brave man, he had himself 
been silent. The great Hunniades scarcely 
knew which rather to do, to lavish his 
aifection on his beloved child, or his gra- 
titude upon Iskander. Thus they went 
on conversing" for some time, Iskander 
placing- his own cloak around Iduna, and 
almost unconsciously winding his arm 
around her unresisting form. 

Just as they were preparing to return 
to the Christian camp, a great noise was 
heard in the grove, and presently, in 
the direction whence Iduna had arrived, 
there came a band of men, bearing 
torches and examining the grove in all 
directions in great agitation. Iskander 
and Hunniades stood upon their guard, 
but soon perceived they were Greeks. 
Their leader, seeing a group near the 



308 THE RISE 

fountain, advanced to make inquiries re- 
specting the object of his search, but 
when he indeed recognized the persons 
who formed the group, the torch fell 
from his grasp, and he turned away his 
head and hid his face in his hands. 

Iduna clung to her father ; Iskander 
stood with his eyes fixed upon the ground, 
but Hunniades, stern and terrible, dis- 
embarrassing himself of the grasp of his 
daughter, advanced and laid his hand 
upon the stranger. 

" Young man," said the noble father, 
" w^ere it contrition instead of shame that 
inspired this attitude, it might be better. 
I have often warned you of the fatal con- 
sequences of a reckless indulgence of the 
passions. More than once I have pre- 
dicted to you, that however great might 
be your confidence in your ingenuity 



OF ISKANDER. SC9 

and your resources, the hour would ar- 
rive when such a career would place you 
in a position as despicable as it was 
shameful. That hour has arrived, and 
that position is now filled by the Prince 
of Athens. You stand before the three 
individuals in this world whom you have 
most injured, and whom you were most 
bound to love and to protect. Here is a 
friend, who has hazarded his prosperity 
and his existence for your life and your 
happiness. And you have made him a 
mere pander to your lusts, and then de- 
serted him in his greatest necessities. 
This maiden was the companion of your 
youth, and entitled to your kindest 
offices. You have treated her infinitely 
worse than her Turkish captor. And for 
myself, Sir, your father was my dearest 
Iriend. I endeavoured to repay his 



310 THE RISE 

friendship by supplying his place to his 
orphan child. How I discharged my 
duty, it becomes not me to say : how 
you have discharged your's, this lady 
here, my daughter, your late prisoner, 
Sir, can best prove." 

" Oh ! spare me, spare me, Sir," said 
the Prince of Athens, turning and faUing 
upon his knee. " I am most wretched. 
Every word cuts to my very core. Just 
Providence has baffled all my arts, and I 
am gratefuL Whether this lady can, 
indeed, forgive me, I hardly dare to 
think, or even hope. And yet forgive- 
ness is a heavenly boon. Perhaps the 
memory of old days may melt her. As 

for yourself. Sir but TU not speak, I 

cannot. Noble Iskander, if I mistake 
not, you may whisper words in that fair 
ear, less grating than my own. May 



I 



OF ISKANDER. SI I 

you be happy ! I will not profane your 
prospects with my vows. iVnd yet I'll 
say farewell !" 

The Prince of Atliens turned away 
with an air of complete wretchedness, 
and slowly withdrew, Iskander followed 
him. 

" Nicseus," said Iskander ; hut the 
Prince entered the grove, and did not 
turn round. 

** Dear Nicaeus," said Iskander. The 
Prince hesitated. 

" Let us not part thus," said Iskander. 
*' Iduna is most unhappy. She bade me 
tell you she had forgotten all.'* 

** God bless her, and God bless you 
too!" replied Niceeus. " I pray you let 
me go." 

" Nay ! dear Niceeus, are we not 
friends ?" 



312 THE RISE 

'* The best and truest, Iskander. I 
will to the camp, and meet you in your 
tent ere morning break. At present, [ 
would be alone." 

" Dear Nicseus, one word. You have 
said upon one point, what I could well 
wish unsaid, and dared to prophesy 
what may never happen. I am not 
made for such supreme felicity. Epirus 
is my mistress, my Nicaeus. As there is 
a living God, my friend, most solemnly I 
vow, I have had no thoughts in this 
atfair, but for your honour." 

'* I know it, my dear friend, I know 
it," replied Nicaeus. '* I keenly feel 
your admirable worth. Say no more, 
say no more ! She is a fit wife for a hero, 
and you are one!" 



OF ISKANDER. 8l3 



XX. 

After the battle of the bridge, Iskan- 
der had hurried to Croia without delay. 
In his progress, he had made many fruit- 
less inquiries after Iduna and Nicaeus, 
but he consoled himself for the unsatis- 
factory answers he received by the opi- 
nion that they had taken a different 
course, and the conviction that all must 
now be safe. The messenger from Croia 
that informed Hunniades of the escape of 
his daughter also solicited his aid in 
favour of Epirus against the impending 
invasion of the Turks, and stimulated by 
personal gratitude as well as by public 
duty, Hunniades answered the solicita- 

VOL. III. p 



.314 THE RISE 

tion in person at the head of twenty 
thousand lances. 

Hunniades and Iskander had mutually 
flattered themselves when apart, that each 
would be able to quell the anxiety of the 
other on the subject of Iduna. The 
leader of Epirus flattered himself that 
his late companions had proceeded at 
once to Transylvania, and the Vaivode 
himself had indulged in the delightful 
hope that the first person he should 
embrace at Croia would be his long-lost 
child. When, therefore, they met, and 
were mutually incapable of imparting 
any information on the subject to each 
other, they were filled with astonishment 
and disquietude. Events, however, gave 
them little opportunity to indulge in^anx- 
iety or grief. On the day that Hun- 
niades and his lances arrived at Croia, 



OF ISKANDER. 315 

the invading' army of the Turks under 
the Price Mahomed crossed the moun- 
tains, and soon after pitched their camp 
on the fertile plain of Kallista. 

As Iskander, by the aid of Hunniades 
and the neighbouring princes, and the 
patriotic exertions of his countrymen, was 
at this moment at the head of a force 
which the Turkish Prince could not liave 
anticipated, he resolv^ed to march at 
once to meet the Ottomans, and decide 
the fate of Greece by a pitched battle. 

The night before the arrival of Iduna 
at the famous fountain, the Christian 
army had taken up its position within 
a few miles of the Turks. The turbaned 
warriors wished to delay the engagement 
until the new moon, the eve of which 
was at hand. And it happened on that 
said eve that Iskander calling to mind his 

v2 



316 THE RISE 

contract with the Turkish Prince made 
in the gardens of the seraglio at Adri- 
anople, and believing from the super- 
stitious character of Mahomed that he 
would not fail to be at the appointed 
spot, resolved, as we have seen, to repair 
to the fountain of Kallista. 

And now from that fountain the hero 
retired, bearing with him a prize scarcely 
less precious than the freedom of his 
country, for which he was to combat on 
the morrow's morn. 

Ere the dawn had broken, the Chris- 
tian power was in motion. Iskander 
commanded the centre, Hunniades the 
right wing. The left was entrusted at his 
urgent request to the Prince of Athens. 
A mist that hung about the plain allowed 
Nicaeus to charge the right wing of the 
Turks almost unperceived. He charged 



OF ISKANDER. JI7 

with irresistible fury, and soon disor- 
dered the ranks of the Moslemin. Ma- 
homed with the reserve hastened to their 
aid. A mighty multitude of Janis- 
saries, shouting- the name of Allah and 
his Prophet, penetrated the Christian 
centre. Hunniades endeavoured to at- 
tack them on their flank, but was him- 
self charged by the Turkish cavalry. The 
battle was now general, and raged with 
terrible fury. Iskander had secreted in 
his centre, a new and powerful battery 
of cannon, presented to him by the Pope, 
and which had just arrived from Venice. 
Tliis battery played upon the Janissaries 
with great destruction . He himself mowed 
them down with his irresistible scimitar. 
Infinite was the slaughter ! awful the up- 
roar ! But of all the Christian knights, 
this day, no one performed such mighty 



318 THE RISE 

feats of arms as the Prince of Athens. 
With a reckless desperation, he clashed 
about the field, and every thing seemed 
to yield to his inspired impulse. His ex- 
ample animated his men with such a de- 
gree of enthusiasm, that the division to 
which he was opposed, although encou- 
raged by the presence of Mahomed him- 
self, could no longer withstand the des- 
perate courage of the Christians, and they 
fled in all directions. Then, rushing to the 
aid of Iskander, Nicseus, at the head of a 
body of picked men, dashed upon the 
rear of the Janissaries, and nearly sur- 
rounded them. Hunniades instantly 
made a fresh charge upon the left wing 
of the Turks. A panic fell upon the 
Moslemin, who were little prepared for 
such a demonstration of strength on the 
part of their adversaries. In a few 



OF ISKANDER. 319 

minutes, their order seemed g-enerally 
broken, and their leadei's in vain endea- 
voured to rally them. Waving his bloody 
scimitar, and bounding on his black 
charger, Iskander called upon his men 
to secure the triumph of the Cross and 
the freedom of Epirus. Pursuit was now 
general. 



XXL 

The Turks were massacred by thou- 
sands. Mahomed, when he found that 
all was lost, fled to the mountains, with a 
train of guards and eunuchs, and left the 
care of his dispersed host to his Pachas. 
The hills were covered with the fugitives 
and their pursuers. Some fled also to 
the sea-shore, where the Turkish fleet was 



320 THE RISE 

at anchor. The plain was strewn with 
corpses and arms, and tents and stand- 
ards. The Sun was now high in the 
heavens. The mist had cleared a\\ay ; 
but occasional clouds of smoke still sailed 
about. 

A solitary Christian knight entered a 
winding pass in the green hills, apart 
from the scene of strife. The slow and 
trembling step of his wearied steed would 
have ill qualified him to join in the tri- 
umphant pursuit, even had he himself 
been physically enabled ; but the Chris- 
tian knight was covered with gore, un- 
happily not alone that of his enemies. 
He was, indeed, streaming with desperate 
wounds, and scarcely could his fainting 
form retain its tottering seat. 

The winding pass, which, for some sin- 
gular reason, he now pursued in solitude, 



OF ISKANDER. 321 

instead of returning to the busy camp for 
aid and assistance, conducted the Knight 
to a small g^reen valley, covered with 
sweet herbs, and entirely surrounded by 
hanging woods. In the centre, rose the 
ruins of a Doric fane : three or four co- 
lumns, grey and majestic. All was still 
and silent, save that in the clear blue sky 
an eagle flew, high in the air, but whirl- 
ing round the temple. 

The Knight reached the ruins of the 
Doric fane, and with difficulty dismount- 
ing from his charger, fell upon the soft 
and flowery turf, and for some moments 
was motionless. His horse stole a few 
yards away, and though scarcely less in- 
jured than its rider, instantly com- 
menced cropping the inviting pasture. 

At length the Christian Knight slowly 
raised his head, and leaning on his arm, 
sighed deeply. His face was very pale ; 



SS-S THE RISE 

but as he looked up, and perceived the 
eagle in the heaven, a smile played upon 
his pallid cheek, and his beautiful eye 
gleamed with a sudden flash of light. 

" Glorious bird !" murmured the Chris- 
tian warrior, '' once I deemed that my 
career might resemble thine ! Tis over 
now ; and Greece, for which I would have 
done so much, will soon forget my im- 
memorial name. I have stolen here to 
die in silence and in beauty. This blue 
air, and these green woods, and these 
lone columns, which oft to me have been a 
consolation, breathing of the poetic past, 
and of the days wherein I fain had lived, 
[ have escaped from the fell field of car- 
nage to die among them. Farewell ! my 
country ! Farewell to one more beauti- 
ful than Greece — farewell, Iduna !" 

These were the last words of Nicaeus, 
Prince of Athens ! 



OF ISKANDER. 323 

XXII. 

While the unhappy lover of the daugh- 
ter of Hunuiades breathed his last words 
to the solitary elements, his more fortu- 
nate friend received, in the centre of his 
scene of triumph, the glorious congratu- 
lations of his emancipated country. The 
discomfiture of the Turks was complete, 
and this overthrow, coupled with their 
recent defeat in Bulgaria, secured Chris- 
tendom from their assaults during the 
remainder of the reii'n of xVmurath the 
Second. Surrounded by his princely 
allies, and the chieftains of Epirus, the 
victorious standards of Christendom, and 
the triumphant trophies of the Moslemin, 
Iskander received from the great Hun- 
niades the hand of his beautiful daugh- 
ter. " Thanks to these brave warriors," 



324 THE RISE OF ISKANDER. 

said the hero, " I can now offer to your 
daughter a safe, an honourable, and a 
Christian home." 

" It is to thee, great Sir, that Epirus 
owes its security," said an ancient chief- 
tain, addressing Iskander, " its national 
existence, and its holy religion. All that 
we have to do now is to preserve them ; 
nor indeed do I see that we can more 
effectually obtain these great objects than 
by entreating thee to mount the redeemed 
throne of thy ancestors. Therefore I say 
God save Iskander, King of Epi- 
rus !" 

And all the people shouted and said, 
" God save the King ! God save 
Iskander, King of Epirus !" 

the end. 
